As filed with the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission on October 25, 2021.
Registration No. 333-259889
UNITED STATES
SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION
Washington, D.C. 20549
AMENDMENT NO. 1 TO
FORM F-1
REGISTRATION STATEMENT UNDER THE SECURITIES ACT OF 1933
Lilium N.V.
(Exact Name of Registrant as Specified in Its Charter)
Claude Dornier Straße 1
Bldg. 335, 82234
Wessling, Germany
Telephone: +49 160 9704 6857
(Address, including zip code, and telephone number, including area code, of registrant’s principal executive offices)
Roger Franks
C/O Lilium Aviation Inc.
2385 N.W. Executive Center Drive, Suite 300
Boca Raton, Florida 33431
Telephone: 561-526-8460
(Name, address, including zip code, and telephone number, including area code, of agent for service)
Copies to:
Dr. Christoph Rödter
Mark Mushkin
J.T. Ho
Orrick, Herrington & Sutcliffe LLP
51 West 52nd Street
New York, NY 10019
(212) 506-5000
Carl Marcellino
Tara Fisher
Ropes & Gray LLP
Prudential Tower
800 Boylston Street
Boston, Massachusetts 02199
(617) 951-7000
Approximate date of commencement of proposed sale to the public: As soon as practicable after this Registration Statement becomes
effective.
If any of the securities being registered on this Form are to be offered on a delayed or continuous basis pursuant to Rule 415 under the
Securities Act of 1933, check the following box. ☒
If this Form is filed to register additional securities for an offering pursuant to Rule 462(b) under the Securities Act, check the following box
and list the Securities Act registration statement number of the earlier effective registration statement for the same offering. ☐
If this Form is a post-effective amendment filed pursuant to Rule 462(c) under the Securities Act, check the following box and list the
Securities Act registration statement number of the earlier effective registration statement for the same offering. ☐
If this Form is a post-effective amendment filed pursuant to Rule 462(d) under the Securities Act, check the following box and list the
Securities Act registration statement number of the earlier effective registration statement for the same offering. ☐
Indicate by check mark whether the registrant is an emerging growth company as defined in Rule 405 of the Securities Act of 1933. Emerging
growth company ☒
If an emerging growth company that prepares its financial statements in accordance with U.S. GAAP, indicate by check mark if the registrant
has elected not to use the extended transition period for complying with any new or revised financial accounting standards† provided pursuant to
Section 7(a)(2)(B) of the Securities Act. ☐
†
The term “new or revised financial accounting standard” refers to any update issued by the Financial Accounting Standards Board to its
Accounting Standards Codification after April 5, 2012.
The Netherlands
0001855756
Not applicable
(State or other jurisdiction of
incorporation or organization)
(Primary Standard Industrial
Classification Code Number)
(I.R.S. Employer
Identification Number)


CALCULATION OF REGISTRATION FEE
Title of Each Class of Securities to be Registered
Amount to be
Registered (1)
Proposed Maximum
Offering Price
Per Security
Proposed Maximum
Aggregate
Offering Price
Amount of
Registration Fee
Primary Offering:
Class A ordinary shares, nominal value of €0.12 per
share (“Class A Shares”)
24,413,065(2)
$10.93(3)
$266,834,800
$29,112
Class A Shares underlying warrants
21,510,000(4)
$10.55(5)
$226,930,500
$24,755
Class A Shares underlying options
6,219,889(6)
$0.01(7)
$62,199
$6
Secondary Offering:
Class A Shares
201,805,118(8)
$10.93(3)
$1,938,872,941(9)
$210,865(9)
Class A Shares underlying warrants
8,860,000(10)
—
—
—(11)
Warrants to purchase Class A Shares
7,060,000(12)
—
—
—(13)
Totals
$2,432,700,440
$264,738(14)
(1)
Pursuant to Rule 416 under the Securities Act of 1933, as amended, includes an indeterminable number of additional Class A Shares that may
be issued to prevent dilution from stock splits, stock dividends or similar transactions that could affect the Class A Shares to be offered by the
selling securityholders.
(2)
Includes 24,413,065 Class A ordinary shares, nominal value of €0.12 per share (“Class A Shares”) of the registrant Lilium N.V., a Dutch
public limited liability company (naamloze vennootschap) (the “Company”) issuable upon conversion of 24,413,065 outstanding Class B
ordinary shares, nominal value of €0.36 per share (“Class B Shares”) of the Company.
(3)
Estimated solely to calculate the registration fee in accordance with Rule 457(c) of the Securities Act on the basis of the average of the high
and low sales prices of the Class A Shares as reported on the Nasdaq Global Select Market on September 28, 2021.
(4)
Includes up to (i) 7,060,000 Class A Shares issuable upon the exercise of 7,060,000 warrants (the “Private Warrants”) originally issued by
Qell in a private placement transaction in connection with the initial public offering (“IPO”) of Qell Acquisition Corp. (“Qell”), and converted
into warrants to purchase Class A Shares at the closing of the Business Combination (as defined below) at an exercise price of $11.50 per
Class A Share, (ii) 12,650,000 Class A Shares that are issuable upon the exercise of 12,650,000 warrants (the “Public Warrants” and, together
with the Private Warrants, the “SPAC Warrants”) originally issued to public shareholders of Qell in its IPO, and converted into warrants to
purchase Class A Shares at the closing of the Business Combination at an exercise price of $11.50 per Class A Share and (iii) 1,800,000 Class
A Shares issuable upon exercise of warrants to purchase Class A Shares issued to a commercial counterparty of the Company at an exercise
price of €0.12 per Class A Share (the “Azul Warrants” and, together with the SPAC Warrants, the “Warrants”).
(5)
Estimated solely for the purpose of the calculation of the registration fee pursuant to Rule 457(g), based on the weighted average exercise
price of the Warrants of $10.55 per share.
(6)
Includes up to 6,219,889 Class A Shares that are issuable upon the exercise of outstanding options to purchase Class A Shares held by certain
of the Company’s current and former directors and employees (the “Specified Options”).
(7)
Estimated solely for the purpose of the calculation of the registration fee pursuant to Rule 457(h), based on the weighted average exercise
price of the options of $0.01 per share.
(8)
Consists of the resale of up to 201,805,118 Class A Shares, consisting of up to (i) 129,292,473 Class A Shares that were issued on completion
of the Business Combination (the “Business Combination”) between the Company, Qell Acquisition Corp., a Cayman Islands exempted
company (“Qell”), and Queen Cayman Merger LLC, a Cayman Islands limited liability company and wholly owned subsidiary of the
Company (“Merger Sub”), (ii) 24,413,065 Class A Shares issuable upon conversion of 24,413,065 outstanding Class B Shares, (iii)
45,000,000 Class A Shares that were issued to certain securityholders in connection with the closing of a private placement offering
concurrent with the closing of the Business Combination (the “PIPE Shares”), (iv) 879,691 Class A Shares issued in connection with certain
equity compensation arrangements and (v) 2,219,889 Class A Shares that are issuable upon the exercise of certain of the Specified Options.
(9)
The registration fee for the issuance of the 24,413,065 Class A Shares issuable upon conversion of outstanding Class B Shares and the
2,219,889 Class A Shares issuable upon the exercise of certain of the Specified Options has been calculated above.
(10) Consists of the resale of up to (i) 7,060,000 Class A Shares issuable upon exercise of the Private Warrants and (ii) 1,800,000 Class A Shares
issuable upon exercise of the Azul Warrants.
(11) The registration fee for the Class A Shares issuable upon exercise of the Private Warrants and the Azul Warrants has been calculated above.
(12) Represents the resale of 7,060,000 Private Warrants.
(13) In accordance with Rule 457(g), the entire registration fee for the warrants is allocated to the Class A Shares underlying the warrants, and no
separate fee is payable for the warrants.
(14) The registrant previously paid a registration fee of $260,941 in connection with its Registration Statement on Form F-1 (File No. 333-259889)
filed on September 29, 2021. The remaining $3,797 has been paid herewith.
The Registrant hereby amends this Registration Statement on such date or dates as may be necessary to delay its effective date until the
Registrant shall file a further amendment which specifically states that this Registration Statement shall thereafter become effective in accordance
with Section 8(a) of the Securities Act of 1933, as amended (the “Securities Act”), or until the Registration Statement shall become effective on
such date as the Securities and Exchange Commission, acting pursuant to said Section 8(a), may determine.


Subject to Completion, dated October 25, 2021
PRELIMINARY PROSPECTUS
Lilium N.V.
Up to 201,805,118 Class A Shares
Up to 27,729,889 Class A Shares Issuable Upon Exercise of Warrants
and Options
Up to 7,060,000 Warrants
This prospectus relates to the issuance by us of an aggregate of up to 52,142,954 of our Class A ordinary shares, nominal value €0.12
per share (“Class A Shares”), which consists of up to (i) 24,413,065 Class A Shares issuable upon conversion of our 24,413,065 outstanding
Class B ordinary shares, nominal value of €0.36 per share (“Class B Shares”), (ii) 7,060,000 Class A Shares issuable upon the exercise of
7,060,000 warrants (the “Private Warrants”) originally issued by Qell in a private placement transaction in connection with the initial public
offering (“IPO”) of Qell Acquisition Corp. (“Qell”), and converted into warrants to purchase Class A Shares at the closing of the Business
Combination (as defined below) at an exercise price of $11.50 per Class A Share, (iii) up to 12,650,000 Class A Shares that are issuable
upon the exercise of 12,650,000 warrants (the “Public Warrants” and, together with the Private Warrants, the “SPAC Warrants”) originally
issued to public shareholders of Qell in its IPO, and converted into warrants to purchase Class A Shares at the closing of the Business
Combination at an exercise price of $11.50 per Class A Share, (iv) 1,800,000 Class A Shares issuable upon exercise of warrants to purchase
Class A Shares issued to a commercial counterparty of the Company at an exercise price of €0.12 per Class A Share (the “Azul Warrants”
and, together with the SPAC Warrants, the “Warrants”) and (v) up to 6,219,889 Class A Shares that are issuable upon the exercise of
outstanding options to purchase Class A Shares held by certain of our current and former directors and employees (the “Specified Options”).
This prospectus also relates to the offer and sale from time to time by the selling securityholders or their permitted transferees
(collectively, the “selling securityholders”) of (a) up to 210,665,118 of our Class A Shares, consisting of up to (i) 129,292,473 Class A
Shares that were issued on completion of the Business Combination, (ii) 45,000,000 Class A Shares issued to certain securityholders in
connection with the closing of a private placement offering concurrent with the closing of the Business Combination (the “PIPE Shares”),
(iii) 24,413,065 Class A Shares issuable upon conversion of our outstanding Class B Shares, (iv) 7,060,000 Class A Shares issuable upon
exercise of the Private Warrants, (v) 1,800,000 Class A Shares issuable upon exercise of the Azul Warrants, (vi) 879,691 Class A Shares
issued in connection with certain equity compensation arrangements and (vii) 2,219,889 Class A Shares issuable upon the exercise of certain
of the Specified Options and (b) up to 7,060,000 Private Warrants. This prospectus also covers any additional securities that may become
issuable by reason of share splits, share dividends or other similar transactions.
This prospectus provides you with a general description of such securities and the general manner in which the selling securityholders
may offer or sell the securities. More specific terms of any securities that the selling securityholders may offer or sell may be provided in a
prospectus supplement that describes, among other things, the specific amounts and prices of the securities being offered and the terms of
the offering. The prospectus supplement may also add, update or change information contained in this prospectus.
All of the Class A Shares and Private Warrants offered by the selling securityholders pursuant to this prospectus will be sold by the
selling securityholders for their respective accounts. We will not receive any proceeds from the sale of Class A Shares or Private Warrants by
the selling securityholders or the issuance of Class A Shares by us pursuant to this prospectus, except with respect to amounts received by us
upon exercise of the Warrants or Specified Options. However, we will pay the expenses, other than any underwriting discounts and
commissions, associated with the sale of securities pursuant to this prospectus.
We are registering the securities described above for resale pursuant to, among other things, the selling securityholders’ registration
rights under certain agreements between us and the selling securityholders. Our registration of the securities covered by this prospectus does
not mean that either we or the selling securityholders will issue, offer or sell, as applicable, any of the securities. The selling securityholders
may offer and sell the securities covered by this prospectus in a number of different ways and at varying prices. We provide more
information about how the selling securityholders may sell the Class A Shares or Private Warrants in the section entitled “Plan of
Distribution.”
We will pay certain expenses associated with the registration of the securities covered by this prospectus, as described in the section
entitled “Plan of Distribution.”
Our Class A Shares and Public Warrants are listed on The Nasdaq Global Select Market (“Nasdaq”) under the symbols “LILM” and
“LILMW,” respectively. On October 22, 2021, the closing sale price as reported on Nasdaq of our Class A Shares was $9.00 per share and of
our Public Warrants was $1.885 per warrant.
We may amend or supplement this prospectus from time to time by filing amendments or supplements as required. You should read
this entire prospectus and any amendments or supplements carefully before you make your investment decision.
We are an “emerging growth company” as that term is defined in the Jumpstart Our Business Startups Act of 2012 and, as such, are
subject to reduced public company reporting requirements.
Our principal executive offices are located at Claude-Dornier Straße 1, Bldg. 335, 82234 Wessling, Germany.
Investing in our securities involves a high degree of risk. Before buying any securities, you should carefully read the discussion
of material risks of investing in our securities in “Risk Factors” beginning on page 17 of this prospectus.
Neither the Securities and Exchange Commission nor any state securities commission has approved or disapproved of these
securities or passed on the adequacy or accuracy of this prospectus. Any representation to the contrary is a criminal offense.
Prospectus dated                            , 2021


TABLE OF CONTENTS
Prospectus Summary
6
The Offering
12
Summary Consolidated Historical and Other Financial Information
13
Summary Unaudited Pro Forma Condensed Combined Financial Information
14
Risk Factors
15
Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements
39
Use of Proceeds
41
Determination of Offering Price
42
Market Information For Class A Shares and Dividend Policy
43
Capitalization
44
Unaudited Pro Forma Condensed Combined Financial Information
45
Business of Lilium and Certain Information About Lilium
56
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
75
Management
87
Executive Compensation
92
Description of Securities
99
Certain Relationships and Related Person Transactions
109
Principal Securityholders
111
Selling Securityholders
113
Taxation
119
Plan of Distribution
139
Shares Eligible for Future Sale
143
Expenses Related to the Offering
145
Legal Matters
145
Experts
145
Where You Can Find More Information
146
Index to Financial Statements
F-1
You should rely only on the information contained in this prospectus, any amendment or supplement to this
prospectus or any free writing prospectus prepared by us or on our behalf. Neither we, nor the selling securityholders,
have authorized any other person to provide you with different or additional information. Neither we, nor the selling
securityholders, take responsibility for, nor can we provide assurance as to the reliability of, any other information that
others may provide. The selling securityholders are not making an offer to sell these securities in any jurisdiction where
the offer or sale is not permitted. The information contained in this prospectus is accurate only as of the date of this
prospectus or such other date stated in this prospectus, and our business, financial condition, results of operations and/or
prospects may have changed since those dates.
Except as otherwise set forth in this prospectus, neither we nor the selling securityholders have taken any action to permit a
public offering of these securities outside the United States or to permit the possession or distribution of this prospectus outside
the United States. Persons outside the United States who come into possession of this prospectus must inform themselves about
and observe any restrictions relating to the offering of these securities and the distribution of this prospectus outside the United
States.
The information in this preliminary prospectus is not complete and may be changed. Neither we nor the selling securityholders may sell these securities until the registration statement filed with the Securities
and Exchange Commission is effective. This preliminary prospectus is not an offer to sell these securities and we are not soliciting an offer to buy these securities in any jurisdiction where the offer or sale is not
permitted.


1
ABOUT THIS PROSPECTUS
This prospectus is part of a registration statement on Form F-1 that we filed with the United States Securities and Exchange
Commission (the “SEC”) using a “shelf” registration process. Under this shelf registration process, the selling securityholders
may, from time to time, offer and sell any combination of the securities described in this prospectus in one or more offerings.
We will not receive any proceeds from the sale of Class A Shares or Private Warrants to be offered by the selling
securityholders pursuant to this prospectus, but we will receive proceeds from Warrants or Specified Options exercised in the
event that such Warrants or Specified Options are exercised for cash. We will pay the expenses, other than underwriting
discounts and commissions, if any, associated with the sale of our Class A Shares and Private Warrants pursuant to this
prospectus. To the extent required, we and the selling securityholders, as applicable, will deliver a prospectus supplement with
this prospectus to update the information contained in this prospectus. The prospectus supplement may also add, update or
change information included in this prospectus. You should read both this prospectus and any applicable prospectus supplement,
together with additional information described below under the caption “Where You Can Find More Information.” We have not,
and the selling securityholders have not authorized anyone to provide you with information different from that contained in this
prospectus. The information contained in this prospectus is accurate only as of the date on the front cover of the prospectus. You
should not assume that the information contained in this prospectus is accurate as of any other date.
No offer of these securities will be made in any jurisdiction where the offer is not permitted.
On September 14, 2021 (the “Closing Date”), we closed our previously announced business combination (the “Business
Combination”) pursuant to the Business Combination Agreement, dated as of March 30, 2021, as amended (the “Business
Combination Agreement”), by and among Qell Acquisition Corp., a Cayman Islands exempted company (“Qell”), Lilium
GmbH, a German limited liability company, Lilium B.V., a Dutch private liability company (besloten vennootschap met
beperkte aansprakelijkheid) (which was converted into a Dutch public limited liability company (naamloze vennootschap),
Lilium N.V., prior to the closing of the Business Combination), and Queen Cayman Merger LLC, a Cayman Islands limited
liability company and wholly owned subsidiary of Lilium (“Merger Sub”).
On the Closing Date, (i) Qell converted the class A ordinary shares of Qell (the “Qell Class A Ordinary Shares”) into a
claim for corresponding equity in Merger Sub, with such claim then contributed to Lilium in exchange for one Class A Share,
(ii) the shareholders of Lilium GmbH exchanged their shares of Lilium GmbH for shares in the capital of Lilium, with all
Lilium GmbH shareholders, but Daniel Wiegand, receiving Class A Shares in the share capital of Lilium, and Daniel Wiegand
receiving Class B Shares, and (iii) each outstanding warrant to purchase a Qell Class A Ordinary Share was converted into a
warrant to purchase one Class A Share.
On March 30, 2021, concurrently with the execution of the Business Combination Agreement, Qell and Lilium entered into
Subscription Agreements (the “Subscription Agreements”) with certain investors (the “PIPE Investors”), pursuant to which the
PIPE Investors agreed to subscribe for and purchase, and Lilium agreed to issue and sell to such PIPE Investors, an aggregate of
45,000,000 Class A Shares (the “PIPE Shares”) at a price of $10.00 per share, for gross proceeds of $450,000,000 (the “PIPE
Financing”) on the Closing Date. The PIPE Financing closed concurrently with the Business Combination.
Unless the context indicates otherwise, the terms “Lilium,” the “Company,” “we,” “us” and “our” refer to Lilium N.V. (f/k/a
Lilium B.V.) after conversion into a Dutch public limited liability company and Lilium B.V. prior to the conversion into a Dutch
public liability company.
IMPORTANT INFORMATION ABOUT IFRS AND NON-IFRS FINANCIAL MEASURES
Lilium’s audited financial statements included in this prospectus are prepared in accordance with International Financial
Reporting Standards as issued by the International Accounting Standards Board (“IFRS”). This prospectus includes certain
references to financial measures that were not prepared in accordance with IFRS, including Adjusted EBITDA. The presentation
of this non-IFRS information is not meant to be considered in isolation or as a substitute for Lilium’s consolidated financial
results prepared in accordance with IFRS.


2
This prospectus also uses “contribution margin”, which is not a measurement of Lilium’s financial performance under IFRS
and does not purport to be an alternative to gross profit or loss after tax derived in accordance with IFRS. Lilium’s management
uses contribution margin to evaluate its future operating performance within its industry because:
●
it permits management to evaluate and analyze its productivity, efficiency and performance while taking into account
demand generation expense as a measurement of operating performance;
●
it assists management in comparing Lilium’s operating performance on a consistent basis, as it removes the impact of
items not directly resulting from Lilium’s core operations;
●
for planning purposes, including the preparation of Lilium’s internal annual operating budget and financial projections;
●
to evaluate the performance and effectiveness of Lilium’s strategic initiatives; and
●
to evaluate Lilium’s capacity to fund capital expenditures necessary to grow its business.
Lilium’s definition and calculation of “contribution margin” may not be comparable to similar measures disclosed by other
companies, because not all companies and analysts calculate these measures in the same manner. Lilium presents contribution
margin in this prospectus because it considers it to be an important supplemental measure of its future operating performance,
and Lilium believes it is frequently used by securities analysts, investors and other interested parties in evaluating companies.
Lilium’s management believes that investors’ understanding of Lilium’s performance will be enhanced by including
contribution margin as a reasonable basis for comparing its proposed results of operations.
Items excluded from contribution margin are significant components in understanding and assessing financial performance.
Contribution margin does not reflect Lilium’s capital expenditures, or future requirements for capital expenditures or contractual
commitments, nor does it reflect changes in Lilium’s working capital needs. Lilium compensates for these limitations by relying
primarily on its IFRS results and using contribution margin only as a supplemental measure. Non-IFRS measures such as
contribution margin have limitations as analytical tools and should not be considered in isolation, or as an alternative to, or a
substitute for loss after tax, revenue or other financial statement data presented in Lilium’s consolidated financial statements as
indicators of financial performance. Other companies or analysts may calculate contribution margin differently than Lilium
does, limiting its usefulness as a comparative measure.
CONVENTIONS THAT APPLY TO THIS PROSPECTUS
In this prospectus, unless otherwise specified or the context otherwise requires:
●
“$”, “USD” and “U.S. dollar” each refer to the United States dollar; and
●
“€”, “EUR” and “Euro” each refer to the Euro.
The exchange rate used for conversion between U.S. dollars and Euros is based on the ECB euro reference exchange rate
published by the European Central Bank.
TRADEMARKS, SERVICE MARKS AND TRADE NAMES
The Lilium name, logos 
 and other trademarks and service marks of Lilium appearing in this prospectus are the
property of Lilium. Solely for convenience, some of the trademarks, service marks, logos and trade names referred to in this
prospectus are presented without the ® and ™ symbols, but such references are not intended to indicate, in any way, that we will
not assert, to the fullest extent under applicable law, our rights or the rights of the applicable licensors to these trademarks,
service marks and trade names. This prospectus contains additional trademarks, service marks and trade names of others. All
trademarks, service marks and trade names appearing in this prospectus are, to our knowledge, the property of their respective
owners. We do not intend our use or display of other companies’ trademarks, service marks, copyrights or trade names to imply
a relationship with, or endorsement or sponsorship of us by, any other companies.


3
FREQUENTLY USED TERMS
Unless otherwise stated in this prospectus or the context otherwise requires references to:
“AOC” means the air operator certificate or similar aviation operating authority.
“B2B” means business-to-business.
“B2C” means business-to-consumer.
“Board” means the board of directors of Lilium.
“Business Combination” means the transactions contemplated by the Business Combination Agreement.
“Business Combination Agreement” means the Business Combination Agreement, dated March 30, 2021, as amended, by
and among Lilium GmbH, Merger Sub, Qell and Lilium, as amended.
“Cayman LLC Act” means the Limited Liability Companies Act (2021 Revision) of the Cayman Islands.
“CCPA” means the California Consumer Privacy Act of 2018.
“Class A Shares” means the ordinary shares A, nominal value €0.12 per share, of Lilium.
“Class B Shares” means the ordinary shares B, nominal value €0.36 per share, of Lilium.
“Class C Shares” means the ordinary shares C, nominal value €0.24 per share, of Lilium.
“Closing” means the closing of the transactions contemplated by the Business Combination Agreement.
“Code” means the U.S. Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended.
“COVID-19” means the novel coronavirus known as SARS-CoV-2 or COVID-19, and any evolutions, mutations thereof or
related or associated epidemics, pandemic or disease outbreaks.
“DCGC” means the Dutch Corporate Governance Code.
“DEVT” mean ducted electric vectored thrust.
“DOA” means the Design Organization Approval.
“EASA” means the European Union Aviation Safety Agency.
“ESOP” means the Employee Stock Option Program.
“ESPP” means the Lilium 2021 Employee Share Purchase Plan.
“eVTOL” mean electric vertical take-off-and-landing.
“Exchange” means the exchange of Lilium GmbH shares for the applicable class of Lilium Shares.
“Exchange Act” means the U.S. Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended.
“FAA” mean the Federal Aviation Administration.
“FCPA” means the U.S. Foreign Corrupt Practices Act.
“Final Closing Date” means the date on which the final Closing steps occur, being at least one business day after the
consummation of the Liquidation Distribution and Assumption.


4
“General Meeting” means a general meeting of the shareholders of the Company.
“GDPR” means the General Data Protection Regulation.
“IAS” means the International Accounting Standard.
“IASB” means the International Accounting Standards Board.
“IBR” means the incremental borrowing rate.
“IFRS” means the International Financial Reporting Standards as issued by the IASB.
“Incentive Plan” means the Lilium 2021 Equity Incentive Plan.
“IPO” means initial public offering.
“ISO” means incentive stock option.
“JOBS Act” means the Jumpstart Our Business Startups Act of 2012.
“Lilium” means Lilium N.V.
“Lilium Jet” means the Lilium 7-Seat eVTOL aircraft.
“Lilium Shares” means the Class A Shares and the Class B Shares.
“Liquidation Distribution and Assumption” means the distribution of all of Merger Sub’s tangible and intangible assets
(including all cash) and transfer of any and all of its liabilities to Lilium, in each case in connection with the commencement of
winding up proceedings of Merger Sub under the Cayman LLC Act.
“Merger” means the merger of Qell with and into Merger Sub, with Merger Sub surviving such merger.
“Merger Sub” means Queen Cayman Merger LLC, a Cayman Islands limited liability company and wholly-owned
subsidiary of Lilium.
“Nasdaq” means the Nasdaq Global Select Market.
“OEMs” means the original equipment manufacturers.
“PIPE Financing” means the subscription for and purchase by the PIPE Investors of an aggregate of 45,000,000 Class A
Shares at $10.00 per share for gross proceeds of $450,000,000 pursuant to the Subscription Agreements.
“PIPE Investors” means the investors in the PIPE Financing pursuant to the Subscription Agreements.
“POA” means the production organization approval.
“Private Warrants” means the 7,060,000 warrants held by certain former Qell shareholders, purchased by such holders in
the private placement that occurred concurrently with the closing of Qell’s IPO and converted into warrants to purchase one
Class A Share at a price of $11.50 per share, subject to adjustment, at the closing of the Business Combination.
“Public Warrants” means the 12,650,000 warrants to purchase one Class A Share at a price of $11.50, subject to adjustment,
held by certain former Qell shareholders.
“Qell” means Qell Acquisition Corp., a Cayman Islands exempted company.
“Qell Class A Ordinary Shares” means Qell’s Class A ordinary shares.
“Qell Class B Ordinary Shares” means Qell’s Class B ordinary shares.


5
“Qell IPO” means Qell’s initial public offering.
“RAM” means the Regional Air Mobility.
“Sarbanes-Oxley Act” means the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002.
“SC-VTOL” means Special Conditions for Small-Category VTOL Aircraft, EASA’s set of rules for the certification of
small-category VTOL aircraft like the Lilium Jet.
“SEC” means the United States Securities and Exchange Commission.
“Sponsor” means Qell Partners LLC, a Cayman Islands limited liability company.
“Sponsor Letter Agreement” means the Sponsor Letter Agreement, dated March 30, 2021, by and between Sponsor, Qell,
Lilium GmbH, and Lilium.
“Subscription Agreements” means the Subscription Agreements, dated March 30, 2021, between each of Lilium and Qell
with the PIPE Investors.
“Tencent” means Tencent Mobility (Luxembourg) S.à r.l.
“Trust Account” means the trust account established by Qell containing the proceeds of the Qell IPO and from certain
private placements occurring simultaneously with the Qell IPO for the benefit of Qell’s public shareholders.
“VTOL” means vertical take-off and landing.


PROSPECTUS SUMMARY
This summary highlights certain information about us, this offering and selected information contained elsewhere in this
prospectus. This summary is not complete and does not contain all of the information that you should consider before deciding
whether to invest in the securities covered by this prospectus. For a more complete understanding of our company and this
offering, we encourage you to read and consider carefully the more detailed information in this prospectus, and any related
prospectus supplement, including the information set forth in the section titled “Risk Factors” in this prospectus, and any
related prospectus supplement in their entirety before making an investment decision.
Unless otherwise stated or the context otherwise indicates, references to the “Company”, “we”, “our”, “us”, “Lilium” or
the “Lilium Group” refer to Lilium N.V., together with its subsidiaries, or, as the context may require, may refer to local holders
of Air Operator Certificates (“AOC”) or similar aviation operating authorities who Lilium anticipates will operate and control
Lilium network air carrier operations in certain jurisdictions in order to comply with applicable law.
Our Company
Lilium is a next-generation transportation company. We are focused on developing an eVTOL aircraft for use in a new type
of high-speed air transport system for people and goods-one that would offer increased connectivity for communities around the
world as well as generate time savings to travelers, would be accessible from homes and workplaces, be affordable for a large
part of the population, and be more environmentally friendly than current air transportation.
The product we are developing is a fully electric, 7-seater jet aircraft that will take-off and land vertically with low noise
(the “Lilium Jet”). Our objective is for the Lilium Jet to be the basis for sustainable, high-speed air shuttle networks that will
connect communities within a region directly with one another. We believe such a network will require less infrastructure than
traditional airports or railway lines and a fully electric jet aircraft would produce minimal operating emissions. We expect our
Lilium Jets to generate 0.3 ounces CO2 of operating emissions per passenger mile, which is approximately 97% less when
compared to commercial aviation. A single trip might save hours for a traveler; in aggregate, these networks could save our
societies millions of travel hours and significant carbon emissions each year.
Currently, our development efforts are focused on the Lilium Jet, including our ongoing certification process with
European Union Aviation Safety Agency (“EASA”) and Federal Aviation Administration (“FAA”), and building out our
manufacturing capacity to produce the Lilium Jet. We plan to rely on two business models. First, we plan to use the Lilium Jet
within regional passenger shuttle networks, initially in the U.S. and Europe, that we intend to create and operate with third
parties (our “People Network”). Second, we plan to provide a turnkey enterprise solution by leasing fleets of Lilium Jets
directly to governments and enterprise customers (the “Turnkey Enterprise”).
The new and developing eVTOL aircraft market has been made possible by a convergence of innovation across battery
technology, lightweight materials, sensors and computing power, and propulsion technology. Morgan Stanley has projected that
the eVTOL aircraft market could represent $1.5 trillion (in the base case) to $3.0 trillion (in the bull case) in revenues by 2040.
The Lilium Jet architecture is based on our proprietary Ducted Electric Vectored Thrust (“DEVT”) technology, which has
been developed and rigorously tested over the last five years. While the majority of our eVTOL competitors leverage open rotor
engines, which are based on unducted, contra-rotating propeller blades, DEVT consists of electric turbofans mounted within a
cylindrical duct. DEVT offers four fundamental advantages over open propeller eVTOL architectures: lower noise, higher
payload, safety and highest market penetration for ducted fans in commercial aviation, and scalability to larger aircraft in the
future.
We believe these technology advantages will enable our regional shuttle service model to carry more passengers (or cargo)
per jet on longer (regional) trips than open propeller eVTOL aircraft. The specifications for the Lilium Jet under development
call for the aircraft to be able to cruise at 175 mph at 10,000 feet for up to 155 miles and to have 7 seats (one for the pilot) or
210 cubic feet of cargo space representing 50% more (passenger) capacity than an open propeller eVTOL architecture would
have at comparable noise levels. We believe the combination of longer average trip lengths and higher passenger capacity per
jet (thus a higher load factor) will provide greater time savings to customers, more competitive pricing, and superior unit
economics as compared to open propeller eVTOL architecture.
We intend for the Lilium Jet to have lower take-off noise-60db(A) at 100 meters (330 feet) – than of any equivalent eVTOL
aircraft being developed by open propeller competitors, which would give us the potential for broad market access and dense
networks with more sold tickets overall. By contrast, helicopters generate a noise footprint 100 times larger. We are designing
the Lilium Jet to be virtually inaudible (estimated 20 db(A) at 3,000 meters (9,840 feet) distance) from the ground during cruise
flight.
6


We believe that our high-speed regional air networks will significantly change the economic calculus of passengers and
businesses shipping goods when making transportation and shipping decisions. Based on current design specifications and our
business model, we estimate that our Lilium Jet will be able to move people and goods five times faster than road transport, and
that a Lilium eVTOL network will be at least 100 times less costly and approximately 10 times faster to deploy than equivalent
high-speed rail infrastructure, and considerably more adaptable to shifting passenger demand. These estimates are based on
judgments and assumptions of our management in light of information available at this time; actual results may differ.
We believe that our aerospace team is one of the most capable in the eVTOL sector. Collectively, they have held
instrumental roles in the delivery of the Airbus A350 XWB, Airbus A380, Airbus A320, the Gulfstream G-650 jet engine, the
Eurofighter Typhoon and the Harrier jet. They are supported by approximately 400 aerospace engineers and a business team
with a strong track record in building successful companies in Silicon Valley and Europe. In addition to our Co-Founder and
Chief Executive Officer, Daniel Wiegand, the board of directors of Lilium (the “Board”) includes our Chairman, Dr. Thomas
Enders, as well as Henri Courpron, Barry Engle, David Neeleman, Margaret M. Smyth, Gabrielle Toledano, David Wallerstein
and Niklas Zennström. We have a 100,000 square foot technology prototyping and production facility at the Oberpfaffenhofen
airfield near our Munich headquarters in Germany. This facility will eventually house our serial aircraft production, including
the anticipated manufacturing of the proprietary propulsion and energy systems and the final assembly of the serial aircraft.
Other sub-systems and components will be outsourced to Tier 1 aerospace suppliers, such as Toray Industries, Aciturri
Aeronáutica and Honeywell. Under our planned timeline, we have targeted late 2022 for this facility to produce the first batch
of conforming serial aircraft units, in advance of our final test campaign.
Lilium is a Dutch public limited liability company (naamloze vennootschap). The mailing address of our principal
executive office is Claude-Dornier Straße 1, Bldg. 335, 82234 Wessling, Germany, our phone number is +49 160 9704 6857,
and our website is www.lilium.com. Information contained in our website is not a part of, nor incorporated by reference into,
this prospectus or our other filings with the SEC, and should not be relied upon.
Recent Developments
Closing of the Business Combination
On September 14, 2021 (the “Closing Date”), we closed our previously announced business combination (the “Business
Combination”) pursuant to the Business Combination Agreement, dated as of March 30, 2021, as amended (the “Business
Combination Agreement”), by and among Qell Acquisition Corp., a Cayman Islands exempted company (“Qell”), Lilium
GmbH, a German limited liability company (“Lilium GmbH”), Lilium, and Queen Cayman Merger LLC, a Cayman Islands
limited liability company and wholly owned subsidiary of Lilium (“Merger Sub”).
On the Closing Date, (i) Qell converted the Class A ordinary shares of Qell into a claim for corresponding equity in Merger
Sub, with such claim then contributed to Lilium in exchange for one of our Class A ordinary shares, nominal value €0.12 per
share (“Class A Shares”), (ii) the shareholders of Lilium GmbH exchanged their Lilium GmbH shares for shares in the capital of
Lilium with all Lilium GmbH shareholders, except Daniel Wiegand, receiving Class A Shares and Daniel Wiegand receiving
Class B ordinary shares, nominal value €0.36 per share, in the share capital of Lilium (“Class B Shares” and together with the
Class A Shares, “Lilium Shares”), and (iii) each outstanding warrant to purchase a Qell Class A ordinary share, including certain
warrants issued to Qell public shareholders in the Qell IPO and certain warrants issued by Qell in a private placement
transaction concurrently with the Qell IPO, was converted into a warrant to purchase one Class A Share.
Prior to the Business Combination, Qell did not conduct any material activities other than those incident to its formation
and the matters contemplated by the Business Combination Agreement, such as the making of certain required securities law
filings. Upon the closing of the Business Combination, Qell merged with and into Merger Sub, with Merger Sub as the
surviving company. Lilium then caused Merger Sub to wind up under the Cayman LLC Act and to distribute all of its tangible
and intangible assets (including all cash) and transfer any and all of its liabilities to Lilium (the “Liquidation Distribution and
Assumption”).
Our Class A Shares and our warrants issued in exchange for the Qell warrants included in the units sold in the Qell IPO,
each of which is exercisable for one Class A Share (the “Public Warrants”), began trading on Nasdaq under the symbols
“LILM” and “LILMW”, respectively, on September 15, 2021.
PIPE Financing
Concurrently with the execution of the Business Combination Agreement, Qell and Lilium entered into Subscription
Agreements (the “Subscription Agreements”), dated March 30, 2021, with certain investors (the “PIPE Investors”), pursuant to
which the PIPE Investors agreed to subscribe for and purchase, and Lilium agreed to issue and sell to such PIPE Investors, an
aggregate of 45,000,000
7


Class A Shares (the “PIPE Shares”) at a price of $10.00 per share, for gross proceeds of $450,000,000 (the “PIPE Financing”)
on the Closing Date. The PIPE Financing closed concurrently with the Business Combination.
The PIPE Shares were not registered under the Securities Act, in reliance upon the exemption provided in Section 4(a)
(2) of the Securities Act of 1933, as amended (the “Securities Act”) and/or Regulation D or Regulation S promulgated
thereunder without any form of general solicitation or general advertising.
Strategic Commercial Collaboration
On July 31, 2021, we executed a term sheet in which we agreed to enter into negotiations with Brazilian airline Azul S.A.
and Azul Linhas Aereas Brasileiras S.A. (collectively, “Azul”) to establish a strategic collaboration whereby Azul is expected to
commit to purchase from us 220 Lilium Jets for an aggregate value of up to $1.0 billion, with anticipated delivery to commence
in 2025. As part of the anticipated agreement, we would provide an aircraft health monitoring platform to assist in the
maintenance of the Lilium Jets sold to Azul, and Azul would operate the Lilium Jets. In addition, Azul would assist us in
pursuing type certification of the Lilium Jet in Brazil and by marketing the service in Brazil, and the parties expect to jointly
launch a co-branded network in Brazil using Lilium Jets, subject to obtaining the requisite type certification for the Lilium Jet
from the applicable regulatory authorities. Both parties would also support the setup of a local vertiport network in Brazil. The
parties have further agreed to work exclusively with one another with respect to the establishment of eVTOL products or
services in Brazil until the earlier of the execution and delivery of definitive agreements or the expiration of the term sheet,
subject to earlier termination for certain non-performance events.
In consideration of the strategic commercial collaboration, we agreed to use all efforts to grant to Azul warrants to purchase
up to 8,000,000 Class A Shares at an exercise price of €0.12 a share, consisting of (i) warrants to purchase 1,800,000 Class A
Shares, which warrants were issued to Azul on a fully vested basis on October 22, 2021, and (ii) subject to the execution of
definitive agreements, warrants to purchase up to an additional 6,200,000 Class A Shares, which are expected to vest in three
tranches.
Completion of the strategic collaboration and the final commercial terms thereof are subject to further negotiation and
execution of definitive agreements, and the operation of a joint eVTOL service in Brazil is subject to obtaining the requisite
type certification for the Lilium Jet. There can be no assurance that definitive agreements for the contemplated strategic
collaboration with Azul will be entered into on the anticipated timeline or at all or that the final commercial terms for the
proposed collaboration with Azul will not differ, including materially, from the terms currently contemplated by the parties.
Coronavirus (COVID-19) Pandemic
Since January 2020, the coronavirus (“COVID-19”) and its variants have been spreading worldwide. The strict measures to
stop the spread of COVID-19 adopted in several countries where we operate initially resulted in the majority of our workforce
working from home with a small number of teams with special purposes for development of the Lilium Jet remaining onsite.
Modern forms of communication enabled contact to be maintained between various members of staff and deadlines defined
before the period during which employees were working from home have been complied with. Additional costs were incurred
as a result of expenses related to health, safety and transportation of employees which remained onsite, however, the impact of
these did not materially impact our consolidated financial statements. As COVID-19 vaccines have become more broadly
available, certain of our employees have begun returning to onsite work. However, there can be no assurance that future
developments regarding the ongoing spread of COVID-19 will not result in a return to working from home for large portions of
our workforce and the reinstatement of additional COVID-19 mitigation measures.
The current uncertainty regarding the consequences and duration of COVID-19 has negatively impacted the ability to
develop a precise forecast for product development. Based on COVID-19 developments throughout 2021 and the latest
developments, we expect that business operations can continue.
We are monitoring the global outbreak of COVID-19 and have taken steps to identify and mitigate the adverse effects and
risks to us as a result of the pandemic. We have continued to implement social distancing and other COVID-19 mitigation
practices and are ready to reintroduce additional modifications to our business practices depending on the ongoing development
of the COVID-19 pandemic. We expect to continue to take actions as may be required or recommended by government
authorities or in the best interests of our employees and business partners. While the pandemic has not resulted in a slowdown
in our engineering, testing, certification and production activities, our operations, and the operations of our vendors, suppliers,
and commercial partners, including infrastructure, airline, training, and other business partners, may be adversely impacted.
Despite vaccines becoming available, COVID-19’s ongoing economic and health repercussions may also negatively impact our
future field engineering, testing and certification processes, manufacturing capacity in the future, as well as our commercial
activities including potential delays and restrictions on our ability to recruit and train staff. COVID-19 could also affect the
operations of our suppliers and business partners, which has resulted and may continue to result in delays or disruptions in the
supply chain of our components and delay the
8




development and rollout of a vertiport network and commercial operations. We will continue to closely monitor the effects of
the pandemic. For additional information on risks posed by the COVID-19 pandemic, see “Risk Factors.”
Implications of Being an Emerging Growth Company and a Foreign Private Issuer
We qualify as an “emerging growth company” as defined in the Jumpstart Our Business Startups Act of 2012 (“JOBS
Act”). As an emerging growth company, we intend to take advantage of exemptions from various reporting requirements that
are applicable to most other public companies. The exemptions include, but are not limited to:
●
an exemption from the provisions of Section 404(b) of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act requiring that our independent
registered public accounting firm provide an attestation report on the effectiveness of our internal control over
financial reporting;
●
reduced disclosure obligations regarding executive compensation; and
●
not being required to hold a nonbinding advisory vote on executive compensation or seek shareholder approval of any
golden parachute payments not previously approved.
We will remain an “emerging growth company” until the earliest to occur of (i) the last day of the fiscal year (a) following
the fifth anniversary of the closing of the Business Combination, (b) in which we have total annual gross revenue of at least
$1.07 billion or (c) in which we are deemed to be a large accelerated filer, which means the market value of equity securities
held by our non-affiliates exceeds $700 million as of the last business day of our prior second fiscal quarter, and (ii) the date on
which we have issued more than $1.0 billion in non-convertible debt during the prior three-year period.
We are also considered a “foreign private issuer” subject to reporting requirements under the Securities Exchange Act of
1934, as amended (the “Exchange Act”), as a non-U.S. company with foreign private issuer status. As a “foreign private issuer,”
we will be subject to different U.S. securities laws than domestic U.S. issuers. The rules governing the information that we must
disclose differ from those governing U.S. corporations pursuant to the Exchange Act. This means that, even after we no longer
qualify as an emerging growth company, as long as we qualify as a foreign private issuer under the Exchange Act, we will be
exempt from certain provisions of the Exchange Act that are applicable to U.S. domestic public companies, including:
●
the rules under the Exchange Act prescribing the furnishing and content of proxy statements to shareholders and
requirements that the proxy statements conform to Schedule 14A of the proxy rules promulgated under the Exchange
Act;
●
the sections of the Exchange Act regulating the solicitation of proxies, consents or authorizations in respect of a
security registered under the Exchange Act;
●
the sections of the Exchange Act requiring insiders (i.e., officers, directors and holders of more than 10% of our issued
and outstanding equity securities) to file public reports of their stock ownership and trading activities and liability for
insiders who profit from trades made in a short period of time;
●
the rules under the Exchange Act requiring the filing with the Securities and Exchange Commission (the “SEC”) of
quarterly reports on Form 10-Q containing unaudited financial and other specified information, or current reports on
Form 8-K, upon the occurrence of specified significant events; and
●
the SEC rules on disclosure of compensation on an individual basis unless individual disclosure is required in our
home country (the Netherlands) and is not otherwise publicly disclosed by us.
We may take advantage of these exemptions until such time as we are no longer a foreign private issuer. We would cease to
be a foreign private issuer at such time as more than 50% of our outstanding voting securities are held by U.S. residents and any
of the following three circumstances applies: (i) the majority of our executive officers or directors are U.S. citizens or residents,
(ii) more than 50% of our assets are located in the United States or (iii) our business is administered principally in the United
States.
We may choose to take advantage of some but not all of these reduced reporting requirements of which we have taken
advantage of in this prospectus. Accordingly, the information contained herein may be different from the information you
receive from our competitors that are U.S. domestic filers, or other U.S. domestic public companies in which you have made an
investment.
9


Risk Factors
Investing in our securities entails a high degree of risk as more fully described in the “Risk Factors” section beginning on
page 17. These risks include, among others, the following:
●
We have incurred significant losses and expect to incur significant expenses and continuing losses for the foreseeable
future, and we may not achieve or maintain profitability.
●
The eVTOL market may not continue to develop, or eVTOL aircraft may not be adopted by the transportation market.
●
Our eVTOL aircraft may not be certified by transportation and aviation authorities, including EASA or the FAA.
●
The Lilium Jet may not deliver the expected reduction in operating costs or time savings that we anticipate.
●
The success of our business depends on the safety and positive perception of the Lilium Jets, the convenience of
Lilium’s vertiports, and our ability to effectively market and sell RAM services.
●
We have a limited operating history and face significant challenges to develop, certify, manufacture and launch our
services in a new industry, urban and regional air transportation services. The Lilium eVTOL jet remains in
development, and we do not expect to launch commercial services until 2024, at the earliest, if at all.
●
The RAM market for eVTOL passenger and goods transport services does not exist; whether and how it develops is
based on assumptions, and the RAM market may not achieve the growth potential we expect or may grow more
slowly than expected.
●
We may be unable to adequately control the costs associated with our pre-launch operations, and our costs will
continue to be significant after we commence operations.
●
We may experience difficulties in managing our growth and commercializing our operations.
●
We may not realize the anticipated benefits of the transactions contemplated by the Business Combination.
●
Our business model has yet to be tested or regulatorily approved and any failure to commercialize our strategic plans
would have an adverse effect on our operating results and business, harm our reputation and could result in substantial
liabilities that exceed our resources.
●
Our forward-looking operating estimates and business plan relies in large part upon assumptions and analyses that we
have developed. If these assumptions or analyses prove to be incorrect, our actual operating results may be materially
different from our anticipated results.
●
We anticipate commencing commercial operations with our fully developed Lilium Jet, if regulatorily approved and
certified, which is currently in the design and development phase and has yet to complete the testing and certification
process. Any delay in completing testing and certification, and any design changes that may be required to be
implemented in order to receive certification, would adversely impact our business plan and our financial condition.
●
Any delays in the development, certification, manufacture and commercialization of the Lilium Jets and related
technology, such as battery technology or electric motors, may adversely impact our business, financial condition and
results of operations.
●
If we are unable to successfully design, manufacture and obtain regulatory approval and certification of our jets, or if
the jets we build fail to perform as expected, our ability to develop, market, and sell our services could be harmed.
●
The Lilium Jets require complex software, battery technology and other technology systems that remain in
development in coordination with our vendors and suppliers to complete serial production.
●
We will rely on third-party suppliers for the provision and development of key emerging technologies, components
and materials used in the Lilium Jet, such as the lithium-ion batteries that will power the jets, a significant number of
which may be single or limited source suppliers.
10


●
If any of our suppliers become economically distressed or go bankrupt, we may be required to provide substantial
financial support or take other measures to ensure supplies of components or materials, which could increase our
costs, affect our liquidity or cause production disruptions.
●
Third-party U.S. air carriers will provide RAM services in the U.S. using the Lilium eVTOL aircraft. These third-party
U.S. air carriers are subject to substantial regulation and laws, and unfavorable changes to, or the third-party U.S. air
carriers’ failure to comply with, these regulations and/or laws could substantially harm our business and operating
results in the U.S.
●
We are subject to substantial regulation and laws and unfavorable changes to, or our failure to comply with, these
regulations and/or laws could substantially harm our business and operating results.
●
Any inability to operate our RAM services after commercial launch at our anticipated flight rate, on our anticipated
routes or with our anticipated vertiports could adversely impact our business, financial condition and results
operations.
●
Our potential customers may not generally accept the RAM industry or our passenger or goods transport services. If
we are unable to convince customers of the convenience of our services and generally provide high quality customer
service that will be expected of a premium service, our business and reputation may be materially and adversely
affected.
●
Adverse publicity stemming from any incident involving Lilium or our competitors, or an incident involving any air
travel service or unmanned flight based on autonomous technology, could have a material adverse effect on our
business, financial condition and results of operations.
●
Although we hope to be the first to bring eVTOL RAM services to market, our competitors have also displayed
eVTOL prototypes and may gain certification and commercialize their vehicles to allow them to enter the market
before us.
●
Our business plans require a significant amount of capital. In addition, our future capital needs may require us to sell
additional equity or debt securities that may adversely affect the market price of our shares and dilute our shareholders
or introduce covenants that may restrict our operations.
Corporate Information
We were incorporated as a Dutch private limited liability company (besloten vennootschap met beperkte aansprakelijkheid)
under the name Qell DutchCo B.V. on March 11, 2021 solely for the purpose of effectuating the Business Combination. Prior to
the Business Combination, Qell DutchCo B.V. did not conduct any material activities other than those incident to its formation
and certain matters related to the Business Combination, such as the making of certain required securities law filings.
Our name was changed from Qell DutchCo B.V. to Lilium B.V. on April 8, 2021. In connection with the closing of the
Business Combination on September 10, 2021, we converted into a Dutch public limited liability company (naamloze
vennootschap).
We are registered in the Commercial Register of the Netherlands Chamber of Commerce (Kamer van Koophandel) under
number 82165874. Our official seat (statutaire zetel) is in Amsterdam, the Netherlands and the mailing and business address of
our principal executive office is Claude-Dornier Straße 1, Bldg. 335, 82234, Wessling, Germany. Our telephone number is +49
160 9704 6857.
We maintain a website at www.lilium.com, where we regularly post copies of our press releases as well as additional
information about us. Our filings with the SEC are available free of charge through the website as soon as reasonably
practicable after being electronically filed with or furnished to the SEC. Information contained in our website is not a part of,
nor incorporated by reference into, this prospectus or our other filings with the SEC, and should not be relied upon.
All trademarks, service marks and trade names appearing in this prospectus are the property of their respective holders. Use
or display by us of other parties’ trademarks, trade dress, or products in this prospectus is not intended to, and does not, imply a
relationship with, or endorsements or sponsorship of, us by the trademark or trade dress owners.
11


THE OFFERING
Issuer
    Lilium N.V. (f/k/a Lilium B.V.)
Issuance of Class A Shares
Class A Shares offered by us
52,142,954 of our Class A Shares, consisting of up to (i) 24,413,065 Class A Shares
issuable upon conversion of our outstanding Class B Shares, (ii) 7,060,000 Class A
Shares issuable upon the exercise of 7,060,000 Private Warrants, (iii) 12,650,000
Class A Shares issuable upon the exercise of 12,650,000 Public Warrants, (iv)
1,800,000 Class A Shares issuable upon exercise of the Azul Warrants and (v)
6,219,889 Class A Shares that are issuable upon the exercise of outstanding Specified
Options.
Class A Shares outstanding prior to exercise of all
Warrants and Specified Options1
259,696,994 Class A Shares (as of September 14, 2021)
Class A Shares outstanding assuming exercise of all
Warrants and Specified Options1
287,426,883 Class A Shares (or 311,839,948 Class A Shares, assuming conversion of
all outstanding Class B Shares), based on total shares outstanding as of September
14, 2021
Exercise Price of Warrants and Specified Options
SPAC Warrants: $11.50 per share, subject to adjustments described therein
Azul Warrants: €0.12 per Class A Share
Specified Options: $0.01 per share (calculated on a weighted average basis for all
Specified Options)
Use of Proceeds
We will receive up to an aggregate of approximately $227.0 million from the
exercise of the Warrants and Specified Options, assuming the exercise in full of all of
the Warrants and Specified Options for cash. We expect to use the net proceeds from
the exercise of the Warrants and Specified Options for general corporate purposes.
See “Use of Proceeds.”
Resale of Class A Shares and Private Warrants
Class A Shares that may be offered and sold from
time to time by the selling securityholders
210,665,118 of our Class A Shares, consisting of up to (i) 129,292,473 Class A
Shares issued in the Business Combination, (ii) 45,000,000 Class A Shares issued to
the PIPE Investors concurrently with the closing of the Business Combination, (iii)
24,413,065 Class A Shares issuable upon conversion of outstanding Class B Shares,
(iv) 7,060,000 Class A Shares issuable upon exercise of the Private Warrants, (v)
1,800,000 Class A Shares issuable upon exercise of the Azul Warrants, (vi) 879,691
Class A Shares issued in connection with certain equity compensation arrangements
and (vii) 2,219,889 Class A Shares issuable upon the exercise of certain of the
Specified Options.
Warrants offered by the selling securityholders
7,060,000 Private Warrants
Redemption
The Private Warrants are redeemable in certain circumstances. See “Description of
Securities—Warrants” for further discussion.
Use of proceeds
All of the Class A Shares and Private Warrants offered by the selling securityholders
pursuant to this prospectus will be sold by the selling securityholders for their
respective accounts. We will not receive any of the proceeds from such sales.
1 The number of Class A Shares issued and outstanding as of September 14, 2021 does not include 375,000 issued Class A
Shares held by Lilium as treasury shares as of September 14, 2021.
12


SUMMARY CONSOLIDATED HISTORICAL AND OTHER FINANCIAL INFORMATION
Summary Historical Financial Data of Lilium
The following table shows summary historical financial information of Lilium for the periods and as of the dates indicated.
The summary historical financial information of Lilium as of and for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 was derived
from the audited historical financial statements of Lilium included elsewhere in this prospectus. The summary historical
financial information of Lilium as of and for the six months ended June 30, 2021 and 2020 was derived from the unaudited
condensed consolidated interim financial statements appearing elsewhere in this prospectus.
The following summary historical financial information should be read together with the consolidated financial statements
and accompanying notes and “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations”
appearing elsewhere in this prospectus. The summary historical financial information in this section is not intended to replace
our consolidated financial statements and the related notes. Our historical results are not necessarily indicative of our future
results.
The financial information contained in this section relates to Lilium, prior to and without giving pro-forma effect to the
impact of the Business Combination and, as a result, the results reflected in this section may not be indicative of the results of
Lilium going forward after giving effect to the Business Combination. See the section entitled “Unaudited Pro Forma
Condensed Combined Financial Information” included elsewhere in this prospectus.
Six Months Ended June 30,
Year Ended December 31,
    
2021
    
2020
    
2020
    
2019
Statement of Operations Data
(in € thousands)
(in € thousands)
Revenue
€
47
€
97
€
97
€
— 
Cost of sales
(11)
(10)
(10)
—
Gross profit
36
87
87
—
Total operating expenses
(138,807)
(58,200)
Operating loss
(103,793)
(39,860)
(138,720)
(58,200)
Financial result
(6,284)
(3,577)
(49,661)
(5,218)
Loss before income tax
(110,278)
(43,437)
(188,381)
(63,418)
Income tax expense
(199)
(20)
(46)
(61)
Net loss
€
 (110,477)
€
(43,457)
€
(188,427)
€
 (63,479)
Statement of Financial Position Data
Total assets
€
112,556
€
233,288
€
 184,946
€
 77,853
Total equity
€
61,364
€
131,489
€
 57,722
€
 (24,088)
Total liabilities
€
51,192
€
101,799
€
 127,224
€
101,941
Statement of Cash Flows Data
Cash flow from operating activities
€
 (74,912)
€
(30,479)
€
 (77,883)
€
 (47,047)
Cash flow from investing activities
€
34,767
€
(102,497)
€
 (59,472)
€
 (4,797)
Cash flow from financing activities
€
752
€
149,482
€
 179,955
€
 64,261
13


SUMMARY UNAUDITED PRO FORMA CONDENSED COMBINED FINANCIAL INFORMATION
The following summary unaudited pro forma condensed combined financial information (the “Summary Pro Forma
Information”) gives effect to the Business Combination and related transactions contemplated in the Business Combination
Agreement. The Business Combination will be accounted for as a capital reorganization in accordance with IFRS as issued by
the IASB. Under this method of accounting, Qell is treated as the “acquired” company for financial reporting purposes.
Accordingly, the Business Combination is treated as the equivalent of Lilium GmbH issuing shares at the Closing of the
Business Combination for the net assets of Qell as of the Closing Date, accompanied by a recapitalization. The net assets of
Qell is stated at historical cost, with no goodwill or other intangible assets recorded. The Business Combination, which is not
within the scope of IFRS 3 since Qell does not meet the definition of a business in accordance with IFRS 3, is accounted for
within the scope of IFRS 2. Any excess of fair value of Lilium GmbH shares issued over the fair value of Qell's identifiable net
assets acquired represents compensation for the service of a stock exchange listing for its shares and is expensed as incurred.
The summary unaudited pro forma condensed combined statement of financial position data as of June 30, 2021 gives pro
forma effect to the Business Combination and related transactions as if they had occurred on June 30, 2021. The summary
unaudited pro forma condensed combined statements of operations data for the six months ended June 30, 2021 and the year
ended December 31, 2020 give pro forma effect to the Business Combination and related transactions as if they had been
consummated on January 1, 2020, the beginning of the earliest period presented.
The summary pro forma information have been derived from, and should be read in conjunction with, the unaudited pro
forma condensed combined financial information of the combined company appearing elsewhere in this prospectus and the
accompanying notes thereto. The unaudited pro forma condensed combined financial information is based upon, and should be
read in conjunction with, the historical financial statements of Qell and related notes and the historical consolidated financial
statements of Lilium GmbH and related notes included in this prospectus.
The summary pro forma information have been presented for informational purposes only and are not necessarily
indicative of what Lilium GmbH’s financial position or results of operations actually would have been had the Business
Combination and related transactions been completed as of the dates indicated. In addition, the summary pro forma information
do not purport to project the future financial position or operating results of the combined company.
Summary Unaudited Pro Forma Condensed Combined Financial Information
    
Pro Forma Combined
(in thousands except
share and per share
 data)
Summary Unaudited Pro Forma Condensed Combined
 
  
Statements of Operations Data
 
  
For the Six Months Ended June 30, 2021
Revenue
€
47
Net loss per share – basic and diluted
€
(0.32)
Weighted average number of shares outstanding – basic and diluted
285,282,977
For the Year Ended December 31, 2020
Revenue
€
 97
Net loss per share - basic and diluted
€
 (1.24)
Weighted average number of shares outstanding - basic and diluted
 
 285,282,977
Summary Unaudited Pro Forma Condensed Combined
 
  
Statement of Financial Position Data as of June 30, 2021
 
  
Total assets
€
 542,893
Total liabilities
€
 71,008
Total equity
€
 471,885
14


15
RISK FACTORS
Investing in our Class A Shares or Warrants involves a high degree of risk. In addition to the other information set forth in
this prospectus, you should carefully consider the risk factors discussed below when considering an investment in our Class A
Shares or Warrants and any risk factors that may be set forth in the applicable prospectus supplement, as well as the other
information contained in this prospectus and any applicable prospectus supplement. If any of the following risks occur, our
business, financial condition, results of operations and prospects could be materially and adversely affected. In that case, the
market price of our Class A Shares and Public Warrants could decline and you could lose some or all of your investment.
Additional risks and uncertainties not presently known to us or that we currently deem immaterial also may impair our business
operations.
Risks Related to Our Business and Financial Position
We have incurred significant losses and expect to incur significant expenses and continuing losses for the foreseeable future,
and we may not achieve or maintain profitability.
We have incurred significant operating losses. Our operating losses were €58.2 million and €138.7 million for the years
ended December 31, 2019 and 2020, respectively, and €43.5 million and €110.5 million for the six months ended June 30, 2020
and 2021, respectively. We expect to continue to incur substantial losses during 2021. Our consolidated financial statements for
the year ended December 31, 2020 and for the six months ended June 30, 2021, have been prepared on a basis that assumes we
will continue as a going concern, as described in the notes to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this
prospectus. We have received approximately $584 million (€493 million) in gross proceeds pursuant to the Business
Combination and related PIPE Financing and expect to use these amounts to progress part of the certification, production and
commercialization of the Lilium Jet. However, we have based this estimate on assumptions that may prove to be wrong, and we
could utilize our available capital resources sooner than we expect. In addition, we have not yet started commercial operations,
making it difficult for us to predict our future operating results, and we believe that we will continue to incur operating losses
until at least the time we begin commercial operations. As a result, our losses may be larger than anticipated, and we may not
achieve profitability when expected, or at all, and even if we do, we may not be able to maintain or increase profitability.
We expect our operating expenses to increase over the next several years as we complete our aircraft design, build
manufacturing sites and agree the commercial matters necessary to launch of our operations. We expect the rate at which we
incur losses will be significantly higher for 2021 though at least 2025 as we engage in the following activities:
●
continue to design, certify and produce our Lilium Jet aircraft;
●
engage suppliers in the development of aircraft components and commit capital to serial production of those
components;
●
finish building our production capabilities to assemble the major components of our jets in our Munich factory: the
propulsion systems, energy system assembly and aircraft integration, as well as the cost associated with outsourcing
production of subsystems and commodity components;
●
close relationships with infrastructure providers to build and license our vertiport infrastructure;
●
hire additional employees across development, design, production, marketing, administration and commercialization of
our business;
●
engage with third party providers for design, testing, certification and commercialization of our business;
●
build up inventories of parts and components for our jets;
●
further enhance our research and development capacities to continue the work on our jet’s technology, components,
hardware and software performance;
●
test and certify the performance and operation of our jets;
●
work with third-party providers to train our pilots, mechanics and technicians in our proprietary jet operation and
maintenance;
●
develop and launch our digital platform and customer user interface;


16
●
develop our sales and marketing activities and develop our vertiport infrastructure; and
●
increase our general and administrative functions to support our growing operations and our responsibilities as a public
company.
Because we will incur the costs and expenses from these efforts before we receive any associated revenue, our losses in
future periods will likely continue to be significant. In addition, we may find that these efforts are more expensive than we
currently anticipate or that these efforts may not result in the revenue we anticipate, which would further increase our losses.
Furthermore, if our future growth and operating performance fail to meet investor or analyst expectations, or if we have future
negative cash flow or losses resulting from our investment in acquiring customers or expanding our operations, this could have a
material adverse effect on our business, financial condition and results of operations.
The eVTOL market may not continue to develop, eVTOL aircraft may not be adopted by the transportation market, eVTOL
aircraft may not be certified by transportation and aviation authorities or eVTOL aircraft may not deliver the expected
reduction in operating costs or time savings.
eVTOL aircraft involve a complex set of technologies and are subject to evolving regulations, many of which were
originally not intended to apply to electric and/or VTOL aircraft. Before any eVTOL aircraft can fly passengers, manufacturers
and operators must receive requisite regulatory approvals, including – but not limited to – aircraft type certificate and
certification-related to air service operations (AOC etc.). No eVTOL aircraft have passed certification by EASA or the FAA for
commercial operations in Europe or the United States, respectively, and there is no assurance that our current serial prototype
for the Lilium Jet will receive government certification in a way that is market-viable or commercially successful, in a timely
manner or at all. Gaining government certification requires us to prove the performance, reliability and safety of our Lilium Jet,
which cannot be assured. In addition, our operations will be subject to national, federal, state and municipal licensing
requirements and other regulatory measures in each jurisdiction in which we lease vertiport space, and we may require changes
to our proposed vertiport infrastructure to satisfy licensing or regulatory requirements. Any of the foregoing risks and challenges
could adversely affect our prospects, business, financial condition and results of operations.
The success of our business depends on the safety and positive perception of our jets, the establishment of strategic
relationships, the convenience of our vertiports, and of our ability to effectively market and sell RAM services.
We have not commenced commercial operations, and we expect that our success will be highly dependent on our target
customers’ embrace of RAM and eVTOL vehicles, which we believe will be influenced by the public’s perception of the safety,
convenience and cost of our Lilium Jets specifically but also of the industry as a whole. As a new industry, the public has low
awareness of RAM and eVTOL vehicles, which will require substantial publicity and marketing campaigns in a cost-effective
manner to effectively and adequately target and engage our potential customers. If we are unable to demonstrate the safety of
our jets, the convenience of our jets, the cost-effectiveness and time-savings of our RAM services as compared with other
commuting, goods transportation, airport shuttle, or regional transportation options, our business may not develop as we
anticipate it could, and our business, revenue and operations may be adversely affected. Further, our sales growth will depend
on our ability to develop relationships with infrastructure providers, airline, other commercial entities, municipalities and
regional governments and landowners, which may not be effective in generating anticipated sales, and marketing campaigns can
be expensive and may not result in the acquisition of customers in a cost-effective manner, if at all. If conflicts arise with our
strategic counterparties, the other party may act in a manner adverse to us and could limit our ability to implement our
strategies. Our strategic counterparties may develop, either alone or with others, products or services in related fields that are
competitive with our products and services.
We have a limited operating history and face significant challenges to develop, certify, manufacture and launch our services
in a new industry, urban and regional air transportation services. Our Lilium eVTOL jet remains in development, and we do
not expect to launch commercial services until 2024, at the earliest, if at all.
Lilium was incorporated in 2015, and we are operating in a newly emerging RAM market, which is continuously evolving.
We have no experience as an organization in high volume manufacturing of our planned Lilium Jets or operation of a
commercially viable RAM service. We cannot assure you that we or our suppliers and other commercial counterparties will be
able to develop efficient, cost-efficient manufacturing capability and processes, and reliable sources of component supplies that
will enable us to meet the quality, price, engineering, design and production standards, as well as the production volumes,
required to successfully produce and maintain Lilium Jets and provide customers with a high-quality customer service across a
distributed network of vertiports. Based on our current testing and projections, we believe that we can achieve our business plan
and forecasted performance model targets in terms of aircraft range, speed, energy system capacity, payload and noise; however,
our Lilium Jet is not yet fully operational, and we might not achieve all of our performance targets, which would materially
impact our business plan and results of operations. You


17
should consider our business and prospects in light of the risks and significant challenges we face as a new entrant into a new
industry, including, among other things, with respect to our ability to:
●
design and produce safe, reliable and high-quality Lilium Jets and scale that production in a cost-effective manner;
●
obtain the necessary certification and regulatory approvals in a timely manner;
●
build a well-recognized and respected brand;
●
build and maintain a convenient network of vertiports and provide high quality customer service to our customers;
●
establish and expand our customer base;
●
successfully market our intra-city RAM services and our goods transportation services to commercial customers;
●
properly price our services, and successfully anticipate the take-up rate and usage of such services by our target
customers;
●
successfully maintain and service our jets and maintain a good flow of spare parts and qualified technicians;
●
attract, train and maintain pilots, mechanics and technicians trained in our jets and motivate other talented employees
to remain with our company;
●
improve and maintain our operational efficiency;
●
maintain a reliable, secure, high-performance and scalable technology infrastructure;
●
predict our future revenues and appropriately budget for our expenses;
●
anticipate trends that may emerge and affect our business;
●
anticipate and adapt to changing market conditions, including technological developments and changes in competitive
landscape;
●
secure, protect and defend our intellectual property; and
●
navigate an evolving and complex regulatory environment.
If we fail to adequately address any or all of these risks and challenges, our business may be materially and adversely
affected.
The RAM market for eVTOL passenger and goods transport services does not exist; whether and how it develops is based on
assumptions, and the RAM market may not achieve the growth potential we expect or may grow more slowly than expected.
Our estimates for the total addressable market for eVTOL RAM regional passenger and goods transport services are based
on a number of internal and third-party estimates, including customers who have expressed interest, assumed prices at which we
can offer our services, assumed aircraft development, certification and production figures, our ability to manufacture, obtain
regulatory approval and certification, and operate our jets, assumed vertiport networks available to us in our target markets,
assumed safety protocols and redundancies, our internal processes and general market conditions. While we believe our
assumptions and the data underlying our estimates are reasonable, these assumptions and estimates may not be correct and the
conditions supporting our assumptions or estimates may change at any time, thereby reducing the predictive accuracy of these
underlying factors. As a result, our estimates of the annual total addressable market for our RAM passenger transport and goods
transport services, as well as the expected growth rate for the total addressable market, may prove to be incorrect, which could
negatively affect our operating revenue, costs, operations and potential profitability.


18
We may be unable to adequately control the costs associated with our pre-launch operations, and our costs will continue to
be significant after we commence operations.
We will require significant capital to develop and grow our business, including designing, developing, testing, certifying
and manufacturing our aircraft, building our manufacturing plant, securing leases and contractual arrangements for our
vertiports and other commercial activities, educating customers of the safety, efficiency and cost-effectiveness of our services
and building our brand. Our research and development expenses were €38.1 million and €90.3 million in 2019 and 2020,
respectively, and €58.8 million for the six months ended June 30, 2021, and we expect to continue to incur significant expenses
which will impact our profitability, including continuing research and development expenses, manufacturing, maintenance and
procurement costs, marketing, customer and payment system expenses, and general and administrative expenses as we scale our
operations. In addition, we expect to incur significant costs in connection with operating our services, including scaling out our
operations by building and operating a fleet of jets (including, but not limited to pilot salaries, landing fees, jet maintenance and
energy costs), training staff on the operation and maintenance of our aircraft, expanding our vertiport network, and promoting
our services. Our ability to become profitable in the future will not only depend on our ability to successfully market our
services but also our ability to control our costs. If we are unable to cost efficiently design, certify, manufacture, market, operate
and service our jets and operations, our margins, profitability and prospects would be materially and adversely affected.
We may experience difficulties in managing our growth and commercializing our operations.
We expect to experience significant growth in the scope and nature of our manufacturing and service operations. Our ability
to manage our operations and future growth will require us to continue to improve our operational, financial and management
controls, compliance programs and reporting systems. We are currently in the process of strengthening our compliance
programs, including our compliance programs related to internal controls, intellectual property management, privacy and
cybersecurity. We may not be able to implement improvements in an efficient or timely manner and may discover deficiencies
in existing controls, programs, systems and procedures, which could have an adverse effect on our business, reputation and
financial results.
We may not realize the anticipated benefits of the transactions contemplated by the Business Combination.
The combination of independent businesses is complex, costly and time consuming and combining Qell and Lilium’s
business and operations may divert significant management attention and resources and disrupt the combined company’s
business. The failure to meet the challenges involved in integrating the businesses and to realize the anticipated benefits of the
transactions contemplated by the Business Combination could cause an interruption of, or a loss of momentum in, the combined
company’s business activities and could adversely affect its results of operations. The Business Combination may also result in
material unanticipated problems, expenses, liabilities, and competitive responses.
Many of these factors are outside of our control, and any one of them could result in lower revenues, higher costs and
diversion of management time and energy, which could materially impact our business, financial condition and results of
operations.
If the Business Combination’s benefits do not meet the expectations of investors, shareholders or financial analysts, the
market price of our securities may decline.
If the benefits of the Business Combination do not meet the expectations of investors or securities analysts, the market price
of our securities may decline. In addition, fluctuations in the price of our Class A Shares could contribute to the loss of all or
part of your investment. If an active market for our securities develops and continues, the trading price of our Class A Shares
could be volatile and subject to wide fluctuations in response to various factors, some of which are beyond our control. Any of
the factors listed below could have a material adverse effect on your investment in our securities and our securities may trade at
prices significantly below the price you paid for them. In such circumstances, the trading price of our securities may not recover
and may experience a further decline.
Factors affecting the trading price of our Class A Shares may include:
●
actual or anticipated fluctuations in our financial results or the financial results of companies perceived to be similar to
Lilium;
●
changes in the market’s expectations about our operating results;
●
success of competitors;


19
●
our operating results failing to meet the expectation of securities analysts or investors in a particular period;
●
changes in financial estimates and recommendations by securities analysts concerning Lilium or the market in general;
●
operating and stock price performance of other companies that investors deem comparable to Lilium;
●
our ability to market new and enhanced products and technologies on a timely basis;
●
changes in laws and regulations affecting our business;
●
our ability to meet compliance requirements;
●
commencement of, or involvement in, litigation involving us;
●
changes in our capital structure, such as future issuances of securities or the incurrence of additional debt;
●
the volume of Class A Shares available for public sale;
●
any major change in the Board or management;
●
sales of substantial amounts of Class A Shares by our directors, executive officers or significant shareholders or the
perception that such sales could occur; and
●
general economic and political conditions such as recessions, interest rates, international currency fluctuations and acts
of war or terrorism.
Broad market and industry factors may materially harm the market price of our securities irrespective of our operating
performance. The stock market has experienced price and volume fluctuations that have often been unrelated or disproportionate
to the operating performance of the particular companies affected. The trading prices and valuations of these stocks, and of our
securities, may not be predictable. A loss of investor confidence in the market for retail stocks or the stocks of other companies
which investors perceive to be similar to Lilium could depress our stock price regardless of our business, prospects, financial
conditions or results of operations. A decline in the market price of our securities also could adversely affect our ability to issue
additional securities and our ability to obtain additional financing in the future.
We may be unable to launch our services on the timeline, or with the scope of services, that we are anticipating.
We need to resolve significant regulatory, operational, logistical, and other challenges in order to launch our Lilium Jet
services. We do not currently have infrastructure in place to operate our services, and such infrastructure may not become
available at all or at the times or under conditions we anticipate. Our Lilium Jets have not yet received any EASA or FAA
certification/approvals, and we are working through the details of the required airspace, operational authority and other relevant
and necessary multinational, federal, national and local government approvals, which are essential to the operation of our
services. Any delay in the financing, design, manufacture, and launch of our Lilium Jets, any delay in the receipt of all necessary
regulatory approvals and certifications, and any determination by a transportation or aviation authority that we cannot
manufacture or provide or otherwise engage in the services as we contemplated could materially damage our brand, business,
prospects, financial condition and operating results, and may require us to incur additional costs and created adverse publicity
for our business. If we are not able to overcome these challenges, our business, prospects, operating results and financial
condition will be negatively impacted and our ability to grow our business will be harmed.
Our business model has yet to be tested or regulatorily approved and any failure to commercialize our strategic plans would
have an adverse effect on our operating results and business, harm our reputation and could result in substantial liabilities
that exceed our resources.
Any new business will encounter challenges and difficulties, especially a business pioneer operating in a newly emerging
market. Many of these challenges will be beyond our control, including substantial risks and expenses to create a new market,
set up operations and educate potential customers about a new market. You should consider the likelihood of our success in light
of these risks, expenses, complications, delays discussed in these Risk Factors. There is nothing at this time upon which to base
an assumption that our business model will prove successful, and we may not be able to generate significant revenue, raise
additional capital or operate profitably. We will continue to encounter risks and difficulties frequently experienced by early
commercial stage companies, including scaling up our infrastructure and headcount, and may encounter unforeseen expenses,
difficulties or delays in connection


20
with our growth. In addition, as a result of the capital-intensive nature of our business, we expect to continue to sustain
substantial operating expenses without generating sufficient revenues to cover expenditures. Any investment in our company is
therefore highly speculative and could result in the loss of your entire investment.
We anticipate commencing commercial operations with our fully developed Lilium Jet, if regulatorily approved and certified,
which remains under development and has yet to complete the testing and certification process. Any delay in completing
testing and certification, and any design changes that may be required to be implemented in order to receive certification,
would adversely impact our business plan and our financial condition.
We expect to commence commercial operations in 2024 with a single model of eVTOL jet. We are currently engaged in a
rigorous testing and design program that will be required to substantiate our certification process, and we must conduct and
analyze our test flight data before we will be cleared to operate with commercial passengers using our eVTOL jet aircraft.
Following each flight test, we undertake, we analyze the resulting data and determine whether additional changes to the jet
design, propulsion, electronic motor, battery and software systems are required. We are engaged in a process of carefully
reviewing and implementing preliminary operating data in order to identify and implementing changes to our prototype model
in order to ensure optimal safety protocols, battery efficiency, sufficient redundancies, and maximum load capacities. For
example, a fire occurred during post-flight maintenance after a test flight by one of our two prototypes jets in February 2020,
resulting in the total loss of our first Phoenix demonstrator. Although Lilium property was damaged, no injuries or casualties
resulted from the fire; however, the damage to our Phoenix demonstrator caused significant delays in the testing and analysis as
we redesigned the energy system in our next generation demonstrator and addressed safety protocols, as further discussed under
“Business of Lilium and Certain Information about Lilium — Safety and Performance.” The prototypes of one of our
competitors, Eviation, was also destroyed in a fire in January 2020, reportedly related to a battery system. If incidents like these
occur during testing, if our remediation measures and process changes are not successfully implemented or if we experience
issues with manufacturing improvements or design, certification and safety, the anticipated launch of our commercial operations
could be delayed.
Any delays in the development, certification, manufacture and commercialization of our Lilium Jets and related technology,
such as battery technology or electric motors, may adversely impact our business, financial condition and results of
operations.
We have previously experienced, and may experience in the future, delays or other complications in the design,
certification, manufacture, launch, production, and servicing ramp up of our jets and related technology. If further delays arise or
recur, if our remediation measures and process changes do not continue to be successful or if we experience issues with planned
manufacturing improvements or design and safety, we could experience issues in sustaining the progress towards
commercialization or delays in increasing production capacity. If we encounter difficulties in scaling our production or servicing
capabilities, if we fail to supply the required batteries from our suppliers which meet the required performance parameters, if
our jet technologies and components do not meet our expectations or if we are unable to launch and operate our initial RAM
services before our competitors, or if such technologies fail to perform as expected, are inferior to those of our competitors or
are perceived as less safe than those of our competitors, we may not be able to achieve our performance targets in aircraft range,
speed, payload and noise or launch products on our anticipated timelines, and our business, financial condition and results of
operations could be materially and adversely impacted.
Although we hope to be the first to bring eVTOL RAM services to market, our competitors have also displayed eVTOL
prototypes and may gain certification and commercialize their vehicles to allow them to enter the market before us.
We face intense competition to be the first to bring our eVTOL RAM services to market, as further discussed under
“Business of Lilium and Certain Information about Lilium — Our Competitive Strengths.” Some of our current and potential
competitors may have greater financial, technical, manufacturing, regulatory, marketing and other resources than we do, which
may allow them to deploy greater resources to the design, certification, development, regulation, manufacturing, promotion,
sales, marketing and support of their eVTOL vehicle fleet and customer services. Additionally, some of our competitors may
have greater name recognition, larger sales forces, broader customer and industry relationships and other resources than we do.
These competitors may also compete with us in recruiting and retaining qualified research and development, sales, marketing
and management personnel, as well as in acquiring technologies complementary to, or necessary for, our jets and our customer
services, and they may secure more convenient, exclusive leases on vertiports than we are able to secure. These competitors
may also secure intellectual property related to eVTOL jets and related services. There has been some consolidation in the
industry, with Joby Aviation’s acquisition of Uber Elevate and partnership with Uber in December 2020, and further
consolidation may result in even more resources being concentrated in our competitors. We cannot provide assurances that our
eVTOL services will be the first to market. Even if our eVTOL RAM services are first to market, we may not receive any
competitive advantage or our potential customers may not choose our services over those of our competitors, or over other
transportation options, such as helicopters, or terrestrial passenger options like cars, trains, busses or subways or other goods
delivery methods such as trucking, van, car or unmanned drones. Further, our competitors may obtain larger scale capital
investment than we have access to, and they may benefit from our efforts in developing consumer and community acceptance
for


21
eVTOL aircraft, making it easier for them to obtain the permits and authorizations required to operate a service in the markets in
which we intend to launch or in other markets.
Any inability to operate our RAM services after commercial launch at our anticipated flight rate, on our anticipated routes
or with our anticipated vertiports could adversely impact our business, financial condition and results operations.
Even if we complete the development, certification, manufacture and commercial launch of our RAM operations, we will
be dependent on one jet design system and jets that we manufacture. To be successful and satisfy the assumptions in our
business plan, we will need to maintain a sufficient service operation rate consisting of a minimum number of flights per day per
jet across a distributed vertiport infrastructure, which will be negatively impacted if we are not able to operate our flight services
for any reason. We may be unable to operate our anticipated service operation rate for a number of reasons, such as unexpected
weather patterns, maintenance issues, pilot error, design and electronic motoring flaws, airway access restrictions, natural
disasters, changes in governmental regulations or in the status of our regulatory certifications and approvals or applications or
other events that force us to suspend or delay services. At launch, our jets will be certified for Visual Flight Rule conditions,
which means that they will have reduced operations under adverse weather conditions such as storms, fog or heavy
precipitation, with enhanced certification planned soon after launch. We intend to extend our certification to all-weather
capabilities, although we may be unable to do so, and to receive certification, we may incur significant costs to improve the
climate resiliency of our jets and our vertiports. Our vertiports in Florida may be located in areas susceptible to hurricanes and
sudden storms, as well as related flooding, and our vertiports in Germany may be located in areas prone to freezing and snow
storms, the occurrence of any of which could result in costs and loss of revenue. The potential physical effects of climate
change, such as increased frequency and severity of storms, fog, mist, freezing conditions and other climate-related events,
could affect the frequency of our operations and cause delays and cancellations to our services, which would materially impact
our operations, public perception and market image and financial results. If we need to replace any components or hardware in
our jets, many of which will be bespoke or custom-produced by or for us, there are limited numbers of replacement parts
available, some of which have significant lead time associated with procurement or manufacture, so any unplanned failures
could result in reduced jet service and significant delays to our planned growth.
Our potential customers may not generally accept the RAM industry or our passenger or goods transport services. If we are
unable to convince customers of the convenience of our services and generally provide high quality customer service that
will be expected of a premium service, our business and reputation may be materially and adversely affected.
As a vertically-integrated business, we intend to provide our customers with direct customer service at branded and third
party-operated vertiports in our passenger Lilium network, including sales, payment, scheduling, on-site service, pre-boarding
lounges and post-boarding customer support, as well as first-mile and last-mile integration with airports, train stations, bus
terminals and urban transport systems. Some of these systems we intend to operate directly, such as our customer-facing digital
platform and user interface, which remains under development and may be difficult to complete with the functionality and
usability that we currently intend to provide. We anticipate that other on-site customer services at our vertiports, like security,
refreshments and baggage handling, will be carried out through third parties certified by us. We may be unable to integrate these
third-party services in our service offering at launch, or at all, at favorable prices, which could reduce the customer appeal of our
services. Further, although such third parties may have experience in servicing other transportation services, they will initially
have limited experience in servicing our jets and interfacing with our customer portal. Our service arrangements may not
adequately address the service requirements of our customers to their satisfaction, or we and our third-party service operators
will have sufficient resources to meet these service requirements in a timely manner as the number of vertiports and vertihubs in
our network increases. Our business and our brand will be affiliated with these third-party service operators, and we may
experience harm to our reputation if these operators provide our customers with poor service, negative publicity, accidents, or
safety incidents. Further, if we are unable to establish a widespread vertiport network that complies with applicable laws, our
customers’ receptivity to our service, ease of use, and general satisfaction levels could be adversely affected, which in turn could
materially and adversely affect our reputation and thus our sales, results of operations, and prospects.
Adverse publicity stemming from any incident involving us or our competitors, or an incident involving any air travel service
or unmanned flight based on autonomous technology, could have a material adverse effect on our business, financial
condition and results of operations.
Electric aircraft are based on complex technology that requires skilled pilot operation and maintenance. Like any aircraft,
they may experience operational or process failures and other problems, including through adverse weather conditions,
unanticipated collisions with foreign objects, manufacturing or design defects, pilot error, software malfunctions, cyber-attacks
or other intentional acts that could result in potential safety risks. Any actual or perceived safety issues with our jets, other
electric aircraft or eVTOL aircraft, unmanned flight based on autonomous technology or the RAM industry generally may result
in significant reputational harm to our business, in addition to tort liability, increased safety infrastructure and other costs that
may arise. The electric aircraft industry has had several accidents involving prototypes. Our first Phoenix demonstrator was
destroyed by a ground-maintenance fire in


22
February 2020; Eviation’s prototype eVTOL vehicle caught fire during testing in January 2020; a small battery-operated plane
operated by Avinor and built by Slovenia’s Pipistrel crashed in Norway in August 2019; and an electric-motor experimental
aircraft built by Siemens and Hungarian company Magnus crashed in Hungary in May 2018, killing both occupants. We are at
risk of adverse publicity stemming from any public incident involving our company, our employees or our brand. If our
personnel or one of jets, or the personnel or vehicles of one of our competitors, were to be involved in a public incident,
accident or catastrophe, the public perception of the RAM industry or eVTOL vehicles specifically could be adversely affected,
resulting in decreased customer demand for services, significant reputational harm or potential legal liability, which could cause
a material adverse effect on our sales and service volumes, business and financial condition. Although our insurance partially
covered the damage caused by the February 2020 ground-maintenance fire, the insurance we carry may be inapplicable or
inadequate to cover any such incident, accident or catastrophe in the future. If our insurance is inapplicable or insufficient to
cover any future incidents, we may be forced to bear substantial losses from an incident or accident.
Our business plans require a significant amount of capital. In addition, our future capital needs may require us to sell
additional equity or debt securities that may adversely affect the market price of our shares and dilute our shareholders or
introduce covenants that may restrict our operations.
We expect our capital expenditures to continue to be significant in the foreseeable future as we expand our development,
certification, production and commercial launch, and that our level of capital expenditures will be significantly affected by
customer demand for our services. The fact that we have a limited operating history and are entering a new industry means we
have no historical data on the demand for our services. As a result, our future capital requirements may be uncertain and actual
capital requirements may be different from those we currently anticipate. We may seek equity or debt financing to finance a
portion of our capital expenditures. Such financing might not be available to us in a timely manner or on terms that are
acceptable, or at all.
Our ability to obtain the necessary financing to carry out our business plan is subject to a number of factors, including
general market conditions and investor acceptance of our industry and business model. These factors may make the timing,
amount, terms and conditions of such financing unattractive or unavailable to us. If we are unable to raise sufficient funds, we
will have to significantly reduce our spending, delay or cancel our planned activities or substantially change our corporate
structure. We might not be able to obtain any funding, and we might not have sufficient resources to conduct our business, both
of which could mean that we would be forced to curtail or discontinue our operations.
We may seek to raise such capital through the issuance of additional shares or debt securities with conversion rights (such
as convertible bonds and option rights). An issuance of additional shares or debt securities with conversion rights could
potentially reduce the market price of our shares, and we currently cannot predict the amounts and terms of such future
offerings.
In addition, our future capital needs and other business reasons could require us to sell additional equity or debt securities or
obtain a credit facility. The sale of additional equity or equity-linked securities could dilute our shareholders. In addition, such
dilution may arise from the acquisition or investments in companies in exchange, fully or in part, for newly issued shares,
options granted to our business partners or from the exercise of stock options by our employees in the context of existing or
future share option programs or the issuance of shares to employees in the context of existing or future employee participation
programs. The incurrence of indebtedness would result in increased debt service obligations and could result in operating and
financing covenants that would restrict our operations.
If we cannot raise additional funds when we need or want them, our operations and prospects could be negatively affected.
If we are unable to successfully design and manufacture our jets, our business will be harmed.
We are expanding our prototype manufacturing facility near Munich to full scale manufacturing and production, and we
expect to begin low volume production of our Lilium Jet for testing and certification in 2022. We have signed three supply
agreements with Toray Industries, Aciturri Aerostructures and Honeywell and term sheets for manufacturing and outsourcing
production agreements with dozens of Tier 1 aerospace companies to produce our jet parts and components, and we are in
discussions with further 60-70 manufacturing and outsourcing parties, as discussed under “Business of Lilium and Certain
Information About Lilium — Production Facilities and Manufacturing Strategy.” Many of the parts and components we require
will be custom-made for our jets at our production facilities or the production facilities of our outsourcing parties and suppliers;
the equipment used to produce these parts and components would be costly to replace and could require substantial lead time to
replace and qualify for use. We may not be able to successfully develop commercial-scale manufacturing capabilities internally
or supply chain relationships with our intended Tier 1 suppliers. Other parts and components will be off-the-shelf products
manufactured for the airline industry and are readily substituted. Our production facilities and the production facilities of our
outsourcing parties and suppliers may be harmed or rendered inoperable by natural or man-made disasters, including
earthquakes, flooding, fire and power outages, or by health epidemics, such as the COVID-19 pandemic, which may render it
difficult or impossible for us to manufacture our jets for some period of time. The inability


23
to manufacture our jets or the backlog that could develop if our production facilities and the production facilities of our
outsourcing parties and suppliers are inoperable for even a short period of time may result in delays in our intended launch or
scale-out plans or harm our reputation. Although we maintain insurance for damage to our property and the disruption of our
business, this insurance may not be sufficient to cover all of our potential losses and may not continue to be available to us on
acceptable terms, if at all.
If the Lilium Jets we build fail to perform as expected, our ability to develop, market, and sell our services could be harmed.
Once we commence serial production, our jets may contain defects in design and manufacture that may cause them not to
perform as expected or that may require repairs, service outages and design changes. Further, our Lilium Jets may be impacted
by various performance factors that could impair customer satisfaction or cause delays or disruptions to our services, such as
wind gusts during take-off and landing, turbulent air during flight, foreign object damage, fan stall or wing flutter, overloading,
hail and bird strike, sub-optimal battery performance or excessive noise. If our Lilium Jets fail to perform as expected, we may
need to delay launch of commercial operations, reduce our roll out plans and commercial expansions or limit the number of
flights or geographic scope of our services, which could adversely affect our brand in our target markets and could adversely
affect our business, prospects, and results of operations.
We may not succeed in establishing, maintaining and strengthening our brand, which would materially and adversely affect
customer acceptance of our services, reducing our anticipated sales and revenue.
Our business and prospects heavily depend on our ability to develop, maintain and strengthen the Lilium brand and sell
consumers on the safety, convenience and cost-effectiveness of our RAM services. If we are not able to establish, maintain and
strengthen our brand, we may lose the opportunity to build a critical mass of customers. Our ability to develop, maintain and
strengthen the Lilium brand will depend heavily on the success of our marketing efforts. When it launches, we expect the RAM
industry to be intensely competitive, with a strong first-mover advantage, and we may not be the first to launch our services or
we may be unsuccessful in building, maintaining and strengthening our brand. If we do not develop and maintain a strong
brand, our business, prospects, financial condition and operating results will be materially and adversely impacted.
We are highly dependent on the services of our four founders.
We are highly dependent on the services of our four founders, as described in “Business of Lilium and Certain Information
About Lilium — Our History”, who are significant shareholders in Lilium. Our founders are the source of many, if not most, of
the ideas and execution driving Lilium. If any of our founders were to discontinue their service to us due to death, disability or
any other reason, we would be significantly disadvantaged.
Our business depends substantially on the continuing efforts of our key employees and qualified personnel, and we will
require experienced pilots and qualified mechanics to operate and service our Lilium Jets; our operations may be severely
disrupted if we lose their services.
Our success depends substantially on the continued efforts of our key employees and qualified personnel, and our
operations may be severely disrupted if we lost their services. As we build our brand and become more well known, the risk that
competitors or other companies may poach our talent increases. The failure to attract, integrate, train, motivate and retain these
personnel could seriously harm our business and prospects.
Throughout the aviation industry, there is a shortage of trained pilots and qualified aircraft mechanics. Our services will
depend on finding third parties to recruit and train pilots qualified to operate our Lilium Jets and mechanics qualified to perform
the requisite maintenance activities, for which we will compete with airlines and other air mobility and transportation services,
some of which will offer wages or benefit packages exceeding ours. We intend to work with third parties to train our pilots,
mechanics and technicians in our proprietary jet operation and maintenance; however, if we are unable to hire, train, and retain
qualified pilots and qualified mechanics, our business could be harmed, and we may be unable to implement our growth plans.
Our business may be adversely affected by labor and union activities.
Although none of our employees are currently represented by a labor union, it is common throughout the aircraft industry
generally for many employees at aircraft companies to belong to a union, which can result in higher employee costs and
increased risk of work stoppages. We may also directly and indirectly depend upon other companies with unionized work forces,
such as parts suppliers and trucking and freight companies, and work stoppages or strikes organized by such unions could have a
material adverse impact on our business, financial condition or operating results.


24
We face risks related to health epidemics, including the recent COVID-19 pandemic.
We face various risks related to public health issues, including epidemics, pandemics, and other outbreaks, including the
recent pandemic of respiratory illness caused by COVID-19. The impact of COVID-19, including changes in consumer and
business behavior, unease with shared transport, pandemic fears and market downturns, and restrictions on business and
individual activities, has created significant volatility in the global economy and led to reduced economic activity. The spread of
COVID-19 has also created a disruption in the manufacturing, delivery and overall supply chain of all manufacturers and
suppliers and has led to a global decrease in personal and business travel around the world.
The pandemic has resulted in government authorities implementing numerous measures to try to contain the virus, such as
travel bans and restrictions, quarantines, stay-at-home or shelter-in-place orders, and business shutdowns. These measures have
and may continue to adversely impact our employees, our ability to provide our services, and the operations of our customers,
suppliers, and business partners, and may negatively impact our sales and marketing activities. In addition, many aspects of our
research and development activities cannot be conducted remotely. These measures by government authorities may remain in
place for a significant period of time (or may be reinstated from time to time if rescinded) and they are likely to continue to
adversely affect our manufacturing plans, sales and marketing activities, business and results of operations.
The spread of COVID-19 initially caused us to modify our business practices including implementing work from home
arrangements for employees able to perform their duties remotely, restricting nonessential employee travel, and practicing social
distancing in our research development, certification and production operations. However, with COVID-19 vaccines becoming
more broadly available, certain of our employees have begun returning to onsite work. There can be no assurance that future
developments regarding the ongoing spread of COVID-19 will not result in a return to working from home for large portions of
our workforce and the reinstatement of additional COVID-19 mitigation measures. We may take further actions as may be
required by government authorities or that we determine is in the best interests of our employees, customers, suppliers, vendors
and business partners. There is no certainty that such actions will be sufficient to mitigate the risks posed by the virus or
otherwise be satisfactory to government authorities. If significant portions of our workforce are unable to work effectively,
including due to illness, quarantines, social distancing, government actions or other restrictions in connection with the COVID-
19 pandemic, our operations will be impacted. The extent to which the COVID-19 pandemic impacts our business, prospects
and results of operations will depend on future developments, which are highly uncertain and cannot be predicted, including the
duration and spread of the pandemic, its severity, the actions to contain the virus or treat its impact, restrictions on shared or air
transport, and how quickly and to what extent normal economic and operating activities can resume. Even after the COVID-19
pandemic has subsided, we may continue to experience an adverse impact to our business as a result of its global economic
impact, including any recession that has occurred or may occur in the future. For example, we continue to experience delays in
our supply chain, including delays in delivery of parts and materials, as well as the impact of higher inflation rates, and there
can be no assurance that the impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic on our supply chain will normalize.
In addition, difficult macroeconomic conditions, such as decreases in discretionary travel, per capita income and level of
disposable income, increased and prolonged unemployment, or a decline in consumer confidence as a result of the COVID-19
pandemic could have a material adverse effect on the demand for our services. Under difficult economic conditions, potential
customers may seek to reduce spending by forgoing our RAM services.
There are no comparable recent events that may provide guidance as to the effect of the spread of COVID-19 and a
pandemic, and, as a result, the ultimate impact of the COVID-19 pandemic or a similar health epidemic is highly uncertain.
Failure of information security and privacy concerns could subject us to penalties, damage our reputation and brand, and
harm our business and results of operations.
We expect to face significant challenges with respect to information security and privacy, including the storage,
transmission and sharing of confidential information. We will transmit and store confidential and private information of our
customers, such as personal information, including names, accounts, user IDs and passwords, and payment or transaction related
information.


25
We intend to adopt strict information security policies and deploy advanced measures to implement the policies, including,
among others, advanced encryption technologies. However, advances in technology, an increased level of sophistication of our
services, an increased level of expertise of hackers, new discoveries in the field of cryptography or others can still result in a
compromise or breach of the measures that we use. If we are unable to protect our systems, and hence the information stored in
our systems, from unauthorized access, use, disclosure, disruption, modification or destruction, such problems or security
breaches could cause a loss, give rise to our liabilities to the owners of confidential information or even subject us to fines and
penalties. In addition, complying with various laws and regulations could cause us to incur substantial costs or require that we
change our business practices, including our data practices, in a manner adverse to our business.
In addition, we will need to comply with increasingly complex and rigorous regulatory standards enacted to protect
business and personal data in the United States, Europe and elsewhere. For example, the European Union adopted the General
Data Protection Regulation (“GDPR”), which became effective on May 25, 2018 and the State of California adopted the
California Consumer Privacy Act of 2018 (“CCPA”); additional U.S. states are likely to adopt measures similar to the CCPA in
the near term. Both the GDPR and the CCPA impose additional obligations on companies regarding the handling of personal
data and provides certain individual privacy rights to persons whose data is stored. Compliance with existing, proposed and
recently enacted laws (including implementation of the privacy and process enhancements called for under the GDPR) and
regulations can be costly; any failure to comply with these regulatory standards could subject us to legal and reputational risks.
Compliance with any additional laws and regulations could be expensive and may place restrictions on the conduct of our
business and the manner in which we interact with our customers. Any failure to comply with applicable regulations could also
result in regulatory enforcement actions against us, and misuse of or failure to secure personal information could also result in
violation of data privacy laws and regulations, proceedings against us by governmental entities or others, and damage to our
reputation and credibility, and could have a negative impact on revenues and profits.
Significant capital and other resources may be required to protect against information security breaches or to alleviate
problems caused by such breaches or to comply with our privacy policies or privacy-related legal obligations. The resources
required may increase over time as the methods used by hackers and others engaged in online criminal activities are
increasingly sophisticated and constantly evolving. Any failure or perceived failure by us to prevent information security
breaches or to comply with privacy policies or privacy-related legal obligations, or any compromise of security that results in
the unauthorized release or transfer of personally identifiable information or other customer data, could cause our customers to
lose trust in us and could expose us to legal claims. Any perception by the public that online transactions or the privacy of user
information are becoming increasingly unsafe or vulnerable to attacks could inhibit the growth of online retail and other online
services generally, which may reduce the number of orders we receive.
We are subject to cybersecurity risks to our operational systems, security systems, infrastructure, integrated software in our
aircraft and customer data processed by us or third-party vendors.
We are at risk for interruptions, outages and breaches of the following systems, which are either owned by us or operated by
our third-party vendors or suppliers:
●
operational systems, including business, financial, accounting, product development, data processing or production
processes;
●
facility security systems;
●
aircraft technology including powertrain and avionics and flight control software;
●
the integrated software in our aircraft;
●
customer data; or
●
digital platform.
The occurrence of any such incident could disrupt our operational systems, result in loss of intellectual property, trade
secrets or other proprietary or competitively sensitive information, compromise personal information of customers, employees,
suppliers, or others, jeopardize the security of our facilities or affect the performance of in-product technology and the
integrated software in our jets.


26
Moreover, there are inherent risks associated with developing, improving, expanding and updating our current systems,
such as the disruption of our data management, procurement, production execution, finance, supply chain and sales and service
processes. These risks may affect our ability to manage our data and inventory, procure parts or supplies or manufacture, deploy,
deliver and service our aircraft, adequately protect our intellectual property or achieve and maintain compliance with, or realize
available benefits under, applicable laws, regulations and contracts. We cannot be sure that these systems upon which we rely,
including those of our third-party vendors or suppliers, will be effectively implemented, maintained or expanded as planned. If
these systems do not operate as we expect them to, we may be required to expend significant resources to make corrections or
find alternative sources for performing these functions.
Any unauthorized access to or control of our jets or their systems or any loss of data could result in legal claims or
proceedings. In addition, regardless of their veracity, reports of unauthorized access to our jets, their systems or data, as well as
other factors that may result in the perception that our jets, their systems or data are capable of being “hacked,” could negatively
affect our brand and harm our business, prospects, financial condition and operating results.
We face risks related to natural disasters, health epidemics and other outbreaks, which could significantly disrupt our
operations.
Our manufacturing or customer service facilities or operations could be adversely affected by events outside of our control,
such as natural disasters, wars, health epidemics like COVID-19, and other calamities. Although we have servers that are hosted
in an offsite location, our backup system does not capture data on a real-time basis, and we may be unable to recover certain
data in the event of a server failure. We cannot assure you that any backup systems will be adequate to protect us from the
effects of fire, floods, typhoons, earthquakes, power loss, telecommunications failures, break-ins, war, riots, terrorist attacks or
similar events. Any of the foregoing events may give rise to interruptions, breakdowns, system failures, technology platform
failures or internet failures, which could cause the loss or corruption of data or malfunctions of software or hardware as well as
adversely affect our ability to provide services.
The unaudited pro forma condensed combined financial information included in this prospectus is preliminary and our
actual financial condition and results of operations may differ materially.
The unaudited pro forma financial information included in this prospectus is presented for illustrative purposes only and is
not necessarily indicative of what our actual financial position or results of operations would have been had the Business
Combination been completed on the date(s) indicated. The preparation of the pro forma financial information is based upon
available information and certain assumptions and estimates that we currently believe are reasonable. The unaudited pro forma
condensed combined information does not purport to indicate the results that would have been obtained had the Business
Combination and related transactions actually been completed on the assumed date or for the periods presented, or which may
be realized in the future. The pro forma adjustments are based on the information currently available and the assumptions and
estimates underlying the pro forma adjustments are described in the accompanying notes. Actual results may differ materially
from the assumptions within the accompanying unaudited pro forma condensed combined financial information.
Risks Related to Our Reliance on Third Parties
Our Lilium Jets require complex software, battery technology and other technology systems that remain in development and
need to be commercialized in coordination with our vendors and suppliers to complete serial production. The failure of
advances in technology and of manufacturing at the rates and volumes we project may impact our ability to increase the
volume of our production or drive down end user pricing.
Our Lilium Jets will use a substantial amount of third-party and in-house software codes and complex hardware to operate.
Our software and hardware may contain, errors, bugs or vulnerabilities, and our systems are subject to certain technical
limitations that may compromise our ability to meet our objectives. Some errors, bugs or vulnerabilities inherently may be
difficult to detect and may only be discovered after the code has been implemented. We have a limited frame of reference by
which to evaluate the long-term performance of our software and hardware systems and our jets, and we may be unable to detect
and fix any defects in the jets prior to commencing commercial operations. The development and on-going monitoring of such
advanced technologies is inherently complex, and we will need to coordinate with our vendors and suppliers in order to
complete full-scale production. Our potential inability to develop the necessary software and technology systems may harm our
competitive position or delay the certification or manufacture of our jets.
We are relying on third-party suppliers to develop a number of emerging technologies for use in our products, including
lithium-ion battery technology. Many of these technologies are already commercially viable, and measurements of our battery
supplier have already yielded promising results. However, the final technology of our batteries and other sub-systems is still
under development and


27
the design is not yet finalized. The final cell design of our suppliers may not be able to meet the safety, technological,
economical or operational requirements to support the regulatory requirements and performance assumed in our business plan.
We are also relying on third-party suppliers to commercialized these technologies (such as battery cell technology) at the
volume and costs we require to launch and ramp-up our production. Our suppliers may not be able to meet the production
timing, volume requirements or cost requirements we have assumed in our business plan. Our third party suppliers could face
other challenges, such as the lack of raw materials or machinery, the breakdown of tools in production or the malfunctioning of
technology as they ramp up production. As a result, our business plan could be significantly impacted, and we may incur
significant delays in production and full commercialization, which could adversely affect our business, prospects, and results of
operations.
Our Lilium Jets will make use of lithium-ion battery cells, which have been observed to catch fire or vent smoke and flame.
The battery packs within our Lilium Jets will use lithium-ion cells. On rare occasions, lithium-ion cells can rapidly release
the energy they contain by venting smoke and flames in a manner that can ignite nearby materials as well as other lithium-ion
cells. While the battery pack is designed to contain any single cell’s release of energy without spreading to neighboring cells, a
failure of battery packs in our jets could occur or batteries could catch fire during production or testing, which could result in
bodily injury or death and could subject us to lawsuits, regulatory challenges or redesign efforts, all of which would be time
consuming and expensive and could harm our brand image. Also, negative public perceptions regarding the suitability of
lithium-ion cells for automotive applications, the social and environmental impacts of cobalt mining, or any future incident
involving lithium-ion cells, such as a vehicle or other fire, could seriously harm our business and reputation.
We will rely on third-party suppliers and strategic parties for the provision and development of key emerging technologies,
components and materials used in our Lilium Jet, such as the lithium-ion batteries that will power the jets, a significant
number of which may be single or limited source suppliers. If any of these prospective suppliers or strategic parties choose to
not do business with us at all, or insist on terms that are commercially disadvantageous, we may have significant difficulty in
procuring and producing our jets, and our business prospects would be harmed.
Third-party suppliers and strategic parties will provide key components and technology to the Lilium Jets. Collaborations
with strategic parties are necessary to successfully commercialize our existing and future products. If we are unable to identify
or enter into agreements with strategic parties for the development of key technology or if such strategic parties insist on terms
that are commercially disadvantageous, including for example the ability to freely commercialize jointly owned intellectual
property, we may have significant difficulty in procuring and producing our jets or technologies, components or materials used
in our jets. The terms of our existing collaboration agreements typically include one or more of the following: joint ownership of
the new intellectual property, assignment of the new intellectual property to either us or the collaborator, either exclusive or non-
exclusive licenses to the new intellectual property to us or the collaborator and other restrictions on our or our collaborator’s use
of developments, such as non-competes and time or milestone limited exclusivity provisions. If we are unable to negotiate
exclusivity regarding the technology developed under these collaborations, our competitors may be able to access the
technology that is owned, solely or jointly, by our collaborator.
In addition to our collaborations, we will be substantially reliant on our relationships with our suppliers for the parts and
components in our jets. If any of these prospective suppliers choose to not do business with us at all, or insist on terms that are
commercially disadvantageous, we may have significant difficulty in procuring and producing our jets, and our business
prospects would be harmed. If our suppliers experience any delays in providing us with or developing necessary components, or
if our suppliers are unable to deliver necessary components in a timely manner and at prices and volumes acceptable to us, we
could experience delays in manufacturing or servicing our jets, delivering on our timelines, and launching and scaling up as
anticipated, which could have a material adverse effect on our business, prospects and operating results.
While we plan to obtain components from multiple sources whenever possible, we may purchase many of the components
used in our Lilium Jets from a single source. While we believe that we may be able to establish alternate supply relationships
and can obtain replacement components for our single source components, we may be unable to do so in the short term (or at
all) at prices or quality levels that are acceptable to us. In addition, we could experience delays if our suppliers do not meet
agreed upon timelines or experience capacity constraints. Any disruption in the supply of components, whether or not from a
single source supplier, could temporarily disrupt production or servicing of our jets until an alternative supplier is able to supply
the required material. Changes in business conditions, unforeseen circumstances, governmental changes, and other factors
beyond our control or which we do not presently anticipate, could also affect our suppliers’ ability to deliver components to us
on a timely basis. Any of the foregoing could materially and adversely affect our results of operations, financial condition and
prospects.


28
Any disruptions to our supply chain, significant increase in component costs, or shortages of critical components, could
adversely affect our business and result in increased costs.
Any disruptions to our supply chain, significant increase in component costs, or shortages of critical components, could
adversely affect our business and result in increased costs. Such a disruption could occur as a result of any number of events,
including, but not limited to, an extended closure of or any slowdown at our supplier’s plants or shipping delays due to efforts to
limit the spread of COVID-19 or implementation of post-COVID-19 policies or practices, market shortages due to surge in
demand for any particular part or component, increases in prices or impact of inflation, the imposition of regulations, quotas or
embargoes on components, labor stoppages, transportation delays or failures affecting the supply chain and shipment of
materials and finished goods, third-party interference in the integrity of the parts and components sourced through the supply
chain, the unavailability of raw materials, severe weather conditions, adverse effects of climate change, natural disasters,
geopolitical developments, war or terrorism and disruptions in utilities and other services. Further, the impact of the ongoing
COVID-19 situation and broader inflationary environment has had, and may continue to have, adverse impacts on our supply
chain, which could put pressure on our unit costs in the future, and increased upfront payments to our suppliers and earlier
phasing of those payments may put pressure on our non-recurring costs in future periods. In addition, any future updates or
modifications to the anticipated design of the Lilium Jet may increase the number of parts and components we would be
required to source and increase the complexity of our supply chain management. Failure to effectively manage the supply of
parts and components could materially and adversely affect our results of operations, financial condition and prospects.
If any of our suppliers become economically distressed or go bankrupt, we may be required to provide substantial financial
support or take other measures to ensure supplies of components or materials, which could increase our costs, affect our
liquidity or cause production disruptions.
We expect to purchase various types of equipment, raw materials and manufactured component parts from our suppliers. If
these suppliers experience substantial financial difficulties, cease operations, or otherwise face business disruptions, we may be
required to provide substantial financial support to ensure supply continuity or would have to take other measures to ensure
components and materials remain available. Any disruption could affect our ability to deliver vehicles and could increase our
costs and negatively affect our liquidity and financial performance.
Risks Related to Our Intellectual Property
We may not be able to prevent others from unauthorized use of our intellectual property, which could harm our business and
competitive position.
We may not be able to prevent others from unauthorized use of our intellectual property, which could harm our business and
competitive position. We rely on a combination of patents, trade secrets (including know-how), employee and third-party
nondisclosure agreements, copyrights, trademarks, intellectual property licenses, and other contractual rights to establish and
protect our rights in our technology. Despite our efforts to protect our proprietary rights, third parties may attempt to copy or
otherwise obtain and use our intellectual property or seek court declarations that they do not infringe upon our intellectual
property rights or those rights are not enforceable. Monitoring unauthorized use of our intellectual property is difficult and
costly, and the steps we have taken or will take are aimed to prevent misappropriation. From time to time, we may have to resort
to litigation to enforce our intellectual property rights, which could result in substantial costs and diversion of our resources,
including significant amounts of time from our key executives and management, and may not have the desired outcome.
Patent, trademark, and trade secret laws vary significantly throughout the world. Some countries do not protect intellectual
property rights to the same extent as do the laws of the United States and European Union. Therefore, we may not be able to
secure certain intellectual property rights in some jurisdictions, and our intellectual property rights may not be as strong or as
easily enforced outside of the United States and the European Union. Failure to adequately protect our intellectual property
rights could result in our competitors offering similar products, potentially resulting in the loss of some of our competitive
advantage and a decrease in our revenue which, would adversely affect our business, prospects, financial condition and
operating results.
Our patent applications may not issue as patents, which may have a material adverse effect on our ability to prevent others
from commercially exploiting products similar to ours.
We cannot be certain that we are the first inventor of the subject matter to which we have filed or plan to file a particular
patent application, or if we are the first party to file such a patent application. If another party has filed a patent application for
the same subject matter as we have, or similar subject matter is otherwise publicly disclosed, we may not be entitled to the
protection sought by the patent application. Further, the scope of protection of issued patent claims is often difficult to
determine. As a result, we cannot be certain that the patent applications that we file will issue, or that our issued patents will
afford protection against competitors with


29
similar technology or will cover certain aspects of our products. In addition, our competitors may design around our issued
patents, which may adversely affect our business, prospects, financial condition or operating results.
As our patents may expire and may not be extended, our patent applications may not be granted and our patent rights may be
contested, circumvented, invalidated or limited in scope, our patent rights may not protect us effectively. In particular, we
may not be able to prevent others from developing or exploiting competing technologies.
We cannot assure you that we will be granted patents pursuant to our pending applications or those we plan to file in the
future. Even if our patent applications succeed and we are issued patents in accordance with them, these patents could be
contested, circumvented or invalidated in the future. In addition, the rights granted under any issued patents may not provide us
with meaningful protection or competitive advantages. The claims under any patents that issue from our patent applications may
not be broad enough to prevent others from developing technologies that are similar or that achieve results similar to ours. The
intellectual property rights of others could also bar us from licensing and exploiting any patents that issue from our pending
applications. Numerous patents and pending patent applications owned by others exist in the fields in which we have developed
and are developing our technology. These patents and patent applications might have priority over our patent applications and
could result in refusal of or invalidation our patent applications. Finally, in addition to those who may claim priority, any of our
existing or pending patents may also be challenged by others on the basis that they are otherwise invalid or unenforceable.
We may need to defend ourselves against patent or trademark infringement claims, which may be time-consuming and would
cause us to incur substantial costs.
Companies, organizations, or individuals, including our competitors, may hold or obtain patents, trademarks or other
proprietary rights that would prevent, limit or interfere with our ability to make, use, develop, sell, leasing or market our
vehicles or components, which could make it more difficult for us to operate our business. From time to time, we may receive
communications from holders of patents (including non-practicing entities or other patent licensing organizations), trademarks
or other intellectual property regarding their proprietary rights. Companies holding patents or other intellectual property rights
may bring suits alleging infringement of such rights or otherwise assert their rights and urge us to take licenses. Our applications
and uses of trademarks relating to our design, software or artificial intelligence technologies could be found to infringe upon
existing trademark ownership and rights. In addition, if we are determined to have infringed upon a third party’s intellectual
property rights, we may be required to do one or more of the following:
●
cease manufacturing our jets, or discontinue use of certain components in our jets, or offering services that incorporate
or use the challenged intellectual property;
●
pay substantial damages;
●
seek a license from the holder of the infringed intellectual property right, which license may not be available on
reasonable terms, or at all;
●
redesign our jets or other customer service offerings; or
●
establish and maintain alternative branding for our jets or services.
In the event of a successful claim of infringement against us and our failure or inability to obtain a license to the infringed
technology or other intellectual property right, our business, prospects, operating results and financial condition could be
materially and adversely affected. In addition, any litigation or claims, whether or not valid, could result in substantial costs,
negative publicity and diversion of resources and management attention.
We may be subject to damages resulting from claims that we or our employees have wrongfully used or disclosed alleged
trade secrets of our employees’ former employers.
Many of our employees were previously employed by other aeronautics, aircraft or transportation companies or by
suppliers to these companies. We may be subject to claims that we or these employees have inadvertently or otherwise used or
disclosed trade secrets or other proprietary information of our former employers. Litigation may be necessary to defend against
these claims. If we fail in defending such claims, in addition to paying monetary damages, we may lose valuable intellectual
property rights or personnel. A loss of key personnel or our work product could hamper or prevent our ability to commercialize
our products, which could severely harm our business. Even if we are successful in defending against these claims, litigation
could result in substantial costs and demand on management resources.


30
Risks Related to the Regulatory Environment in which Lilium Operates
We are subject to substantial regulation and unfavorable changes to, or our failure to comply with, these regulations could
substantially harm our business and operating results.
Our eVTOL jets and the operation of our RAM services by us or in certain jurisdictions by our local AOCs will be subject
to substantial regulation in the jurisdictions in which we intend our eVTOL jets to operate. We expect to incur significant costs
in complying with these regulations. Regulations related to the eVTOL industry, including aircraft certification, production
certification, passenger operation, flight operation, airspace operation, security regulation and vertiport regulation are currently
evolving, and we face risks associated with the development and evolution of these regulations.
Our jets must be certified with the FAA and EASA as a light aircraft, as further discussed under “Business of Lilium and
Certain Information About Lilium — Aircraft Certification.” Operating our jets in the U.S. and Europe and providing our
passenger and goods transportation services must comply with U.S. and European laws, regulations, safety standards, and
customer service regulations. Rigorous testing and the use of approved materials and equipment are among the requirements for
achieving certification. Our failure to obtain or maintain certification for our jets or infrastructure would have a material adverse
effect on our business and operating results. In addition to obtaining and maintaining certification of our jets, we and our third
party air carriers will need to obtain and maintain operational authority necessary to provide our envisioned RAM services. A
transportation or aviation authority may determine that we and/or our third party air carriers cannot manufacture, provide, or
otherwise engage in the services as we contemplated and upon which we based our projections. The inability to implement our
envisioned RAM services could materially and adversely affect our results of operations, financial condition, and prospects.
To the extent the laws change, our jets and our RAM services may not comply with applicable American, European,
international, federal, state or local laws, which would have an adverse effect on our business. Compliance with changing
regulations could be burdensome, time consuming, and expensive. To the extent compliance with new regulations is cost
prohibitive, our business, prospects, financial condition and operating results would be adversely affected.
When we expand beyond the United States and the European Union, such as into China, there will be Chinese laws and
regulations we must comply with, and there may be laws and regulations in other jurisdictions we have not yet entered or laws
we are unaware of in jurisdictions we have entered that may restrict our operations or business practices or that are difficult to
interpret and change rapidly. Continued regulatory limitations and other obstacles interfering our business operations could have
a negative and material impact on our business, prospects, financial condition and results of operations.
Third-party air carriers will operate our RAM services in the U.S. and Europe using the Lilium Jets. These third-party air
carriers are subject to substantial regulation and laws, and unfavorable changes to, or the third-party air carriers’ failure to
comply with, these regulations and/or laws could substantially harm our business and operating results.
Non-U.S. citizen air carriers cannot engage in air transportation services within the U.S. Accordingly, our strategy for
service offerings in the U.S. and the European markets involves strategic relationships with third-party U.S. citizen (as “citizen
of the United States” is defined in 49 U.S.C. § 40102(a)(15)) or EU air carriers, respectively, which will be responsible for
providing the aircraft services using the Lilium Jets. These third-party air carriers are subject to substantial regulation and laws,
and unfavorable changes to, or the third-party air carriers’ failure to comply with, these regulations or laws could substantially
harm our business and operating results. Further, although third-party air carriers may have experience in providing air
transportation services, they will initially have limited experience in operating our Lilium Jets. Our arrangements with third-
party air carriers may not adequately address the operating requirements of our customers to their satisfaction. Given that our
business and our brand will be affiliated with these third-party air carriers, we may experience harm to our reputation if these
third-party air carriers provide customers with poor service, receive negative publicity, or experience accidents or safety
incidents. Further, under U.S. law and the policy of the U.S. Department of Transportation, U.S. citizens must have actual
control of U.S. air carriers, and thus there are limits on our ability to exercise control over such U.S. air carriers. Any
determination by a transportation or aviation authority that we cannot provide or otherwise engage in the services as we
contemplated and upon which we based our projections could materially affect the services we intend to offer and could
adversely affect our results of operations, financial condition, business and prospects.
We are or will be subject to anti-corruption, anti-bribery, anti-money laundering, financial and economic sanctions and
similar laws, and non-compliance with such laws can subject us to administrative, civil and criminal fines and penalties,
collateral consequences, remedial measures and legal expenses, all of which could adversely affect our business, results of
operations, financial condition and reputation.
We are or will be subject to anti-corruption, anti-bribery, anti-money laundering, financial and economic sanctions and
similar laws and regulations in various jurisdictions in which we conduct or in the future may conduct activities, including the
U.S. Foreign


31
Corrupt Practices Act (“FCPA”), European anti-bribery and corruption laws, and other anti-corruption laws and regulations. The
FCPA and European anti-bribery and corruption laws prohibit us and our officers, directors, employees and business partners
acting on our behalf, including agents, from corruptly offering, promising, authorizing or providing anything of value to a
“foreign official” for the purposes of influencing official decisions or obtaining or retaining business or otherwise obtaining
favorable treatment. The FCPA also requires companies to make and keep books, records and accounts that accurately reflect
transactions and dispositions of assets and to maintain a system of adequate internal accounting controls. A violation of these
laws or regulations could adversely affect our business, results of operations, financial condition and reputation. Our policies
and procedures designed to ensure compliance with these regulations may not be sufficient and our directors, officers,
employees, representatives, consultants, agents, and business partners could engage in improper conduct for which we may be
held responsible.
Non-compliance with anti-corruption, anti-bribery, anti-money laundering or financial and economic sanctions laws could
subject us to whistleblower complaints, adverse media coverage, investigations, and severe administrative, civil and criminal
sanctions, collateral consequences, remedial measures and legal expenses, all of which could materially and adversely affect our
business, results of operations, financial condition and reputation. In addition, changes in economic sanctions laws in the future
could adversely impact our business and investments in our shares.
We will be subject to governmental export and import control laws and regulations as we expand our suppliers and
commercial operations outside the U.S. and Europe.
Our Lilium Jets will be subject to export control and import laws and regulations, which must be made in compliance with
these laws and regulations. For example, we may require licenses to import or export our jets, components or technologies to
our production facilities and may experience delays in obtaining the requisite licenses to do so. Audits in connection with the
application for licenses may increase areas of noncompliance that could result in delays or additional costs. If we fail to comply
with these laws and regulations, we and certain of our employees could be subject to additional audits, substantial civil or
criminal penalties, including the possible loss of export or import privileges, fines, which may be imposed on us and responsible
employees or managers and, in extreme cases, the incarceration of responsible employees or managers.
Risks Associated with Lilium Being a U.S. Public Company
We will need to improve our operational and financial systems to support our expected growth, increasingly complex
business arrangements, and rules governing revenue and expense recognition and any inability to do so will adversely affect
our billing and reporting.
To manage the expected growth of our operations and increasing complexity, we will need to improve our operational and
financial systems, procedures, and controls and continue to increase systems automation to reduce reliance on manual
operations. Any inability to do so will affect our manufacturing operations, customer billing and reporting. Our current and
planned systems, procedures and controls may not be adequate to support our complex arrangements and the rules governing
revenue and expense recognition for our future operations and expected growth. Delays or problems associated with any
improvement or expansion of our operational and financial systems and controls could adversely affect our relationships with
our customers, cause harm to our reputation and brand and could also result in errors in our financial and other reporting. We
expect that complying with these rules and regulations will substantially increase our legal and financial compliance costs and
will make some activities more time-consuming and costly. The increased costs will increase our net loss. We cannot predict or
estimate the amount or timing of additional costs we may incur to respond to these requirements.
We have identified material weaknesses in our internal control over financial reporting and may identify additional material
weaknesses in the future. Failure to remediate such material weaknesses in the future or to maintain an effective system of
internal control could impair our ability to comply with the financial reporting and internal controls requirements for
publicly traded companies.
As a U.S. public company, we operate in an increasingly demanding regulatory environment, which requires us to comply
with the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002 (the “Sarbanes-Oxley Act”), Nasdaq regulations, SEC rules and regulations, expanded
disclosure requirements, accelerated reporting requirements and more complex accounting rules. Company responsibilities
required by the Sarbanes-Oxley Act include establishing corporate oversight and adequate internal control over financial
reporting and disclosure controls and procedures. Effective internal controls are necessary for us to produce reliable financial
reports and are important to help prevent financial fraud.
In connection with the audit of our consolidated financial statements, we identified material weaknesses in our internal
control over financial reporting. A material weakness is a deficiency, or a combination of deficiencies, in internal control over
financial reporting such that there is a reasonable possibility that a material misstatement of our annual or interim financial
statements will not


32
be prevented or detected on a timely basis. The material weaknesses relate to (i) lack of consistent and proper application of
accounting processes and procedures, defined control processes and segregation of duties, (ii) insufficient design,
implementation and operating effectiveness of information technology general controls for information systems that are
significant to the preparation of our financial statements, (iii) lack of review and supervision and (iv) insufficient resources with
an appropriate level of technical accounting and SEC reporting expertise.
We are in the process of designing and implementing measures to improve our internal control over financial reporting to
remediate the material weaknesses, including by implementing new information technology and systems for the preparation of
the financial statements, implementing additional review procedures within our accounting and finance department, hiring
additional staff and engaging external accounting experts to support improving our accounting processes and procedures and
supplement our internal resources in our computation processes. While we are designing and implementing measures to
remediate the material weaknesses, we cannot predict the success of such measures or the outcome of our assessment of these
measures at this time. These measures may not remediate the deficiencies in internal control or prevent additional material
weaknesses or significant deficiencies in our internal control over financial reporting in the future. Our failure to implement and
maintain effective internal control over financial reporting could result in errors in our financial statements that may lead to a
restatement of our financial statements or cause us to fail to meet our reporting obligations.
We anticipate that the process of building our accounting and financial functions and infrastructure will result in substantial
costs, including significant additional professional fees and internal costs. Any disruptions or difficulties in implementing or
using such a system could adversely affect our controls and harm our business. Moreover, such disruption or difficulties could
result in unanticipated costs and diversion of management’s attention.
In addition, as a public company, we will be required to provide management’s attestation on internal control over financial
reporting under Section 404(a) of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act in our next Annual Report on Form 20-F. Our management may not
be able to effectively and timely implement controls and procedures that adequately respond to the increased regulatory
compliance and reporting requirements that are applicable to us after the Business Combination. If we are not able to comply
with the requirements of Section 404 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act, including Section 404(a) requiring management’s attestation
on internal control over financial reporting, in a timely manner, or if we are unable to maintain proper and effective internal
controls, we may not be able to produce timely and accurate financial statements. If we cannot provide reliable financial reports
or prevent fraud, our business and results of operations could be harmed, investors could lose confidence in our reported
financial information and we could be subject to sanctions or investigations by Nasdaq, the SEC or other regulatory authorities.
Our management has limited experience in operating a U.S. public company.
Our management have limited experience in the management of a U.S. public or European listed company. Our
management team may not successfully or effectively manage our transition to a U.S. public company that is subject to
significant regulatory oversight and reporting obligations under federal securities laws. Their limited experience in dealing with
the increasingly complex laws pertaining to public companies could be a significant disadvantage in that it is likely that an
increasing amount of their time may be devoted to these activities which will result in less time being devoted to the
management and growth of the combined company. We may not have adequate personnel with the appropriate level of
knowledge, experience, and training in the accounting policies, practices or internal controls over financial reporting required of
U.S. public companies. The development and implementation of the standards and controls necessary for us to achieve the level
of accounting standards required of a public company in the United States may require costs greater than expected. It is possible
that we will be required to expand our employee base and hire additional employees to support our operations as a public
company, which will increase our operating costs in future periods.
Our failure to meet Nasdaq’s continued listing requirements could result in a delisting of our shares.
If we fail to satisfy Nasdaq’s continued listing requirements, such as the corporate governance requirements or the
minimum closing bid price requirement, Nasdaq may take steps to delist our shares. Such a delisting would likely have a
negative effect on the price of our shares and would impair your ability to sell or purchase our shares when you wish to do so. In
the event of a delisting, we can provide no assurance that any action taken by it to restore compliance with listing requirements
would allow our shares to become listed again, stabilize the market price or improve the liquidity of our shares, prevent our
shares from dropping below Nasdaq’s minimum bid price requirement or prevent future non-compliance with Nasdaq’s listing
requirements.
If securities or industry analysts do not publish research or reports about our business or publish negative reports about our
business, our share price and trading volume could decline.
The trading market for our shares will depend on the research and reports that securities or industry analysts publish about
us or our business. Currently, we have limited analyst coverage and may not obtain analyst coverage in the future. In the event
we obtain


33
analyst coverage, we will not have any control over such analysts. If one or more of the analysts who cover Lilium downgrade
our shares or change their opinion of our shares, our share price would likely decline. If one or more of these analysts cease
coverage of Lilium or fail to regularly publish reports on Lilium we could lose visibility in the financial markets, which could
cause our share price or trading volume to decline.
We are an “emerging growth company,” and our reduced SEC reporting requirements may make our shares less attractive to
investors.
We are an “emerging growth company” as defined in the Jumpstart Our Business Startups Act of 2012 (“JOBS Act”). We
will remain an “emerging growth company” until the earliest to occur of (i) the last day of the fiscal year (a) following the fifth
anniversary of the closing of the Business Combination, (b) in which we have total annual gross revenue of at least $1.07 billion
or (c) in which we are deemed to be a large accelerated filer, which means the market value of Lilium Shares held by non-
affiliates exceeds $700 million as of the last business day of our prior second fiscal quarter, and (ii) the date on which we issued
more than $1.0 billion in non-convertible debt during the prior three-year period. We intend to take advantage of exemptions
from various reporting requirements that are applicable to most other public companies, such as an exemption from the
provisions of Section 404(b) of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act requiring our independent registered public accounting firm provide an
attestation report on the effectiveness of our internal control over financial reporting and reduced disclosure obligations
regarding executive compensation in our periodic reports and proxy statements and exemptions from the requirements of
holding a nonbinding advisory vote on executive compensation and shareholder approval of any golden parachute payments not
previously approved. We cannot predict if investors will find our shares less attractive because we intend to rely on certain of
these exemptions and benefits under the JOBS Act. If some investors find our shares less attractive as a result, there may be a
less active, liquid and/or orderly trading market for our shares and the market price and trading volume of our shares may be
more volatile and decline significantly.
As a foreign private issuer, we will be exempt from a number of rules under the U.S. securities laws and will be permitted to
file less information with the SEC than a U.S. domestic public company, which may limit the information available to our
shareholders.
We are a foreign private issuer, as such term is defined in Rule 405 under the Securities Act. As a foreign private issuer, we
are not subject to all of the disclosure requirements applicable to public companies organized within the United States. For
example, we are exempt from certain rules under the Exchange Act that regulate disclosure obligations and procedural
requirements related to the solicitation of proxies, consents or authorizations applicable to a security registered under the
Exchange Act, including the U.S. proxy rules under Section 14 of the Exchange Act. As long as we are a foreign private issuer,
we will not be required to obtain shareholder approval for certain dilutive events, such as the establishment or material
amendment of certain equity-based compensation plans, we will not be required to provide detailed executive compensation
disclosure in our periodic reports, and we will be exempt from the requirements of holding a nonbinding advisory vote on
executive compensation and shareholder approval of any golden parachute payments not previously approved. In addition, our
officers and directors will be exempt from the reporting and “short-swing” profit recovery provisions of Section 16 of the
Exchange Act and related rules with respect to their purchases and sales of our securities.
We are not required to file periodic reports and financial statements with the SEC as frequently or as promptly as U.S.
domestic public companies and will not be required to file quarterly reports on Form 10-Q or current reports on Form 8-K
under the Exchange Act.
Also, as a foreign private issuer, we will be permitted to follow home country practice in lieu of certain Nasdaq corporate
governance rules, as discussed under “Description of Securities — Periodic Reporting Under U.S. Securities Law”, including
those that require listed companies to have a majority of independent directors (although all of the members of the audit
committee must be independent under the Exchange Act) and independent director oversight of executive compensation,
nomination of directors and corporate governance matters; have regularly scheduled executive sessions with only independent
directors; and adopt and disclose a code of ethics for directors, officers and employee. Accordingly, our shareholders may not
have the same protections afforded to shareholders of listed companies that are subject to all of the applicable corporate
governance requirements.
Risks Related to Ownership of Our Class A Shares, Warrants and the Offering
If we fail to maintain an effective system of internal control over financial reporting, we may not be able to accurately report
our financial results or prevent fraud. As a result, shareholders could lose confidence in our financial and other public
reporting, which is likely to negatively affect our business and the market price of our Class A Shares.
Effective internal control over financial reporting is necessary for us to provide reliable financial reports and prevent fraud.
Any failure to implement required new or improved controls, or difficulties encountered in our implementation could cause us
to fail to meet our reporting obligations. In addition, any testing conducted by us, or any testing conducted by our independent
registered public


34
accounting firm, may reveal deficiencies in our internal control over financial reporting that are deemed to be material
weaknesses or that may require prospective or retroactive changes to our financial statements or identify other areas for further
attention or improvement. Inferior internal controls could also cause investors to lose confidence in our reported financial
information, which is likely to negatively affect our business and the market price of our Class A Shares.
We are required to disclose changes made in our internal controls and procedures on a quarterly basis and our management
is required to assess the effectiveness of these controls annually. However, for as long as we are an “emerging growth company”
under the JOBS Act, our independent registered public accounting firm will not be required to attest to the effectiveness of our
internal control over financial reporting pursuant to Section 404(b) of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act. We could be an “emerging
growth company” for up to five years. An independent assessment of the effectiveness of our internal controls could detect
problems that our management’s assessment might not. Undetected material weaknesses in our internal controls could lead to
financial statement restatements and require us to incur the expense of remediation, which could negatively affect our business
and the market price of our Class A Shares.
The market price and trading volume of our Class A Shares and Public Warrants may be volatile and could decline
significantly following the Business Combination.
Stock markets, including Nasdaq, on which our Class A Shares and Public Warrants are listed, have from time to time
experienced significant price and volume fluctuations. Even if an active, liquid and orderly trading market develops and is
sustained for our Class A Shares and Public Warrants, the market price of our Class A Shares and Public Warrants may be
volatile and could decline significantly. In addition, the trading volume in our Class A Shares and Public Warrants may fluctuate
and cause significant price variations to occur. If the market price of our Class A Shares or Public Warrants declines
significantly, you may be unable to resell your securities at or above the price you purchased them for. We cannot assure you
that the market price of our Class A Shares and Public Warrants will not fluctuate widely or decline significantly in the future in
response to a number of factors, including, among others, the following:
●
the realization of any of the risk factors presented in this prospectus;
●
actual or anticipated differences in our estimates, or in the estimates of analysts, for our revenues, results of operations,
liquidity or financial condition;
●
additions and departures of key personnel;
●
failure to comply with the requirements of Nasdaq;
●
failure to comply with the Sarbanes-Oxley Act or other laws or regulations;
●
future issuances, sales or resales, or anticipated issuances, sales or resales, of our Class A Shares;
●
the performance and market valuations of other similar companies;
●
broad disruptions in the financial markets, including sudden disruptions in the credit markets;
●
material and adverse impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on the markets and the broader global economy;
●
speculation in the press or investment community;
●
actual, potential or perceived control, accounting or reporting problems; and
●
changes in accounting principles, policies and guidelines.
In the past, securities class-action litigation has often been instituted against companies following periods of volatility in the
market price of their shares. This type of litigation could result in substantial costs and divert our management’s attention and
resources, which could have a material adverse effect on us.


35
If securities or industry analysts publish inaccurate or unfavorable research or cease publishing research about us, our
share price and trading volume could decline significantly.
The market for our Class A Shares depends in part on the research and reports that securities or industry analysts publish
about us or our business. If one or more of the analysts who covers us downgrades its opinions about our Class A Shares,
publishes inaccurate or unfavorable research about us, or ceases publishing about us regularly, demand for our Class A Shares
could decrease, which might cause our share price and trading volume to decline significantly.
Future issuances of preferred shares or other equity securities may adversely affect us, including the market price of our
Class A Shares, and may be dilutive to existing shareholders.
In the future, we may issue preferred shares or other equity ranking senior to our Class A Shares. Preferred shares have, and
those other securities will generally have, priority upon liquidation. Such securities also may be governed by an instrument
containing covenants restricting our operating flexibility. Additionally, any convertible or exchangeable securities that we issue
in the future may have rights, preferences and privileges more favorable than those of our Class A Shares. Because our decision
to issue equity in the future will depend on market conditions and other factors beyond our control, we cannot predict or
estimate the amount, timing, nature or success of our future capital raising efforts. As a result, future capital raising efforts may
reduce the market price of our Class A Shares and be dilutive to existing shareholders.
The future exercise of registration rights may adversely affect the market price of Class A Shares.
Certain Lilium shareholders have registration rights for restricted securities under the terms of our Registration Rights
Agreement with the Sponsor and certain other shareholders of Lilium, which provide for customary “demand” and “piggyback”
registration rights for certain shareholders. In addition, we expect to enter into a registration rights agreement granting
customary registration rights to Azul in respect of the Class A Shares issuable upon the exercise of the Azul Warrants. Sales of a
substantial number of Class A Shares pursuant to the resale registration statement in the public market could occur at any time
the registration statement remains effective. In addition, certain registration rights holders can request underwritten offerings to
sell their securities. These sales, or the perception in the market that the holders of a large number of shares intend to sell shares,
could reduce the market price of our Class A Shares. See also “Description of Securities – Registration Rights and Lock-Up
Arrangements.”
Risks for any holders of SPAC Warrants following the Business Combination
Following the Business Combination, Lilium may redeem the SPAC Warrants prior to their exercise at a time that is
disadvantageous to holders of SPAC Warrants, thereby making such warrants worthless. Lilium will have the ability to redeem
outstanding SPAC Warrants at any time after they become exercisable and prior to their expiration, at a price of $0.01 per
warrant, provided that the closing price of the Class A Shares equals or exceeds $18.00 per share (as adjusted for share
subdivisions, share capitalizations, reorganizations, recapitalizations and the like) for any 20 trading days within a 30 trading
day period ending on the third trading day prior to the date on which a notice of redemption is sent to the warrant holders.
Lilium will not redeem the warrants as described above unless a registration statement under the Securities Act covering the
Class A Shares issuable upon exercise of such warrants is effective and a current prospectus relating to those Class A Shares is
available throughout the 30-day redemption period. If and when the SPAC Warrants become redeemable by Lilium, Lilium may
exercise its redemption right even if it is unable to register or qualify the underlying securities for sale under all applicable state
securities laws. Redemption of the outstanding SPAC Warrants could force holders of SPAC Warrants (i) to exercise their SPAC
Warrants and pay the exercise price therefor at a time when it may be disadvantageous for such holders to do so, (ii) to sell their
SPAC Warrants at the then-current market price when they might otherwise wish to hold the SPAC Warrants, or (iii) to accept
the nominal redemption price which, at the time the outstanding SPAC Warrants are called for redemption, is likely to be
substantially less than the market value of the SPAC Warrants.
In addition, Lilium will have the ability to redeem the outstanding SPAC Warrants at any time after they become
exercisable and prior to their expiration, at a price of $0.10 per warrant if, among other things, the closing price of the Class A
Shares equals or exceeds $10.00 per share (as adjusted for share sub-divisions, share dividends, rights issuances, subdivisions,
reorganizations, recapitalizations and the like) on the trading day prior to the date on which a notice of redemption is sent to the
warrant holders. If trading prices for the Class A Shares have not exceeded the $10.00 per share threshold at which the Public
SPAC Warrants would become redeemable, holders will be able to exercise their SPAC Warrants prior to redemption for a
number of Class A Shares determined based on the redemption date and the fair market value of the Class A Shares.
The value received upon exercise of the SPAC Warrants (1) may be less than the value the holders would have received if
they had exercised their SPAC Warrants at a later time where the underlying share price is higher and (2) may not compensate
the holders for the value of the SPAC Warrants.


36
Our ability to utilize our net operating loss and tax credit carryforwards to offset future taxable income may be subject to
certain limitations, including losses as a result of the Business Combination.
We have incurred and are likely to continue incurring significant tax losses, which may be limited in their usability under
German and other tax laws, in particular following significant shareholder changes. Although we do not expect the Business
Combination nor any of the ownership changes in the course of past financing rounds to result in a forfeiture of our German tax
loss attributes, the realization of future tax savings from such tax loss attributes depends on the tax authorities’ acceptance of
their continued availability and our ability to generate future taxable income in Germany against which such losses can be
offset.
Our tax residency might change if Germany ratifies the MLI and changes its provisional election on the corporate residence
tie-breaker.
Our sole tax residency in Germany for purposes of the convention between Germany and the Netherlands for the avoidance
of double taxation and the prevention of fiscal evasion with respect to taxes on income (the “German-Dutch tax treaty”) is
subject to the application of the provisions on tax residency as stipulated in the German-Dutch tax treaty as effective as of the
date of this prospectus. However, among others, Germany and the Netherlands entered into a Multilateral Convention to
Implement Tax Treaty Related Measures to Prevent Base Erosion and Profit Shifting (“MLI”). The MLI operates to amend
bilateral tax treaties between participating states, provided there is a match between certain options made by the relevant states.
The MLI provides, amongst others, for an amendment of relevant treaty rules regarding tax residency for purposes of relevant
tax treaties. According to its elections, the Netherlands applies such deviating rules on tax residency, i.e., it did not opt out. With
regard to Germany, provisional statements made at the time of signing the MLI indicate that it is intended to opt-out of the
application of such provisions. However, given that the MLI has to date not been ratified in Germany and the options provided
for in the MLI remain subject to discussion, it cannot be ruled out that Germany ultimately opts to amend the current
rules regarding tax residency in line with the option exercised by the Netherlands. If Germany changed its provisional view on
the election, the MLI rules on tax residency would become applicable to the German-Dutch tax treaty. In this case, the
competent authorities of the Netherlands and Germany shall endeavor to determine by mutual agreement the sole tax residency
of the Company. During the period in which a mutual agreement between both states is absent, we may not be entitled to any
relief or exemption from tax provided by the German-Dutch tax treaty. During such period, there would also be a risk that both
Germany and the Netherlands would levy dividend withholding tax on distributions by us, in addition to the risk of double
taxation on the profits of the Company itself.
The rights of shareholders in companies subject to Dutch corporate law differ in material respects from the rights of
shareholders of corporations incorporated in the United States.
We are a public limited liability company incorporated under Dutch law. Our corporate affairs are governed by our articles
of association, our internal rules and policies and by the laws governing companies incorporated in the Netherlands. The rights
of shareholders may be different from the rights and obligations of shareholders in companies governed by the laws of U.S.
jurisdictions. The role of the management board in a Dutch company is also materially different, and cannot be compared to, the
role of a board of directors in a corporation incorporated in the United States. In the performance of their duties, our
management board is required by Dutch law to consider the interests of our company and the sustainable success of our
business, with an aim to creating long-term value, taking into account the interests of our shareholders, our employees and other
stakeholders of the Company, in all cases with due observation of the principles of reasonableness and fairness. It is possible
that some of these parties will have interests that are different from, or in addition to, your interests as a shareholder.
We are not obligated to, and do not, comply with all best practice provisions of the Dutch Corporate Governance Code.
We will be subject to the Dutch Corporate Governance Code (the “DCGC”). The DCGC contains both principles and best
practice provisions on corporate governance that regulate relations between the management board and the General Meeting of
shareholders and matters in respect of financial reporting, auditors, disclosure, compliance and enforcement standards. The
DCGC is based on a “comply or explain” principle. Accordingly, companies are required to disclose in their annual reports
(which are filed in the Netherlands) whether they comply with the provisions of the DCGC. If they do not comply with those
provisions (for example, because of a conflicting Nasdaq requirement), the Company is required to give the reasons for such
noncompliance. The DCGC applies to Dutch companies listed on a government-recognized stock exchange, whether in the
Netherlands or elsewhere, including Nasdaq.
We acknowledge the importance of good corporate governance. However, we do not comply with all the provisions of the
DCGC, to a large extent because such provisions conflict with or are inconsistent with the corporate governance rules of Nasdaq
and U.S. securities laws, or because we believe such provisions do not reflect customary practices of global companies listed on
Nasdaq. Any such noncompliance may affect your rights as a shareholder, and you may not have the same level of protection as
a shareholder in a Dutch company that fully complies with the DCGC.


37
Shareholders may not be able to exercise preemptive rights and, as a result, may experience substantial dilution upon future
issuances of shares.
In the event of an issuance of our Class A Shares and our Class B Shares, subject to certain exceptions, each shareholder
will have a preemptive right that is pro rata to the total amount of Class A Shares or Class B Shares (as applicable) held by such
shareholder. These preemptive rights have been excluded by a resolution proposed by the management and adopted by the
General Meeting. Our Board is authorized for a five-year period to issue shares or grant rights to subscribe for shares up to our
authorized share capital and to limit or exclude preemptive rights in connection therewith, which could cause existing
shareholders to experience substantial dilution of their holdings.
Our dual class structure has the effect of giving a greater percentage of voting rights than economic rights to Daniel
Wiegand, our founder and Chief Executive Officer.
Class B Shares have three times as many votes per share, for a total of 36 votes per share on any matter submitted for
shareholder approval, as opposed to the Class A Shares, which have 12 votes per share. As of September 14, 2021, Daniel
Wiegand, our Co-Founder and Chief Executive Officer, holds all of the issued and outstanding Class B Shares and controls
22.0% of the total voting power in the Company. Accordingly, Mr. Wiegand, like all shareholders with greater than 10% voting
power in the Company, will be able to call a special meeting of shareholders to propose matters for shareholder approval such as
the removal or election of directors or amendments to our organization documents. Mr. Wiegand may have interests that differ
from yours and may vote in a way with which you disagree and which may be adverse to your interests. For information about
our dual class structure, see the section titled “Description of Securities.”
Investors may have difficulty enforcing civil liabilities against us or the members of our management and our Board.
We are incorporated in the Netherlands, and we will conduct substantially all of our operations in Germany or Europe
through our subsidiaries. A majority of our management and our directors are not United States residents and do not have
significant assets in the United States, and the majority of our assets are located outside the United States. As a result, it may not
be possible, or may be very difficult, to serve process on our representatives or us in the United States, or to enforce judgments
obtained in U.S. courts against our representatives or us based on civil liability provisions of the securities laws of the United
States. There is no treaty between the United States and the Netherlands for the mutual recognition and enforcement of
judgments (other than arbitration awards) in civil and commercial matters. Therefore, a final judgment for the payment of
money rendered by any federal or state court in the United States based on civil liability, whether or not predicated solely upon
the U.S. federal securities laws, would not be enforceable in the Netherlands unless the underlying claim is re-litigated before a
Dutch court of competent jurisdiction. U.S. investors will be unable to enforce any judgments obtained in U.S. courts in civil
and commercial matters, including judgments under the U.S. federal securities laws, against us, members of our management
and our directors. In addition, there is doubt as to whether a Dutch court would impose civil liability on us or the members of
our management or our directors in an original action predicated solely upon the U.S. federal securities laws brought in a court
of competent jurisdiction in the Netherlands against us or our management or directors.
Dutch, German and European insolvency laws are substantially different from U.S. insolvency laws and may offer our
shareholders less protection than they would have under U.S. insolvency laws.
As a Dutch public limited liability company and as a company with its ‘centre of main interest’ in Germany, we are subject
to Dutch and German insolvency laws in the event any insolvency proceedings are initiated against us including, among other
things, Regulation (EU) 2015/848 of the European Parliament and of the Council of May 20, 2015 on insolvency proceedings.
Should courts in another European country determine that the insolvency laws of that country apply to us in accordance with
and subject to such EU regulations, the courts in that country could have jurisdiction over the insolvency proceedings initiated
against us. Insolvency laws in Germany, the Netherlands or the relevant other European country, if any, may offer our
shareholders less protection than they would have under U.S. insolvency laws and make it more difficult for our shareholders to
recover the amount they could expect to recover in a liquidation under U.S. insolvency laws.
Shareholders may be subject to limitations on transfer of their shares.
Our shares are transferable on the transfer agent’s books. However, the transfer agent may close its transfer books at any
time or from time to time when it deems expedient in connection with the performance of its duties. In addition, the transfer
agent may refuse to deliver, transfer or register transfers of shares generally when our books or the transfer agent’s books are
closed, or at any time if we or the transfer agent deems it advisable to do so because of any requirement of law or of any
government or governmental body, or under any provision of the deposit agreement, or for any other reason.


38
We may be or may become a PFIC, which could result in adverse U.S. federal income tax consequences to U.S. Holders.
If we or any of our subsidiaries is a passive foreign investment company (a “PFIC”) for any taxable year, or portion thereof,
that is included in the holding period of a beneficial owner of our ordinary shares that is a U.S. Holder, such U.S. Holder (as
defined in the section entitled “Taxation—Material U.S. Federal Income Tax Considerations for U.S. Holders”), may be subject
to certain adverse U.S. federal income tax consequences and may be subject to additional reporting requirements. It is uncertain
whether we or any of our subsidiaries will be treated as a PFIC for U.S. federal income tax purposes for the current or any
subsequent tax year. If we determine that we and/or any of our subsidiaries is a PFIC for any taxable year, we intend to provide
a U.S. Holder with such information necessary for the U.S. Holder to make and maintain a QEF Election (as defined in the
section entitled “Taxation—Material U.S. Federal Income Tax Considerations for U.S. Holders”) with respect to us and/or such
subsidiaries, but there can be no assurance that we will have timely knowledge of our status as a PFIC in the future or of the
required information to be provided.
See the section entitled “Taxation—Material U.S. Federal Income Tax Considerations for U.S. Holders” for a more detailed
discussion with respect to our PFIC status. Prospective U.S. Holders of Class A Shares or Public Warrants are urged to consult
their tax advisors regarding the possible application of the PFIC rules to them.
We do not anticipate paying dividends.
Under Dutch law, we may only pay dividends to the extent our shareholders’ equity (eigen vermogen) exceeds the sum of
the paid-up and called-up share capital plus the reserves required to be maintained by Dutch law or by our articles of association
and (if it concerns a distribution of profits) after adoption of the annual accounts by our General Meeting from which it appears
that such distribution is allowed. Our Board shall make a proposal to the General Meeting which amount of the profit shall be
allocated to the Company's profit reserves and which amount of the profit will be available for distribution. Our Board is
permitted, subject to certain requirements, to declare interim dividends without the approval of the General Meeting. Subject to
such restrictions, any future determination or recommendation to pay (interim) dividends will depend on a number of factors,
including our results of operations, earnings, cash flow, financial condition, future prospects, contractual restrictions, capital
investment requirements, restrictions imposed by applicable law and other factors considered relevant by the Board.
Our Board may decide that all or part of our remaining profits shall be added to our reserves. After such reservation, any
remaining profit will be at the disposal of the General Meeting at the proposal of our Board, subject to the applicable restrictions
of Dutch law.
Dividends and other distributions shall be made payable not later than the date determined by the corporate body that
declares the (interim) dividend. Claims to dividends and other distributions not made within five years from the date that such
dividends or distributions became payable will lapse and any such amounts will be considered to have been forfeited to us
(verjaring).
Provisions of our articles of association or Dutch corporate law might deter acquisition bids for us that our shareholders
might consider to be favorable and prevent or frustrate any attempt to replace or remove the Board at the time of such
acquisition bid.
Certain provisions of our articles of association may make it more difficult for a third party to acquire control of the Board
or effect a change in the composition of the Board. These include:
●
the General Meeting will adopt a resolution to authorize the Board to issue Class A Shares and to limit or exclude
preemptive rights on those Class A Shares, which could enable the Board to dilute the holdings of an acquirer by
issuing Class A Shares to other parties;
●
a provision that our directors can only be removed (other than pursuant to a proposal by the Board) by our General
Meeting by a majority of at least two thirds of the votes cast, provided such votes represent more than half of the
issued share capital; if and to the extent permitted by law, our Executive Directors may also be suspended by the
Board; and
●
a requirement that certain matters, including an amendment of our articles of association, a legal merger, legal
demerger or a resolution to dissolve the Company, may only be brought to the shareholders for a vote upon a proposal
by the Board.
Such provisions could discourage a takeover attempt and impair the ability of shareholders to benefit from a change in
control and realize any potential change of control premium. This may adversely affect the market price of our Class A Shares.
See the section titled “Description of Securities.”


39
CAUTIONARY NOTE REGARDING FORWARD-LOOKING STATEMENTS
This prospectus contains forward-looking statements. Forward-looking statements provide our current expectations or
forecasts of future events. Forward-looking statements include statements about our expectations, beliefs, plans, objectives,
intentions, assumptions and other statements that are not historical facts. Words or phrases such as “anticipate,” “believe,”
“continue,” “could,” “estimate,” “expect,” “intend,” “may,” “might,” “objective,” “ongoing,” “plan,” “potential,” “predict,”
“project,” “should,” “will” and “would,” or similar words or phrases, or the negatives of those words or phrases, may identify
forward-looking statements, but the absence of these words does not necessarily mean that a statement is not forward-looking.
Examples of forward-looking statements in this prospectus include, but are not limited to, statements regarding our disclosure
concerning our operations, cash flows, financial position and dividend policy.
Forward-looking statements are subject to risks and uncertainties. The risks and uncertainties include, but are not limited to:
●
Business or supply chain disruptions arising from the COVID-19 pandemic;
●
Any disruption from the Business Combination to our current business plans and operations or potential difficulties in
employee retention as a result of the Business Combination;
●
We may not realize the anticipated benefits of the transactions contemplated by the Business Combination;
●
If the Business Combination’s benefits do not meet the expectations of investors, shareholders or financial analysts, the
market price of our securities may decline.
●
The market price of our securities may be volatile due to a variety of factors, such as changes in the competitive
environment in which we operate, the regulatory framework of the industry in which we operate, developments in our
business and operations, and any future changes in our capital structure;
●
Our ability to maintain the listing of our securities on the Nasdaq;
●
Our ability to implement business plans, operating models, forecasts, and other expectations and identify and realize
additional business opportunities;
●
General economic downturns or general systematic changes to the industry in which we operate, including a negative
safety incident involving one of our competitors that results in decreased demand for our jets or services;
●
We and our current and future business partners will be unable to successfully develop and commercialize our
business, or experience significant delays in doing so;
●
We may never achieve or sustain profitability;
●
We will need to raise additional capital to execute our business plan, which may not be available on acceptable terms
or at all;
●
We may experience difficulties in managing our growth, moving between development phases or expanding our
operations;
●
Third-party suppliers, component manufacturers or service provider partners not being able to fully and timely meet
their obligations or deliver the high-level customer service that our customers will expect;
●
The Lilium Jet not performing as expected, delays in producing the Lilium Jets or delays in seeking full certification of
all aspects of the Lilium Jet, causing overall delays in the anticipated time frame for our commercialization and launch;
●
The technology necessary to successfully operate our business, as contemplated in the business models, is delayed,
unavailable, not available at commercially anticipated prices, not sufficiently tested, not certified for passenger use or
otherwise unavailable to us based on our current expectations and expected needs;
●
Any identified material weaknesses in our internal control over financial reporting which, if not corrected, could
adversely affect the reliability of our financial reporting;


40
●
Product liability lawsuits, civil or damages claims or regulatory proceedings relating to our jets, technology,
intellectual property or services;
●
Our inability to secure or protect our intellectual property; and
●
Negative publicity about us, our employees, directors, management, shareholders, affiliated parties or our founders.
Forward-looking statements are subject to known and unknown risks and uncertainties and are based on potentially
inaccurate assumptions that could cause actual results to differ materially from those expected or implied by the forward-
looking statements. Actual results could differ materially from those anticipated in forward-looking statements for many
reasons, including the factors described under the section titled “Risk Factors” in this prospectus. Accordingly, you should not
rely on these forward-looking statements, which speak only as of the date of this prospectus. We undertake no obligation to
publicly revise any forward-looking statement to reflect circumstances or events after the date of this prospectus or to reflect the
occurrence of unanticipated events. You should, however, review the factors and risks we describe in the reports we will file
from time to time with the SEC after the date of this prospectus.
In addition, statements that “Lilium believes” or “we believe” and similar statements reflect our beliefs and opinions on the
relevant subject. These statements are based on information available to us as of the date of this prospectus. And while we
believe that information provides a reasonable basis for these statements, that information may be limited or incomplete. Our
statements should not be read to indicate that we have conducted an exhaustive inquiry into, or review of, all relevant
information. These statements are inherently uncertain, and you are cautioned not to unduly rely on these statements.
Although we believe the expectations reflected in the forward-looking statements were reasonable at the time made, we
cannot guarantee future results, level of activity, performance or achievements. Moreover, neither Lilium nor any other person
assumes responsibility for the accuracy or completeness of any of these forward-looking statements. You should carefully
consider the cautionary statements contained or referred to in this section in connection with the forward looking statements
contained in this prospectus and any subsequent written or oral forward-looking statements that may be issued by Lilium or
persons acting on our behalf.


41
USE OF PROCEEDS
All of the Class A Shares and Private Warrants offered by the selling securityholders pursuant to this prospectus will be sold
by the selling securityholders for their respective accounts. We will not receive any of the proceeds from such sales. We will pay
certain expenses associated with the registration of the securities covered by this prospectus, as described in the section titled
“Plan of Distribution.”
We will receive up to an aggregate of approximately $227.0 million from the exercise of the Warrants and Specified
Options, assuming the exercise in full of all of the Warrants and Specified Options for cash. We expect to use the net proceeds
from the exercise of the Warrants and Specified Options for general corporate purposes. We will have broad discretion over the
use of proceeds from the exercise of the Warrants and Specified Options. There is no assurance that the holders of the Warrants
or Specified Options will elect to exercise any or all of such Warrants or Specified Options. To the extent that any of the
Warrants or Specified Options are exercised on a “cashless basis,” the amount of cash we would receive from the exercise of the
Warrants and Specified Options will decrease.


42
DETERMINATION OF OFFERING PRICE
The offering price of the Class A Shares underlying the Private Warrants offered hereby is determined by reference to the
exercise price of the Private Warrants of $11.50 per share. The Class A Shares and the Public Warrants are listed on the Nasdaq
Global Select Market under the symbol “LILM” and “LILMW,” respectively.
We cannot currently determine the price or prices at which shares of our Class A Stock or Private Warrants may be sold by
the selling securityholders under this prospectus.


43
MARKET INFORMATION FOR CLASS A SHARES AND DIVIDEND POLICY
Market Information
Our Class A Shares and Public Warrants are currently listed on the Nasdaq Global Select Market under the symbols
“LILM” and “LILMW,” respectively. Prior to the consummation of the Business Combination, our Class A Shares and our
Public Warrants were listed on the Nasdaq Global Select Market under the symbols “QELL” and “QELLW,” respectively. As of
September 14, 2021, immediately following the completion of the Business Combination, there were 60 holders of record of our
Class A Shares and two holders of record of our SPAC Warrants. Such numbers do not include beneficial owners holding our
securities through nominee names. We currently do not intend to list the Private Warrants offered hereby on any stock exchange
or stock market. Our Class C Shares are not registered and we do not currently intend to list the Class C Shares on any exchange
or stock market.
Dividend Policy
We have never declared or paid any cash dividends on our ordinary shares and we do not anticipate paying any dividends
on our ordinary shares for the foreseeable future. We currently intend to retain any earnings for future operations.
Under Dutch law, we may only pay dividends to the extent our shareholders’ equity (eigen vermogen) exceeds the sum of
the paid-up and called-up share capital plus the reserves required to be maintained by Dutch law or by our articles of association
and (if it concerns a distribution of profits) after adoption of the annual accounts by our General Meeting from which it appears
that such distribution is allowed. Subject to such restrictions, any future determination to pay dividends will be at the discretion
of the Board and will depend on a number of factors, including our results of operations, earnings, cash flow, financial
condition, future prospects, contractual restrictions, capital investment requirements, restrictions imposed by applicable law and
other factors considered relevant by the Board.
Our Board may decide that all or part of our remaining profits shall be added to our reserves. After such reservation, any
remaining profit will be at the disposal of the General Meeting at the proposal of our Board, subject to the applicable restrictions
of Dutch law. Our Board is permitted, subject to certain requirements, to declare interim dividends without the approval of the
General Meeting. Dividends and other distributions shall be made payable not later than the date determined by the corporate
body that declares the (interim) dividend. Claims to dividends and other distributions not made within five years from the date
that such dividends or distributions became payable will lapse and any such amounts will be considered to have been forfeited
to us (verjaring).


44
CAPITALIZATION
The following table sets forth our capitalization on an unaudited pro forma combined basis as of June 30, 2021, after giving
effect to the Business Combination and the PIPE Financing.
The information in this table should be read in conjunction with the financial statements and notes thereto and other
financial information included in this prospectus and any prospectus supplement and the information under “Management’s
Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.” Our historical results do not necessarily indicate
our expected results for any future periods.
(€) in
As of June 30, 2021
    
thousands
Cash and cash equivalents
€
 493,103
Equity:
  
Subscribed capital
 40,093
Share premium
 890,799
Other capital reserves
 
 93,896
Accumulated deficit
 
 (552,784)
Accumulated other comprehensive loss
 
 (119)
Total equity
€
 471,885
Debt:
 
  
Convertible loans
€
 1,986
Total debt
€
 1,986
Total capitalization(1)
€
 473,871
(1) Excludes the impact of shares that are issuable upon the exercise of outstanding options to purchase Class A Shares held by
certain of our current and former directors and employees. Further, as all of the shares offered by the selling securityholders
pursuant to this prospectus will be sold by the selling securityholders for their respective accounts, the Company will not
receive any of the proceeds from such sale. As such, there is no impact to the capitalization relating to the resale.


45
UNAUDITED PRO FORMA CONDENSED COMBINED FINANCIAL INFORMATION
Introduction
The following unaudited pro forma condensed combined financial information has been prepared in accordance with
Article 11 of Regulation S-X.
The unaudited pro forma condensed combined statement of financial position as of June 30, 2021 combines the historical
statement of financial position of Lilium GmbH and the historical statement of financial position of Qell on a pro forma basis as
if the Business Combination and related transactions had been consummated on June 30, 2021. The unaudited pro forma
condensed combined statements of operations for the six months ended June 30, 2021 and for the year ended December 31,
2020 combine the historical statements of operations of Lilium GmbH and Qell for such period on a pro forma basis as if the
Business Combination and related transactions had been consummated on January 1, 2020, the beginning of the earliest period
presented.
The unaudited pro forma condensed combined financial information has been presented for illustrative purposes only and is
not necessarily indicative of the financial position and results of operations that would have been achieved had the Business
Combination and related transactions occurred on the dates indicated. Further, the unaudited pro forma condensed combined
financial information may not be useful in predicting the future financial condition and results of operations of the post-
combination company. The actual financial position and results of operations may differ significantly from the pro forma
amounts reflected herein due to a variety of factors. The unaudited pro forma adjustments represent management’s estimates
based on information available as of the date of the unaudited pro forma condensed combined financial information and is
subject to change as additional information becomes available and analyses are performed. This information should be read
together with Lilium GmbH’s and Qell’s audited financial statements and related notes, as applicable, and the section titled
“Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” and other financial information
included elsewhere in this prospectus.
Description of the Business Combination
On September 14, 2021 (the “Closing Date”), Lilium closed the previously announced Business Combination pursuant to
the Business Combination Agreement, dated as of March 30, 2021 by and among Qell, Lilium GmbH, Lilium, and Merger Sub.
On the Closing Date, (i) Qell converted the Qell Class A Ordinary Shares into a claim for corresponding equity in Merger
Sub, with such claim then contributed to Lilium in exchange for one Class A Share of Lilium, (ii) the shareholders of Lilium
GmbH exchanged their shares of Lilium GmbH for shares in the capital of Lilium, with all Lilium GmbH shareholders, but
Daniel Wiegand, receiving Class A Shares in the share capital of Lilium, and Daniel Wiegand receiving Class B Shares of
Lilium, and (iii) each outstanding warrant to purchase a Qell Class A Ordinary Share was converted into a warrant to purchase
one Lilium Class A Share.
On March 30, 2021, concurrently with the execution of the Business Combination Agreement, Qell and Lilium entered into
Subscription Agreements with certain PIPE Investors, pursuant to which the PIPE Investors agreed to subscribe for and
purchase, and Lilium agreed to issue and sell to such PIPE Investors, an aggregate of 45,000,000 Class A Shares at a price of
$10.00 per share, for gross proceeds of $450,000,000 on the Closing Date. The PIPE Financing closed concurrently with the
Business Combination.
Accounting Treatment
The Business Combination will be accounted for as a capital reorganization. Under this method of accounting, Qell is
treated as the “acquired” company for financial reporting purposes. Accordingly, the Business Combination is treated as the
equivalent of Lilium GmbH issuing shares at the closing of the Business Combination for the net assets of Qell as of the closing
date, accompanied by a recapitalization. The net assets of Qell is stated at historical cost, with no goodwill or other intangible
assets recorded.
Lilium GmbH has been determined to be the accounting acquirer based on evaluation of the following facts and
circumstances:
●
Lilium GmbH’s shareholders have the largest voting interest in Lilium with approximately 80% of the voting interest;
●
Lilium GmbH has nominated the majority of the members on the Board of the post-combination company;
●
Lilium GmbH’s senior management is the senior management of the post-combination company;
●
The business of Lilium GmbH comprises the ongoing operations of Lilium; and


46
●
Lilium GmbH is the larger entity, in terms of substantive operations and employee base.
The Business Combination, which is not within the scope of IFRS 3 since Qell does not meet the definition of a business in
accordance with IFRS 3, is accounted for within the scope of IFRS 2. Any excess of fair value of Lilium GmbH shares issued
over the fair value of Qell’s identifiable net assets acquired represents compensation for the service of a stock exchange listing
for its shares and is expensed as incurred.
The unaudited pro forma condensed combined financial information assumes that the Public Warrants and Private Warrants
will be accounted for as liabilities in accordance with IAS 32 following consummation of the Business Combination and,
accordingly, would be subject to ongoing mark-to-market adjustments through the statement of operations. However, the
Company's evaluation of the post-Business Combination accounting for the Public Warrants and Private Warrants is ongoing.
Basis of Pro Forma Presentation
Pursuant to Qell’s existing charter, Qell’s public shareholders were offered the opportunity to redeem, upon closing of the
Business Combination, Qell Class A Ordinary Shares held by them for cash equal to their pro rata share of the aggregate amount
on deposit in the Trust Account. The unaudited pro forma condensed combined financial statements reflect the actual
redemption of 24,527,594 shares of Qell Class A Ordinary Shares at $10.00 per share.
The following summarizes the number of Lilium ordinary shares outstanding at Closing Date:
     Ownership in     
    
shares
Equity %
Voting %
Lilium GmbH shareholders(1)
 
219,202,016
 77 %  
 80 %
Qell public shareholders
 
 13,422,406  
 5 %  
 4 %
Qell sponsor (2)
 
 7,658,555  
 2 %  
 2 %
PIPE Investors
 
 45,000,000  
 16 %  
 14 %
Total Ordinary Shares
 
 
285,282,977  
 100 %  
 100 %
(1) Includes 1,172,918 Lilium Class A Shares to be issued to certain Lilium GmbH executives in connection with the
consummation of the Business Combination.
(2) Includes 3,063,422 of Lilium Class A Shares acquired by the Sponsor in connection with the Merger, which Sponsor has
agreed to subject to certain time and performance vesting provisions.


47
UNAUDITED PRO FORMA CONDENSED COMBINED STATEMENT OF FINANCIAL POSITION
AS OF JUNE 30, 2021
(In thousands)
Qell
IFRS Policy and
Lilium
(US GAAP,
Presentation
Transaction
(IFRS,
As
Alignment
Accounting
 
Pro Forma
     Historical)      Converted)     
(Note 2)
     Adjustments       
Combined
ASSETS:
 
   
  
 
   
     
  
Intangible assets
€
 1,626   €
 —
€
 —   €
 —
€
1,626
Property, plant and equipment
 
 26,918  
 —
 
 —  
 —
 
26,918
Financial assets
 
 2,422  
 —
 
 —  
 —
 
2,422
Non-financial assets
 
 301  
 —
 
 —  
 —
 
301
Investments in an associate
8,301
—
—
—
8,301
Investments held in Trust Account
 
 —  
 320,169
 
 —  
 (206,931)A  
—
 
 (113,238)B
Non-current assets
 
 39,568  
 320,169
 
 —  
 (320,169)
 
39,568
Other financial assets
 
 2,315  
 —
 
 —  
 —
 
2,315
Non-financial assets
 
 7,890  
 —
 
 329  
(433)E  
7,786
Trade receivables
47
—
—
—
47
Cash and cash equivalents
 
 62,736  
285
 
 —  
113,238 B  
493,103
 
 379,491 C
 
 (11,201)D
 
 (51,446)E
Prepaid expenses
 
 —  
 329
 
 (329) 
 —
 
 —
Due From Related Party
—
74
—
74
Current assets
 
 72,988  
688
 
 —  
429,649
 
503,325
TOTAL ASSETS
€  112,556
€  320,857
€
 —
€  109,480
€
542,893
EQUITY AND LIABILITIES
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
      
  
Subscribed capital
€
 76
€
 —
€
 —
€
 5,400 C €
40,093
 
 141 F
 
 2,530 J
 
 31,946 K
Share premium
   384,086
 
 —
 
 14,172
 
374,091 C  
890,799
 
 (6,981)E
 
 7,620 F
 
 67,412G
   (23,914) H
 
 0I
 
(2,528) J
 
(31,946)K
 
108,787L
 
Class A ordinary shares
 
 —
 
—
 
 —
 
 1G 
 —
 
 (1)J
Class B ordinary shares
 
 —
 
 1
 
 —
 
 0 I  
 —
 
 (1)J
Other capital reserves
 
 93,896
 
 —
 
 —
 
 —
 
93,896
Additional paid-in capital
 
 —
 
 14,172
 
(14,172)
 
—
 
 —
Accumulated loss
 
 
(416,575)
 
(9,956)
 
 —
 
 (33,619)E  
(552,784)
 
 (7,761)F
 
 23,914 H
 
 
(108,787) L
Accumulated other comprehensive loss
 
 (119)
 
 —
 
 —
 
 —
 
(119)
Shareholders’ Equity
 
 61,364
 
4,217
 
 —
 
 406,304
 
471,885


48
Qell
IFRS Policy and
Lilium
(US GAAP,
Presentation
Transaction
(IFRS,
As
Alignment
Accounting
 
Pro Forma
     Historical)      Converted)     
(Note 2)
     Adjustments       
Combined
COMMITMENTS AND CONTINGENCIES
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
      
  
Class A ordinary shares subject to redemption
 
 —
 
 274,344
 
 (274,344)
 
 —
 
 —
LIABILITIES:
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
      
  
Other financial liabilities
 
 25
 
 —
 
 —
 
 —
 
25
Lease liabilities
 
 10,064
 
 —
 
 —
 
 —
 
10,064
Provisions
 
484
 
 —
 
 —
 
 —
 
484
Derivative warrant liabilities
 
 —
 
 26,595
 
 —
 
 —
 
26,595
Deferred underwriting commissions
 
 —
 
 11,201
 
 —
 
 (11,201)D  
 —
Common stock subject to possible redemptions
 
 —
 
 —
 
 274,344
   (206,931)A  
 —
   (67,413) G
Non-current liabilities
 
 10,573
 
 37,796
 
 274,344
   (285,545)
 
37,168
Accounts payable
 
 —
 
 289
 
 (289)
 
 —
 
 —
Accrued expenses
 
 —
 
 4,211
 
 (4,211)
 
 —
 
 —
Other financial liabilities
 
 9,391
 
 —
 
 —
 
 —
 
9,391
Lease liabilities
 
 1,915
 
 —
 
 —
 
 —
 
1,915
Provisions
 
 146
 
 —
 
 —
 
 —
 
146
Income tax payable
 
 224
 
 —
 
 —
 
 —
 
224
Convertible loans
 
 1,986
 
 —
 
 —
 
 —
 
1,986
Trade and other payables
 
 20,764
 
 —
 
289
 
(7,077) E  
13,976
Other non-financial liabilities
 
 6,193
 
 —
 
 4,211
 
(4,202) E  
6,202
Current liabilities
 
 40,619
 
4,500
 
 —
   (11,279)
 
33,840
TOTAL SHAREHOLDERS’ EQUITY AND
LIABILITIES
€  112,556
€  320,857
€
 —
€  109,480
€
542,893


49
UNAUDITED PRO FORMA CONDENSED COMBINED STATEMENT OF OPERATIONS
FOR THE SIX MONTHS ENDED JUNE 30, 2021
(In thousands, except share and per share data)
IFRS Policy
and
Lilium
Qell
Presentation
Transaction
(IFRS,
(US GAAP,
Alignment
Accounting
Pro Forma
     Historical)     As Converted)    
(Note 2)
    Adjustments     
Combined
 
Revenue
€
47
€
—
€
—
€
—
€
47
Cost of sales
(11)
—
—
—
(11)
Gross Profit
36
—
—
—
36
Research and development expenses
(58,762)
—
—
—
(58,762)
General and administrative expenses
(38,718)
(5,546)
(135)
135 DD
(44,264)
Administrative fee – related party
—
(135)
135
—
—
Selling expenses
(6,376)
—
—
—
(6,376)
Other income
153
—
—
—
153
Change in fair value of derivative warrant liabilities
—
24,861
—
—
24,861
Income earned on investments in Trust Account
—
64
—
(64)AA
—
Other expenses
(126)
—
—
—
(126)
Operating loss
(103,793)
19,244
—
71
(84,478)
Finance income
6,810
—
—
—
6,810
Finance expenses
(13,094)
—
—
—
(13,094)
Financial result
(6,284)
—
—
—
(6,284)
Share of income/(loss) of an associate
(201)
—
—
—
(201)
Loss before income tax
(110,278)
19,244
—
71
(90,963)
Income tax expense
(199)
—
—
—
(199)
Net loss for the period
(110,477)
19,244
—
71
(91,162)
Pro forma weighted average common shares
outstanding – basic and diluted
285,282,977
Pro forma net loss per share – basic and diluted
€
(0.32)


50
UNAUDITED PRO FORMA CONDENSED COMBINED STATEMENT OF OPERATIONS
FOR THE YEAR ENDED DECEMBER 31, 2020
(In thousands, except share and per share data)
    
    
    
    
    
    
For the
    
    
    
Period from
For the
August 7, 2020
For the
Year Ended
(inception) through
Year Ended
December 31, 2020
December 31, 2020
December 31, 2020
Qell
IFRS Policy and
(US GAAP,
Presentation
Transaction
Lilium
Restated,
Alignment
Accounting
Pro Forma
(IFRS, Historical)
As Converted)
(Note 2)
Adjustments
Combined
Revenue
€
 97
€
 —
€
 —
€
 —
€
 97
Cost of sales
 
 (10)
 
 —
 
 —
 
 —
 
 (10)
Gross Profit
 
 87
 
 —
 
 —
 
 —
 
 87
Research and development expenses
 
 (90,345)
 
 —
 
 —
 
 —
 
 (90,345)
General and administrative expenses
 
 (35,406)
 
 (289)
 
 (25)
   (19,662)BB 
 (171,905)
 
 
 (7,761)CC
 
 
 25 DD
 
 
 
(108,787)EE
Administrative fee – related party
 
 —
 
 (25)
 
 25
 
 —
 
 —
Selling expenses
 
 (15,272)
 
 —
 
 —
 
 —
 
 (15,272)
Other income
 
 2,346
 
 —
 
 —
 
 —
 
 2,346
Change in fair value of derivative
warrant liabilities
 
 —
 
 (28,365)
 
 —
 
—
 
(28,365)
Offering costs – derivative warrant
liabilities
 
 —
 
 (841)
 
 —
 
—
 
(841)
Income earned on investments in Trust
Account
 
 —
 
 67
 
 —
 
 (67)AA 
 —
Other expenses
 
 (130)
 
 —
 
 —
 
 —
 
 (130)
Operating loss
 
 (138,720)
 
 (29,453)
 
 —
 
 
(136,252)
 
 (304,425)
Finance income
 
 80
 
 —
 
 —
 
 —
 
 80
Finance expenses
 
 (49,741)
 
 —
 
 —
 
 —
 
 (49,741)
Financial result
 
 (49,661)
 
 —
 
 —
 
 —
 
 (49,661)
Loss before income tax
 
 (188,381)
 
 (29,453)
 
 —
 
 
(136,252)
 
 (354,086)
Income tax expense
 
 (46)
 
 —
 
 —
 
 —
 
 (46)
Net loss for the period
 
 (188,427)
 
 (29,453)
 
 —
 
 
(136,252)
 
 (354,132)
Pro forma weighted average common
shares outstanding – basic and diluted
 
 
  
 
  
 
  
  
 285,282,977
Pro forma net loss per share — basic and
diluted
 
  
 
  
 
  
  €
 (1.24)


51
NOTES TO UNAUDITED PRO FORMA CONDENSED COMBINED FINANCIAL INFORMATION
1.    Basis of Presentation
The unaudited pro forma condensed combined statement of financial position as of June 30, 2021 assumes that the Business
Combination occurred on June 30, 2021. The unaudited pro forma condensed combined statements of operations for the six
months ended June 30, 2021 and for the year ended December 31, 2020 present pro forma effect to the Business Combination as
if it had been completed on January 1, 2020, the beginning of the earliest period presented. These periods are presented on the
basis that Lilium GmbH is the accounting acquirer.
The unaudited pro forma condensed combined financial information has been prepared using, and should be read in
conjunction with, the historical financial statements (including the related notes) of Lilium GmbH and Qell. The historical
financial information of Lilium GmbH was derived from the unaudited interim condensed consolidated financial statements of
Lilium GmbH as of and for the six months ended June 30, 2021 and the audited consolidated financial statements of Lilium
GmbH for the year ended December 31, 2020, each of which are included elsewhere in this prospectus. The historical financial
information of Qell was derived from the unaudited financial statements of Qell as of and for the six months ended June 30,
2021 and the audited financial statements of Qell for the period from August 7, 2020 (inception) to December 31, 2020, each of
which are included elsewhere in this prospectus.
The historical financial statements of Lilium GmbH have been prepared in accordance with IFRS as issued by the IASB
and in its presentation and reporting currency of the Euro (€). The historical financial statements of Qell have been prepared in
accordance with generally accepted accounting principles in the United States (“US GAAP”) in its presentation and reporting
currency of United States dollars ($). The financial statements of Qell have been translated into Euros for the purposes of
presentation in the unaudited pro forma condensed combined financial information (“As Converted”) using the following
exchange rates:
●
at the period end exchange rate as of June 30, 2021 of $1.00 to €0.8433 for the statement of financial position;
●
the average exchange rate for the period from January 1, 2021 through June 30, 2021 of $1.00 to €0.8298 for the
statement of operations for the six months ended June 30, 2021; and
●
the average exchange rate for the period from August 7, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020 of $1.00 to
€0.8416 for the statement of operations for the year ended December 31, 2020.
The adjustments presented in the unaudited pro forma condensed combined financial information have been identified and
presented to provide relevant information necessary for an accurate understanding of Lilium after giving effect to the Business
Combination. Management has made significant estimates and assumptions in its determination of the pro forma adjustments.
As the unaudited pro forma condensed combined financial information has been prepared based on these preliminary estimates,
the final amounts recorded may differ materially from the information presented.
The pro forma adjustments reflecting the consummation of the Business Combination are based on certain currently
available information and certain assumptions and methodologies that management believes are reasonable under the
circumstances. The unaudited condensed pro forma adjustments, which are described in the accompanying notes, may be
revised as additional information becomes available and is evaluated. Therefore, it is likely that the actual adjustments will
differ from the pro forma adjustments and it is possible the difference may be material. The Company believes that its
assumptions and methodologies provide a reasonable basis for presenting all of the significant effects of the Business
Combination based on information available to management at this time and that the pro forma adjustments give appropriate
effect to those assumptions and are properly applied in the unaudited pro forma condensed combined financial information.
The unaudited pro forma condensed combined financial information assumes that the public and private warrants will be
accounted for as liabilities in accordance with IAS 32 following consummation of the Business Combination and, accordingly,
would be subject to ongoing mark-to-market adjustments through the statement of operations. However, the Company's
evaluation of the post-Business Combination accounting for the public and private warrants is ongoing.
The unaudited pro forma condensed combined financial information is not necessarily indicative of what the actual results
of operations and financial position would have been had the Business Combination taken place on the dates indicated, nor are
they indicative of the future consolidated results of operations or financial position of the post-combination company. They
should be read in conjunction with the historical financial statements and notes thereto of Lilium GmbH and Qell.


52
The unaudited pro forma condensed combined financial information does not reflect the income tax effects of the pro forma
adjustments as based on the statutory rate in effect for the historical periods presented. The Company believes this unaudited pro
forma condensed combined financial information to not be meaningful given the combined entity incurred significant losses
during the historical periods presented due to having not yet launched its air mobility service.
2.    IFRS Policy and Presentation Alignment
The historical financial information of Qell has been adjusted to give effect to the differences between US GAAP and IFRS
as issued by the IASB for the purposes of the unaudited pro forma condensed combined financial information. The only
adjustment required to convert Qell’s financial statements from US GAAP to IFRS for purposes of the unaudited pro forma
condensed combined financial information was to reclassify Qell’s common stock subject to redemption to non-current financial
liabilities under IFRS.
Further, as part of the preparation of the unaudited pro forma condensed combined financial information, certain
reclassifications were made to align Qell’s historical financial information in accordance with the presentation of Lilium
GmbH’s historical financial information.
3.    Adjustments to Unaudited Pro Forma Condensed Combined Financial Information
The following unaudited pro forma condensed combined financial information has been prepared in accordance with
Article 11 of Regulation S-X.
Transaction Accounting Adjustments to Unaudited Pro Forma Condensed Combined Statement of Financial Position
The transaction accounting adjustments included in the unaudited pro forma condensed combined statement of financial
position as of June 30, 2021 are as follows:
(A) Reflects the actual redemption of 24,527,594 shares for aggregate redemption payments of €206.9 million at a redemption
price of approximately $10.00 per share based on the investments held in the Trust Account at Closing of $379.6 million.
(B) Reflects the liquidation and reclassification of €113.2 million of investments held in the Qell Trust Account to cash and
cash equivalents, after recording actual redemptions as described in note (A), that becomes available following the Business
Combination.
(C) Represents the proceeds of €379.5 million from the issuance and sale of 45,000,000 shares of Lilium ordinary shares at
$10.00 per share in the PIPE Financing pursuant to the terms of the Subscription Agreements.
(D) Reflects the settlement of €11.2 million in deferred underwriting commissions.
(E) Represents transaction costs incurred by Qell and Lilium GmbH of €23.8 million and €35.3 million, respectively, for
advisory, banking, printing, legal, and accounting fees incurred as part of the Business Combination.
For the Qell transaction costs, €4.2 million of these fees have been accrued in other non-financial liabilities, €0.3 million 
have been accrued in trade and other payables, and €0.7 million has been paid in cash as of June 30, 2021. €4.6 million 
represent equity issuance costs capitalized in share premium related to the PIPE Financing. The remaining amount of €14.0 
million is reflected as an adjustment to accumulated loss, of which €3.4 million was deferred and is reflected in the 
unaudited pro forma statement of financial position in trade and other payables. These costs have been excluded from the 
unaudited pro forma condensed combined statements of operations.  The Qell transaction costs exclude the deferred 
underwriting commissions as described in (D) above.
For the Lilium GmbH transaction costs, €13.4 have been recorded as expenses, including €10.2 million of these fees
accrued in trade and other payables and €3.6 million of fees paid in cash, of which €0.4 million was capitalized in non-
financial assets as of June 30, 2021. €2.3 million represents the total equity issuance costs capitalized in share premium.
The remaining amount of €19.6 million not already paid or accrued is included as an expense through accumulated loss and
is reflected in the unaudited pro forma condensed combined statement of operations for the year ended December 31, 2020
as discussed in (BB) below.


53
The following tables summarize the abovementioned transaction costs and the related treatment within the unaudited pro
forma condensed combined financial information.
    
Transaction
    
accounting
Qell transaction costs
adjustment
Amounts
(in thousands)
PIPE Financing fees
    
(E)
    €
 4,655
Transaction costs not eligible for capitalization(1)
  (E), (H), (L), (EE)
 
 13,957
Transaction costs paid or accrued as of June 30, 2021
(E)
5,222
Total Qell transaction costs
€  23,834
(1) Consistent with the accounting for a capital raising transaction by Lilium GmbH, such costs are excluded from the
unaudited pro forma condensed combined statements of operations, but are reflected as a reduction of the net
assets of Qell when calculating the IFRS 2 expense.
     Transaction     
accounting
Lilium GmbH transaction costs
adjustments
Amounts
(in thousands)
Capitalized equity issuance costs(2)
 
(E)
€
 2,326
Transaction costs not eligible for capitalization
 
(E), (BB)
 
 19,662
Transaction costs paid or accrued as of June 30, 2021
 
(E)
 
 13,365
Total Lilium GmbH transaction costs
€
 35,353
(2) Direct and incremental Lilium GmbH transaction costs were allocated based on costs related to Lilium shares
issued to Qell public shareholders including Sponsor, and costs related to Lilium shares issued to Lilium GmbH
shareholders. Amounts allocated to Qell public shareholders including Sponsor were capitalized and offset against
the proceeds raised in the unaudited pro forma condensed combined statement of financial position, while
amounts allocated to Lilium GmbH shareholders were expensed in the unaudited pro forma condensed combined
statements of operations
(F) Reflects 1,172,918 Lilium Class A Shares to be issued to certain Lilium GmbH executives based on a percentage of
proceeds raised through the consummation of the Business Combination, and the related estimated compensation cost as
discussed in (CC) below.
(G) Represents the reclassification of the redeemable ordinary shares.
(H) Reflects the elimination of Qell’s historical accumulated deficit after recording the transaction costs to be incurred by Qell
as described in note (E).
(I) Represents the forfeiture of 1,828,945 Qell Class B Ordinary Shares pursuant to the Sponsor Letter Agreement.
(J) Represents the exchange of 13,422,406 Qell Class A Ordinary Shares and 7,658,555 Qell Class B Ordinary Shares into
21,080,961 Lilium Class A Shares.
(K) Represents the exchange of 76,314 shares of Lilium GmbH equity into 218,029,098 Lilium Shares, which includes
193,616,033 Lilium Class A Shares and 24,413,065 Lilium Class B Shares. The number of Lilium Class A Shares does not
include the shares issued to certain Lilium GmbH executives as discussed in (F) above.
(L) Represents the expense recognized, in accordance with IFRS 2, for the excess of the fair value of Lilium shares issued and
the fair value of Qell’s identifiable net assets at the date of the Business Combination, resulting in a €108.8 million increase
to accumulated loss. The fair value of shares issued was determined based on a market price of $9.41 per share and $1.55
per warrant as of Closing Date.


54
Transaction Accounting Adjustments to Unaudited Pro Forma Condensed Combined Statements of Operations
The transaction accounting adjustments included in the unaudited pro forma condensed combined statements of operations
for the six months ended June 30, 2021 and for the year ended December 31, 2020 are as follows:
(AA) Represents the elimination of interest income generated from the Trust Account for six months ended June 30, 2021 and
the period from August 7, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020.
(BB)
Reflects the transaction costs of €19.6 million expensed and incurred by Lilium GmbH as part of the Business
Combination, as described in (E). The remaining transaction costs expensed of €10.5 and €2.9 million are included in the
historical income statements of Lilium GmbH for the six months ended June 30, 2021 and for the year ended December
31, 2020, respectively. Transaction costs are reflected as if incurred on January 1, 2020, the date of the Business
Combination occurred for the purposes of the unaudited pro forma condensed statements of operations. These costs are a
nonrecurring item.
(CC) Reflects the compensation cost of €7.8 million related to equity issued to certain Lilium GmbH executives in connection
with the Business Combination, as described in note (F).
(DD) Represents pro forma adjustment to eliminate historical expenses related to Qell’s office space, utilities, and secretarial
and administrative services pursuant to the Administrative Services Agreement, which will terminate upon the
consummation of the Business Combination.
(EE)
Represents €108.8 million of expense recognized in accordance with IFRS 2, for the difference between the fair value of
Lilium shares issued and the fair value of Qell’s identifiable net assets, as described in (L). This cost is a nonrecurring
item.


55
4.    Net Loss per Share
Represents the net loss per share calculated using the historical weighted average shares outstanding, and the issuance of
additional shares in connection with the Business Combination and related transactions, assuming the shares were outstanding
since January 1, 2020. As the Business Combination and related transactions are being reflected as if they had occurred at the
beginning of the periods presented, the calculation of weighted average shares outstanding for basic and diluted net loss per
share assumes that the shares issued in connection with the Business Combination have been outstanding for the entire periods
presented. Basic and diluted loss per share for Lilium Class A Shares and Lilium Class B Shares are the same, as each class of
common stock is entitled to the same dividend participation rights and economic terms.
The unaudited pro forma condensed combined financial information has been prepared using the actual redemption of
Qell’s public shares:
For the Six
Months Ended
June 30, 2021
For the Year Ended
December 31, 2020
(in thousands, except share and per share data)
Pro forma net loss
    €
(91,162)    €
(354,132) 
Weighted average shares outstanding – basic and diluted
285,282,977
285,282,977
Net loss per share – basic and diluted (1)
€
(0.32)
€
(1.24)
Weighted average shares outstanding – basic and
diluted:
Lilium GmbH shareholders (2)
219,202,016
219,202,016
Qell public shareholders
13,422,406
13,422,406
Qell sponsor (3)
7,658,555
7,658,555
PIPE Investors
45,000,000
45,000,000
Total
285,282,977
285,282,977
(1) For the purpose of calculating diluted loss per share, it was assumed that all Qell Public Warrants sold in the Qell IPO and
the Private Warrants are exchanged for Lilium Class A Shares. However, since this results in anti-dilution, the effect of such
exchange was not included in the calculation of diluted loss per share.
(2) Includes 1,172,918 Lilium Class A Shares to be issued to certain Lilium GmbH executives in connection with the
consummation of the Business Combination.
(3) The pro forma basic and diluted shares of Sponsor includes 3,063,422 of Lilium Shares acquired by the Sponsor in
connection with the Merger, which it has agreed to subject to certain time and performance vesting provisions.


56
BUSINESS OF LILIUM AND CERTAIN INFORMATION ABOUT LILIUM
Overview
We are a next-generation transportation company. We are focused on developing an eVTOL aircraft for use in a new type of
high-speed air transport system for people and goods — one that would offer increased connectivity for communities around the
world as well as generate time savings to travelers, would be accessible from homes and workplaces, be affordable for a large
part of the population, and be more environmentally friendly than current air transportation.
The product we are developing is a fully electric, 7-seater jet aircraft that will take-off and land vertically with low noise
(the “Lilium Jet”). Our objective is for the Lilium Jet to be the basis for sustainable, high-speed air shuttle networks that will
connect communities within a region directly with one another. We believe such a network will require less infrastructure than
traditional airports or railway lines and a fully electric jet aircraft would produce minimal operating emissions. We expect our
Lilium Jets to generate 0.3 ounces CO2 of operating emissions per passenger mile, which is approximately 97% less when
compared to commercial aviation. A single trip might save hours for a traveler; in aggregate, these networks could save our
societies millions of travel hours — and significant carbon emissions — each year.
Currently, our development efforts are focused on the Lilium Jet, including our ongoing certification process with European
Union Aviation Safety Agency (“EASA”) and Federal Aviation Administration (“FAA”), and building out our manufacturing
capacity to produce the Lilium Jet. We plan to rely on two business models. First, we plan to use the Lilium Jet within regional
passenger shuttle networks, initially in the U.S. and Europe, that we intend to create and operate with third parties (our “People
Network”). Second, we plan to provide a turnkey enterprise solution by leasing fleets of Lilium Jets directly to governments and
enterprise customers (the “Turnkey Enterprise”).
The new and developing eVTOL aircraft market has been made possible by a convergence of innovation across battery
technology, lightweight materials, sensors and computing power, and propulsion technology. Morgan Stanley has projected that
the eVTOL aircraft market could represent $1.5 trillion (in the base case) to $3.0 trillion (in the bull case) in revenues by 2040.
The Lilium Jet architecture is based on our proprietary Ducted Electric Vectored Thrust (“DEVT”) technology, which has
been developed and rigorously tested over the last five years. While the majority of our eVTOL competitors leverage open rotor
engines, which are based on unducted, contra-rotating propeller blades, DEVT consists of electric turbofans mounted within a
cylindrical duct. DEVT offers four fundamental advantages over open propeller eVTOL architectures: lower noise, higher
payload, safety and highest market penetration for ducted fans in commercial aviation, and scalability to larger aircraft in the
future.
We believe these technology advantages will enable our regional shuttle service model to carry more passengers (or cargo)
per jet on longer (regional) trips than open propeller eVTOL aircraft. The specifications for the Lilium Jet under development
call for the aircraft to be able to cruise at 175 mph at 10,000 feet for up to 155 miles and to have 7 seats (one for the pilot) or
210 cubic feet of cargo space representing 50% more (passenger) capacity than an open propeller eVTOL architecture would
have at comparable noise levels. We believe the combination of longer average trip lengths and higher passenger capacity per jet
(thus a higher load factor) will provide greater time savings to customers, more competitive pricing, and superior unit
economics as compared to open propeller eVTOL architecture. We intend to also create a 16-seater version of the Lilium Jet
based on the same architecture and technology, which could drive our projected unit economics even higher, though there can be
no assurances that such a 16-seater Lilium Jet will be developed or the timing thereof.
We intend for the Lilium Jet to have lower take-off noise - 60db(A) at 100 meters (330 feet) — than of any equivalent
eVTOL aircraft being developed by open propeller competitors, which would give us the potential for broad market access and
dense networks with more sold tickets overall. By contrast, helicopters generate a noise footprint 100 times larger. We are
designing the Lilium Jet to be virtually inaudible (estimated 20 db(A) at 3,000 meters (9,840 feet) distance) from the ground
during cruise flight.
Our business operating model is predicated on deploying our Lilium Jet, at scale, to regional passenger networks and
enterprise customers, while providing high service quality, agility to adjust the supply of jets in a network to match potentially
varying demand and capital efficiency. To implement our People Network business model, we plan to engage with companies
on vertiport infrastructure, airline operations, pilot training and maintenance. For example, we intend to work with leading
infrastructure players such as Ferrovial and Tavistock with the aim of building and operating 14 vertiports, which are areas
designed specifically for VTOL aircraft to take off and land, in strategic locations across Florida. We are also engaged in
negotiations with key infrastructure providers in respect of at least 10 vertiports to build our European network, which we intend
to launch in Germany and then expand across Central Europe. We intend to enter into definitive agreements with these parties
but there can be no assurances that we will be able to do so on favorable terms or at all. In addition, we have engaged Lufthansa
Aviation Training to build a commercial-grade program to train our future pilots. Outsourcing these activities to specialist
companies allow us to scale our asset-light operations quickly without


57
limiting our profit potential or fully relinquishing our competitive advantages or brand loyalty. We plan to deliver the aircraft
fleets and the digital software capabilities that underpin the network service including: network management, flight planning, jet
operations and maintenance, and customer bookings.
We believe that our high-speed regional air networks will significantly change the economic calculus of passengers and
businesses shipping goods when making transportation and shipping decisions. Based on current design specifications and our
business model, we estimate that our Lilium Jet will be able to move people and goods five times faster than road transport, and
that our eVTOL network will be at least 100 times less costly and approximately 10 times faster to deploy than equivalent high-
speed rail infrastructure, and considerably more adaptable to shifting passenger demand. These estimates are based on
judgments and assumptions of our management in light of information available at this time; actual results may differ.
We believe that our aerospace team is one of the most capable in the eVTOL sector. Collectively, they have held
instrumental roles in the delivery of the Airbus A350 XWB, Airbus A380, Airbus A320, the Gulfstream G-650 jet engine, the
Eurofighter Typhoon and the Harrier jet. They are supported by approximately 400 aerospace engineers and a business team
with a strong track record in building successful companies in Silicon Valley and Europe. In addition to our Co-Founder and
Chief Executive Officer, Daniel Wiegand, our Board includes our Chairman, Dr. Thomas Enders, as well as Henri Courpron,
Barry Engle, David Neeleman, Margaret M. Smyth, Gabrielle Toledano, David Wallerstein and Niklas Zennström.
We have applied for Type Certification (“Type Certification”) with the EASA in 2017 and for concurrent Type Certification
with the FAA in 2018. Receiving a Type Certificate in accordance with stated regulatory standards will certify compliance to the
applicable airworthiness standards for the Lilium Jet, which is a necessary prerequisite to undertaking commercial operations. In
2020, the Lilium Jet received CRI-A01 certification basis from EASA (similar to the G-1 from the FAA), setting forth a set of
performance requirements we have agreed with the regulators for the Lilium Jet. We are progressing towards a targeted Type
Certification in 2024, which would position us as one of the first companies to enter the eVTOL market. Importantly, achieving
both EASA and FAA certification will allow our Lilium Jets to operate in Europe, the U.S., and any other countries where the
national civil aviation authorities recognize these certifications (examples may, but are not guaranteed to include, India, Russia,
and certain countries within the Middle East, South East Asia and major parts of Central and South America). We believe that
the national civil aviation authorities of these countries would accept a Type Certification from EASA and FAA; however, we
cannot assure that this will be the case and the actual acceptance is dependent on the authorities’ review when the Type
Certification is presented. In addition, certain other countries have bilateral agreements in place with EASA, including technical
implementation procedures to validate an EASA Type Certification. These countries include China, Japan, Canada and Brazil,
for which some additional validation work would be required. More details about the Lilium Jet’s certification process and
regulation are below under “— Regulation.”
We have a 100,000 square foot technology prototyping and production facility at the Oberpfaffenhofen airfield near our
Munich headquarters in Germany. This facility will eventually house our serial aircraft production, including the anticipated
manufacturing of the proprietary propulsion and energy systems and the final assembly of the serial aircraft. Other sub-systems
and components will be outsourced to Tier 1 aerospace suppliers, such as Toray Industries, Aciturri Aeronáutica and Honeywell.
Under our planned timeline, we have targeted late 2022 for this facility to produce the first batch of conforming serial
aircraft units, in advance of our final test campaign.
The eVTOL Industry, Total Addressable Market and its Drivers
The eVTOL aircraft market is a developing sector within the transportation industry. This market sector is dependent on the
successful development and implementation of eVTOL aircraft and networks, none of which are currently in commercial
operation. Morgan Stanley has projected that the eVTOL market for moving people and moving goods could be between $1.5
trillion (in the base case) to $3.0 trillion (in the bull case) in revenues by 2040, as set forth in the “Morgan Stanley Research,
Flying Cars: Investment Implications of Autonomous Urban Air Mobility” report released in December 2018 (the “Morgan
Stanley Report”).
The Morgan Stanley Report projects that the ‘moving people’ market size could be between $1.0 trillion to $2.0 trillion in
revenues by 2040 and is linked to the automotive, shared mobility and airline transportation markets. The Morgan Stanley
Report projects that the eVTOL aircraft market will become a more cost-effective and time-efficient method of traveling short to
medium distances, eroding market shares from automotive and airline companies as customers appreciate the time savings and
convenience of eVTOL services.
‘Moving goods’ refers mainly to the freight transportation market. The Morgan Stanley Report projects this market size
could represent $0.5 trillion to $0.8 trillion in revenues by 2040. The Morgan Stanley Report projects that eVTOL technology is
expected to revolutionize logistics due to advantages in speed, efficiency and accessibility over traditional trucks, airplane and
train freight transportation. In addition, the Morgan Stanley Report cites the potential for eVTOL technology to provide a viable
and affordable transportation solution in geographic locations without a current viable solution (such as rural or island
communities) and to expand


58
the possibilities for 24-hour delivery or overnight parcel delivery in regions where existing transport modes are simply too slow.
As these eVTOL technologies mature and enable heavier aircraft, eVTOL transportation has the potential to scale from regional
parcel delivery to larger freight applications.
The large eVTOL market opportunity is precipitated by a transportation system that is insufficient to handle increasing
demand without time delays, high infrastructure and maintenance costs and adverse environmental impact. Since 1990, global
passenger flows have increased by more than 125% across all major modes of travel and global trade volume has even increased
by approximately 200%. To counter the rapidly increasing demand for mobility and logistics, governments worldwide are
investing a total of approximately $1 trillion per annum into transport infrastructure, which is three times more compared to
twenty years ago. Yet, despite these investments, our regional transport systems have fundamentally not improved:
●
Cars are slow and limited by capacity, speed limits and congestion. For example, the average commuter spends more
than 50 hours annually in road congestion.
●
High-speed rail has achieved very low density of real high-speed connections given prohibitively high infrastructure
cost and long lead times to deploy the infrastructure.
●
Conventional airplanes fail to achieve significant time savings in regional travel since lengthy arrival and departure
take too much time, with smaller airports closing in favor of more economically sustainable larger hubs.
The transport sector represents approximately a quarter of global greenhouse gas emissions, which have continued to rise
over the last twenty years.
We believe eVTOL technology combines the accessibility of the car and the speed of an aircraft, with the added benefit of
minimal operating emissions. We believe these characteristics will result in customers’ shifting preferences towards eVTOL
over traditional transportation modes, as customers will prioritize time savings, convenience and environmental impact.
Vertiport networks are anticipated to be low cost, low noise, to have minimal operating emissions and to be located at strategic
locations throughout urban and suburban areas that will be capable of operating at all hours, with low upfront infrastructure
costs, allowing these networks to develop substantially quicker and with lower cost than traditional high-speed transport
infrastructure.
Governments are increasing their support for the development of eVTOL networks through regulatory incentives and
investment schemes. For example:
●
In 2020, the U.S. Congress introduced a bill to establish an interagency working group focused on advanced air
mobility.
●
In 2020, the German Federal Ministry of Transport launched a financial assistance program for the development of
drones and air mobility services.
●
In 2020, the French government announced up to €1.5 billion investment by 2023 in research and development of new
technologies in the aviation sector with a goal of having the first emissions-free aircraft by 2035.
The pace of private investment by companies, as well as government spending, will impact the pace of technology adoption
and the level of market penetration. The Vertical Flight Society, a U.S. non-profit group that promotes urban air transportation,
estimates roughly $5 billion was invested into the development of eVTOL aircraft and systems between 2015 and 2020.
Enabling technologies and supporting services are likely be key accelerants of the eVTOL aircraft market, as such factors
have proven to be in the electric vehicle and autonomous vehicle market. We believe that many of the same technology
developments, such as development in batteries, materials, sensors and software, are likely to directly benefit the eVTOL
market. For example, improvements in battery energy density for electric vehicles and autonomous vehicles may drive increased
range and payload for eVTOL aircraft, unlocking longer routes and thus increasing the addressable market.
Use Cases of the eVTOL industry
According to Roland Berger’s “Urban Air Mobility | USD 90 billion of potential: How to capture a share of the passenger
drone market” Report from November 2020, there are three main use cases for passenger transport:
●
Urban Air Mobility (“UAM”) or intra-city air taxis, which will operate within a radius of 10 – 30 miles through an on-
demand service (similar to road taxis), focusing on large urban areas;


59
●
Suburban Air Mobility (“SAM”) or airport shuttles, which are scheduled flights on defined routes between airports and
surrounding areas, covering 10 – 30 miles; and
●
RAM or intercity shuttles, which are scheduled flights between cities and cover distances from 10 – 155 miles.
According to a report from L.E.K. Consulting, the cost of operations on a per-kilometer basis will be lower for RAM
services due to a much higher assumed average distance per flight. L.E.K. Consulting projects RAM to deliver higher
cost and time savings for customers compared to UAM / intra-city air taxis or traditional modes of transport and, as a
result, also to be a much larger segment of the overall eVTOL aircraft market.
The differentiation between these use cases applies mainly to passenger transport but also holds for the cargo transport
application.
Each of these uses will require close integration with existing transportation infrastructure to facilitate a smooth customer
journey. RAM will be able to operate in a multimodal, ride-share fleet model, taking advantage of existing infrastructure and
vacant land adjacent to existing transportation infrastructure, such as the top floor of parking garages, empty safety corridors at
airports, train stations or suburban transportation hubs. We expect eVTOL services to start as a complementary transportation
alternative to existing services, with operations primarily between airports, urban transportation hubs and urban transportation
centers. Over time, eVTOL service infrastructure could evolve with the densification of vertiports across key city locations as
well as rural communities.
Our History
Lilium was co-founded in 2015 by four founders with complementary talents, all of whom are graduates from the Technical
University of Munich: Daniel Wiegand, Sebastian Born, Dr. Patrick Nathen and Matthias Meiner.
The four co-founders started working together in 2014 and founded Lilium in 2015. From 2015 to today, Lilium has
produced four generations of technology demonstrators through which we have tested and refined the core technology
subsystems for the Lilium Jet:
●
‘Falcon’: a sub-scale technology demonstrator which had its unmanned maiden flight in 2015; the first technology
demonstrator with 36 engines, which also provided the first validation of the DEVT technology.
●
‘Dragon’: a sub-scale technology demonstrator, fully 3D printed, which had its unmanned maiden flight in 2016 and
served primarily to test the flight control software.
●
‘Eagle’: the first full scale DEVT-based eVTOL technology demonstrator with space for two seats, which had its
unmanned maiden flight in December 2016.
●
‘Phoenix’: development started in late 2017, the Phoenix is a full-scale technology demonstrator representing an
original 5-seater aircraft and is representative of the flight physics and technology of the Lilium Jet. On May 4, 2019,
following extensive on-ground testing, the Phoenix jet completed its first untethered and unmanned test flight at the
Special Airport Oberpfaffenhofen airport in Munich, Germany.
In 2018, our application for Type Certification of the serial aircraft was accepted by EASA and FAA, and we subsequently
started the development program for our 7-seater serial aircraft based on the technologies developed and refined over the
previous generation of aircraft demonstrators.
Our Competitive Strengths
We believe that our business benefits from a number of competitive strengths, including the following:
Proprietary DEVT technology unlocks higher unit economic potential
The majority of our competitors use ‘open propeller’ eVTOL architectures. We employ our own proprietary DEVT
technology, a differentiated propulsion system refined over five years, which provides four mission critical advantages:
●
Lower Noise: the presence of ducts around the fans stops the noise from radiating freely into the environment.
Furthermore, we employ acoustic liners within the fan duct, which lower the noise further. Our noise footprint at take-
off will be approximately five times lower than open propeller eVTOL configurations of similar weight, which will
permit Lilium Jets to


60
land more often and in more locations (that have communal noise restrictions) than competitor aircraft, increasing our
potential network density and market potential.
●
Highest market penetration for ducted fans in commercial aviation: ducted fans are standard in the aviation industry - 
95% of commercial airliners and business jets employ ducted fan propulsion systems. Fan ducts improve jet and
passenger safety by mitigating damage to the aircraft that can be caused by blade failure and loss. Ducted fans also
generate less vibration than open propellers, improving the passenger experience.
●
Payload Capacity: electric turbo fans have a 10 to 15 times smaller footprint than open propeller eVTOL propulsion
systems, which means that aircraft using ducted fans need 10 to 15 times less rotor surface area than an open propeller
aircraft of the same weight to provide the necessary thrust. Consequently, use of ducted fans allows us to make heavier
airplanes with higher passenger/cargo capacity while still meeting the maximum size limit of a standard helipad. With
our 7-seater aircraft (including the pilot), we estimate that we will have approximately 50% higher passenger capacity
than an open propeller eVTOL architecture would have at comparable noise levels. Greater passenger/cargo capacity
directly translates into higher revenue potential per jet and higher margins, because approximately 75% of the
operating costs (pilot, landing fees, maintenance) are fixed (per aircraft) and do not scale with increased
passenger/cargo capacity.
●
Footprint and Scalability: open propeller eVTOL configurations cannot scale to heavier aircraft with more payload
without significantly increasing rotor tip-to-tip span (footprint) or noise levels. In contrast, the smaller footprint of
DEVT enables greater flexibility to scale to, for example, an equivalent 16-seater eVTOL aircraft while still being able
to take off and land on a standard helipad. This increased payload translates directly into higher revenue and margins
per jet or, if necessary to address competitive pressures, to drive down prices for consumers in the long term.
Highly accomplished team combining deep aerospace experience, global business and entrepreneurial experience, backed by
a strong advisory Board and investor base
●
Lilium was founded by four individuals with complementary skill sets. The founders are still heavily involved in our
operations, with one of our founders, Daniel Wiegand, serving as CEO.
●
Our aerospace team consists of approximately 400 engineers who build on a combined 4,000 years of aerospace and
automotive experience. Our leadership team played instrumental leadership roles in some of the most successful and
complex aviation projects.
●
Our business and commercial leadership team has experience in building and growing successful technology
companies in Silicon Valley and Europe. We promote diversity in all aspects of our culture and our global team
represents more than 40 nationalities.
●
We have attracted a strong investor base of global funds and individuals that play active roles in the development of
our business and preparation for commercialization and market entry. Tencent, one of our largest investors, is
collaborating with us to develop a strategy for market entry into China, though there can be no assurances that any
such strategy will be implemented or will be successful.
●
We have assembled a strong and experienced Board, including the former CEO of Airbus, Dr. Thomas Enders, who
brings substantial experience in delivering some of the world’s largest aircraft programs, as well as successfully
building and shaping a world-class aerospace organization, as well as Henri Courpron, Barry Engle, David Neeleman,
Margaret M. Smyth, Gabrielle Toledano, David Wallerstein, our Co-Founder and Chief Executive Officer, Daniel
Wiegand, and Niklas Zennström.
Progress in concurrent Type Certification with clear path to commercialization
●
We have had regular engagement with both the FAA and EASA since 2017, and in 2018, both authorities accepted our
application for Type Certification.
●
In December 2020, we received from EASA the CRI-A01, the certification basis, for the 7-seater Lilium Jet (similar to
the G-1 from the FAA). The CRI-A01 an important milestone in the certification process and confirms EASA’s
agreement on the certification basis of our serial aircraft design, based on EASA’s SC-VTOL and additional means of
compliance which specify the means by which the requirements contained in the basic regulations can be met. The
CRI-A01 also provides a


61
roadmap of the tests and metrics that we need to implement and comply with to achieve full Type Certification of the
Lilium Jet (as further discussed below under “— Regulation — Aircraft Certification”).
●
We are targeting Type Certification by 2024, which we believe would put us among the first companies certified to
launch an eVTOL service. We believe that receiving Type Certification from both EASA and the FAA will enable us to
access many other markets, beyond Europe and the U.S., where the national civil aviation authorities recognize these
certifications (examples may, but are not guaranteed to include, India, Russia, and certain countries within the Middle
East, South East Asia and major parts of Central and South America). We believe that the national civil aviation
authorities of these countries would accept a Type Certification from EASA and FAA; however, we cannot assure that
this will be the case and the actual acceptance is dependent on the authorities’ review when the Type Certification is
presented.
●
We believe the rigorous FAA and EASA certification processes for eVTOL aircraft create high barriers to entry for
potential market entrants. Therefore, we see it as a competitive advantage that we have engaged frequently with EASA
and FAA since 2017, and that we were one of the earliest players whose application for Type Certification was
accepted by both authorities. This provides us dual advantages of being one of the first movers in the sector and
likewise being substantially familiar with the details of requirements established by the regulators.
Aircraft designed for manufacturability at scale
●
We have designed the Lilium Jet’s architecture based on the principles of simplicity, manufacturability and scalability,
in order to facilitate higher production volumes than traditional aviation.
●
Based on current design specifications, the Lilium Jet has 30 times fewer components than a typical commercial
airliner: it is designed to have only one type of e-motor, one type of actuator, and one type of battery module.
●
The Lilium Jet is intended to be controlled entirely by the flap angle and engine speed alone, and to not have any
aerodynamic control surfaces, fuel or hydraulic systems.
●
The carbon fiber aerostructure is projected to be scalable to a high-volume manufacturing.
●
We believe the combination of these design choices results in an aircraft with very few, highly repeated components
across all systems, which we believe will enable us to employ automotive-style design for manufacturing and fully
automated precision manufacturing of high-volume components such as the electric jet engines, the actuators and the
battery packs.
●
We expect that the Lilium Jet’s simplicity and electric propulsion architecture will drive down the fuel costs and
maintenance requirements, and therefore drive down the overall operating costs.
Strong commercial relationships and commercial traction
●
To ensure the highest quality in all aspects of the aircraft, we are working with leading Tier 1 aerospace suppliers, such
as Toray Industries, Aciturri Aeronáutica and Honeywell, and we are in discussion with other leading companies on
avionics, electric motors, electric wiring system, and other jet components. Many of our suppliers are agreeing to risk-
sharing arrangements, which means that instead of being charged up-front for development and tooling costs, we
intend to amortize these costs over time as our production scales. These arrangements can be terminated by either party
and there can be no assurance that one of our suppliers will not terminate its arrangements with us. The terms of our
existing collaboration agreements typically include one or more of the following: joint ownership of the new
intellectual property, assignment of the new intellectual property to either us or the collaborator, either exclusive or
non-exclusive licenses to the new intellectual property to us or the collaborator and other restrictions on our or our
collaborator’s use of developments, such as non-competes and time or milestone limited exclusivity provisions. If we
are unable to negotiate exclusivity regarding the technology developed under these collaborations, our competitors
may be able to access the technology that is owned, solely or jointly, by our suppliers and other collaborators.
●
In order to build, operate and scale our passenger network infrastructure to the highest operational and service quality,
we intend to work with leading infrastructure players such as Ferrovial, the owner and operator (among others) of
London’s Heathrow airport, and Tavistock, a strong local Florida developer. In Europe, we are likewise engaged in
negotiations with key infrastructure companies to build 10 vertiports for our German-based network across Europe.
These relationships are aimed at putting us in a position to have viable vertiport operations in at least two strategic
markets in time for our targeted


62
commercial launch in 2024, though no assurances can be given that these relationships will not be terminated or that
suitable vertiport operations can be implemented.
●
In addition, we have entered into an agreement with Lufthansa Aviation Training who will assist in the sourcing,
training and management of pilots for our Lilium Jets — both for our own planned passenger network operations as
well as future enterprise customers.
Our Strategy
We plan to create and operate, with commercial operators, high-speed regional air networks that utilize our aircraft and
deploy these for intercity passenger mobility (B2C) as well as turnkey enterprise solutions to governments and companies
(B2B). In each case, we believe our differentiated technologies will allow us to deliver an efficient, cost-effective service for
transporting people and goods. We have outsourced several aspects of the infrastructure and operation so that we can pursue an
asset-light strategy that will allow us to scale quickly and efficiently.
Capitalize on our first mover advantage to enter the new RAM market
●
We are focusing our initial services on RAM: regional, scheduled shuttle connections between cities. We believe these
routes can generate meaningful time savings for our customers at lower cost per seat-mile, while allowing us to
achieve higher load factors per jet than intra-city services would be able to generate.
●
We plan to launch our RAM services with a few, high-demand routes and grow over time, as the services gain support
and acceptance among our customers. Longer-term, we envision expanding our network to provide high-speed
connectivity to all major urban and suburban cities within a region which we expect will be substantially cheaper and
faster to deploy than traditional high-speed rail infrastructure, although there can be no assurances as to the timing or
nature of expansion decisions which will be made depending on circumstances in the future following
commercialization.
●
Most of our competitors are developing aircraft that are smaller than the Lilium Jet, with two to four passenger seats
and a focus on Urban Air Mobility, i.e., an on-demand intra-city taxi service. We believe that intra-city routes are less
compelling given the required time for first and last mile to vertiports, which reduces the time-savings when compared
to existing transport options.
Pursue multiple revenue streams through diversified business models and associated profit pools
●
We plan to operate two business models to diversify our revenue opportunities and mitigate the risks in our
commercialization. Our People Network (B2C) will allow consumers to purchase tickets on a per seat basis. This
business model has higher potential revenues and profits per jet, with revenue dependent on the actual number of
passengers travelling on each jet. We anticipate a two-year payback period, on average, for each jet in this model.
●
Our Turnkey Enterprise service (B2B) service will sell or lease jets to governments, companies, airlines, and logistic
companies followed by an annual service fee charged to customers on a per jet basis for maintenance and operating
services. The B2B revenue potential has lower revenue upside, but establishes a strong revenue floor, immediate
payback of the jet in the case of sales, and predictable revenue flow overall.
Introduce a scalable, capital-light business model for the commercialization of our service and manufacturing of our Lilium
Jets
●
We plan to be a vertically integrated company that focuses on the strategic, differentiated activities in the value chain.
We are managing the design and engineering of core aerospace technologies and production of the jets. We are
developing a digital platform to facilitate the vertiport and aircraft operations, flight planning and network
management, as well as a direct interface to passengers via a customer app.
●
We plan to outsource the capital-intensive and complementary activities of the value chain, which includes airline and
infrastructure operations (vertiport construction and operations, airline operations, aircraft maintenance, pilot training
and crew services) to various established aerospace and infrastructure companies. We believe this outsourcing model
will enable us to remain capital-light, to focus on our core strengths, and to scale quickly. This capital-light approach is
also reflected through our manufacturing strategy. We plan to produce unique technology subsystems in-house (such as
assembling the battery and propulsion systems and final aircraft assembly) and leverage Tier 1 aerospace suppliers for
all other systems and components. We are currently expanding our prototype factory for the initial serial aircraft
production; however, in the


63
medium-term, we intend to leverage manufacturing third parties to help effectively expand our global manufacturing
and to keep our own capital expenditures to a minimum.
Roll out our service globally
●
We believe that RAM represents a large global market opportunity. We are capitalizing on this global opportunity by
setting the requirements to launch and roll-out our service in several major markets around the world. Many countries’
national civil aviation authorities have bilateral agreements or working arrangements with EASA or FAA and, as a
result, we view receiving our concurrent Type Certification with EASA and FAA as an important first step towards
being allowed to operate in a large part of the rest of the world.
●
Three years ahead of our targeted commercial launch in 2024, we have developed a vertiport roll-out plan for the
People Network (B2C) in Florida and Germany and entered into arrangements with leading infrastructure players to
progress these plans.
●
With the estimated demand from the vertiports and network routes we have already planned, we believe that we can
profitably deploy most of our aircraft production volume in 2024 and 2025, though actual results may differ.
●
China represents another important market opportunity, and we are collaborating with our investor Tencent to develop
a strategy for market entry into China.
●
For our Turnkey Enterprise service (B2B), we expect a significant global market potential, and we are in active
discussions with airlines, logistic companies, and governments around the world, including in the U.S., Western
Europe and the Middle East, though these discussions remain at a preliminary stage and we can give no assurances as
to the timing or geography of networks that will develop.
Leverage our superior aircraft technology to unlock better unit economics and drive down prices for our customers
●
The main factors determining unit economics are passenger capacity, speed and range. Low noise, in addition, allows
us to land in more places which could significantly expand our total addressable market and our ability to scale our
services.
●
These four performance factors directly impact the number of passenger-miles a jet can produce per day and thus
increase our revenue potential. Our Lilium Jet has been designed to balance these four competing factors to achieve a
market-leading customer experience and commercial performance. We believe these four performance factors will
allow us to have access to a larger profit pool than our competitors by increasing both our revenue and our contribution
margin potential, which will in turn allow us in time to offer even more competitive customer pricing.


64
●
Although we believe that we will launch our service as a premium service, with prices comparable to a road taxi on a
per-mile basis, over the long-term we intend to decrease prices further to match the cost of private car ownership or
high-speed rail, which would make our B2C services accessible to a larger part of the population.
●
The major contributors to the low operating costs that help drive our attractive unit economics (relative to helicopters,
today’s VTOL aircraft) are our projections for low energy costs and low maintenance costs (fewer service hours and
part replacements per year). A Lilium Jet is expected to achieve 3 to 4 times lower operating costs on a per-seat, per-
mile basis as compared to a conventional passenger helicopter.
●
In addition, the scalability of our Lilium Jets allows us to convert our higher revenues directly into higher margins,
since many of our major costs, such as pilot cost or landing fees, are fixed per jet and are not a function of passenger
volume.
Extend our product portfolio following a comprehensive aircraft and technology roadmap
●
By leveraging the advantages of DEVT, we can extend our technology platform to larger capacity aircraft, faster
aircraft and longer-range aircraft. We also plan to develop an eVTOL jet with 16 seats.
Our Lilium Jet
The Lilium Jet is designed to meet the requirements of high-speed regional mobility. We have developed a next-generation
aircraft architecture based on the combination of DEVT with a fixed wing aircraft configuration. Our unmanned demonstrator,
the 5-seater Phoenix, has performed a significant number of aircraft tests, which demonstrate the performance benefits of our
DEVT technology. Our serial production aircraft, the Lilium Jet, will be a piloted 7-seater aircraft designed from the ground up
using the same underlying technologies as the Phoenix demonstrator and optimized for speed, range, passenger comfort, low
noise, safety, zero operating emissions and simplicity. We are designing the Lilium Jet in accordance with the strictest aerospace
standards and guidelines established by the relevant regulatory authorities, and consistent with the leading original equipment
manufacturers (“OEMs”) commercial aerospace programs.
Aircraft architecture
The jet architecture is based on a canard aircraft concept in which 36 electric ducted fans are distributed and embedded in
the rear of all four fixed wings, with a ratio of 1:2 between the canard (front) and main wings, respectively.
The propulsion system is based on electric ducted fans with a standard single compressor stage, which provides a
significant efficiency advantage over open rotor propulsion by reducing blade tip losses, guiding the flow more effectively and
removing nozzle exit swirl due to an installed stator. A ducted fan requires a roughly 10 - 15 times smaller surface area to lift the
same weight as an open propeller system, i.e. the footprint of such a configuration is smaller for the same weight of aircraft. As
a result, the Lilium Jet architecture allows us to build larger aircraft with more payload than open propeller systems (for a given
ground footprint and noise level), which in turn drives higher unit economics per jet within the same infrastructure. As such, we
are planning to develop a 16-seater eVTOL aircraft that would fit (wings plus propulsion) within existing vertiport infrastructure
without a significant increase in noise levels. This ability to scale is not possible with open rotors aircraft, since increasing
payload will always translate into either significant and non-mitigatable noise challenges, or increased rotor area and overall
span, thus exceeding standard helipads.
The Lilium Jet is a fixed wing aircraft, which makes it efficient in cruise flight, similar to commercial airliners. The two
main wings, two fixed canard (front) wings and the aerodynamic design of the fuselage contribute significantly to the overall
cruise efficiency, providing all the lift to support the weight of the aircraft during horizontal cruise flight. The power
consumption in cruise flight is projected to be around 10% of the hover flight power consumption. Due to the propulsion
system’s planned installation in the rear of the wing, the jet’s power consumption decreases by the inverse of the velocity
squared from hover flight to cruise flight, as the wings create more lift with increasing forward speed. Since the small-sized
engines will be embedded into the wings of the aircraft, the wetted area is significantly reduced, which minimizes drag further
during cruise flight.
The disadvantage of the ducted fans’ small footprint is that the Lilium Jet is expected to consume roughly twice the power
in hover flight than an eVTOL propeller based aircraft of a similar weight. However, since we plan to operate a regional shuttle
service, we aim for less than 60 seconds per mission in the pure hover phase and 30 – 60 minutes in cruise flight. As a result, we
estimate that the associated increase in energy consumption in hover flight is around 5% of the overall mission energy budget.
The Lilium Jet has an intrinsically simple design. With 36 single-stage electric engines, providing near-instantaneous
vectored thrust for controlled flight throughout the mission envelope - aerodynamic control surfaces, such as rudders, ailerons or
tails, are


65
obsolete. Our Lilium Jets also eliminate the variable blade pitch, oil circuits for hydraulics and gearboxes found on a traditional
aircraft or helicopters.
These design improvements contribute to the simplicity of the Lilium Jet, which we project will have less than 100,000
parts, or 30 times fewer than a traditional commercial jet aircraft. In addition to making the Lilium Jet simpler and faster to
design, fewer parts translate to less maintenance and lower operating costs.
Engines
The key to obtaining a quiet aircraft is the propulsion system. The proprietary Lilium Jet engine has been fully developed
in-house and using proprietary acoustic modelling software, simulated on high-performance computing clusters, and tested in
our in-house acoustic chamber to optimize the rotor, stator, and duct design.
The ducts themselves contain the noise naturally and avoid propagation in the far field, compared to the spherical
propagation of open rotors. The noise level itself is reduced further in the ducts by making use of acoustic liners, which absorb
the noise specifically generated by the fan’s blades as they pass the stator.
Our current predictions, based on real world in-house testing, are that the aircraft will have a total sound pressure level at
take-off of 60db(A) at a distance of 100 meters (330 feet), while effectively being inaudible from the ground during cruise
flight.
Another area of innovations in our engines is a light pivoting mechanism with custom actuator and variable nozzle coupled
to the engine angle. This enables optimal engine efficiency in cruise flight and hover flight.
Picture illustrates a cross-section of our ducted fan, embedded in the flap of the jet’s wing.
Battery System
The battery system is a critical component of the Lilium Jet.
Due to rapid improvements in energy density levels, estimated by Roland Berger as increasing approximately 7% per year,
the era of electric aviation is possible today. The battery system must fulfill several key requirements:
●
it must supply high energy density levels in order to achieve the required range;
●
it must supply the high-power density required for vertical takeoff and landing phases;
●
it should have fast charging capabilities to enable high infrastructure throughput; and
●
it should have a long lifetime or cycle rate.
The Lilium Jet’s engines are designed to be powered by a proprietary battery system which is being developed by us in
collaboration with third parties based on large format Lithium-ion pouch batteries. We have selected a battery cell chemistry
based on a silicon-dominant anode combined with conventional NMC (Nickel, Manganese and Cobalt) cathodes and
electrolytes. We believe this combination offers the best compromise of energy and power density at a low state of charge
(“SoC”, the level of an electric battery’s charge relative to its capacity), which determines the effective usable battery capacity.
The majority of battery cell production should be on standard lithium-ion pouch cell production lines. We have invested in a
leading battery technology supplier, securing exclusive rights for the eVTOL market for this chemistry.


66
Supplier and in-house measurements of the pouch cells have yielded nominal energy density levels of 330 watt-hour per
kilogram, which is projected to enable a physical aircraft range of 155 miles (our target for entry into service). This prediction is
based on our testing and simulation of engine efficiency as well as on well-known and standard prediction methods for aircraft
design for batteries, engines, motors, and other components of the aircraft. We anticipate energy density levels and power levels
at low SoC to further improve which will improve the operating range of our Lilium Jet as these improvements occur.
We anticipate that the battery should provide a sufficient cycle life (over 800 standard charge/ discharge cycles measured
until 80% capacity). We are continuing to test and optimize the cycle life of the prototype cell we are designing for the Lilium
Jet. In operations, we intend to replace the battery 2 – 3 times a year given the projected number of flight hours during the
operation of an aircraft within passenger shuttle networks. Cost is another key factor within the operating economics of our
Lilium Jet. In terms of technology and production, our cells are an evolution from today’s automotive batteries, but will be
produced at a premium over automotive batteries in order to meet our stricter aerospace safety and performance requirements.
We are targeting a battery system to be capable of fast charge (80% charge in 15 minutes, full charge within 30 minutes),
which is key to enable smooth operations and quick turnovers. We are working with leading suppliers for charging technology
using equipment based on chargers for the electric trucking industry.
Our battery system design consists of multiple independent packs each built up of multiple modules, creating significant
redundancy across the energy system as a whole. We are designing the battery casing to protect against the effects of multiple-
cell thermal runaway. When thermal runaway occurs in a module, it needs to be contained within the module, with the
remaining modules and packs remaining unaffected to supply enough power and energy for continuous safe flight and landing.
We have successfully validated an early version of a battery system in the Phoenix technology demonstrator, incorporating
many of the technologies of our envisioned and certifiable series solution. We continue to conduct technology development and
demonstrations to determine the most appropriate technology for the Lilium Jet. The challenges and risks intrinsic in refining
our battery system may take longer or be more difficult or costly than we anticipate. The full battery and energy management
system will be certified as a part of the aircraft certification process and will undergo rigorous testing to prove compliance with
the requirements set by the authorities. We are developing the battery pack design and energy management in-house as part of
our core technology, while we work with third parties on the design of the battery cells and some components of the energy
management system.
Flight Physics and Flight Control Systems
The Lilium Jet’s 36 engines are mounted on individually controllable flaps, with six engines on each canard and 12 engines
on each wing. The flaps are not only used for lift generation during vertical take-off and landing, and thrust generation in cruise,
but also to control each axis of the jet via thrust vectoring throughout the entire flight. The flaps make the flight control system
efficient and, due to the amount of thrust required for vertical take-off, leads to high control authority for all the different flight
phases. The flaps, which only receive two signals (engine speed and flap angle), are the only actuators required by the Flight
Control System and therefore avoid traditional control surfaces like ailerons, elevators, or rudders. For vertical take-off and
landing, the flaps are all pointed downwards in a vertical position and after approximately ten seconds of hover flight, when the
jet reaches the initial altitude, they slowly transition into a horizontal position and thereby accelerate the aircraft forward. In
cruise flight, all the aerodynamic lift is generated by the wings (including the flaps) and the main body. During landing, the flaps
transition back into the vertical position.
Having 36 flaps makes the flight control system highly redundant. If a flap fails, the flight control system’s health
monitoring detects the failed flap and redistributes the thrust to stabilize the jet, avoiding large altitude transients. Another
advantage of the design is that air is drawn in over the wing and creating a ‘high lift’ system at low speeds, which allows the jet
to fly efficiently at low forward speeds required for final approaches and with less than half of the power consumption required
in hover flight.
We have designed in-house all the core elements of our flight control system, the flight control laws and health management
algorithms. We have developed and tested the flight control software on the flight dynamics model in simulations, allowing us
to predict and tune how the jet will behave in flight test. This simulation-based development approach, including our flight
dynamics model, also called a ‘Digital Twin’ of our aircraft, incorporates the full aerodynamic data bank, the engine deck,
battery and power models and dynamic models for all actuators and sensors. The ‘Digital Twin’ allows us to assess the jet’s
performance long before flight testing, which enables us to make critical decisions within days compared to weeks of real-life
testing.
The ‘Digital Twin’ flight dynamics model is also used in a series of in-house-developed simulators. Some of these
simulators feature a virtual and mixed reality interface, which are head mounted displays, that are used for pilot assessments on
handling qualities, cockpit layout or procedures.
In addition to simulations on the ‘Digital Twin’, we are running extensive test campaigns on our Phoenix technology
demonstrator as well as wind tunnel tests, the results of which will be correlated into our simulation models.


67
Other simulators are used for remote pilot training as part of the flight testing for our Phoenix technology demonstrator.
We have also developed and are continuously improving an integrated software development and verification framework
that fully utilizes automation and enables the execution of full-code-coverage software testing in a short time. This framework is
subject to EASA audits and will be fully DO-178C compliant, to enable the development of safety critical DAL-A flight
software.
We consider our flight dynamics model and simulators, as well as our software development framework, to be important
trade secrets given the high degree of proprietary knowledge which has been generated over the past five years and specifically
tailored for our Lilium Jet configuration.
Safety and Performance
The safety, performance, and reliability of our Lilium Jets, as well as the credibility of eVTOL industry generally, will be
key factors in achieving customer acceptance of RAM.
We design all systems in accordance with the EASA certification requirements (and expected FAA certification
requirements), which demand an aircraft-level safety standard of not more than 10E-9 failure conditions with catastrophic effect
per flight hour. This corresponds to a maximum of one failure condition with catastrophic effect within every one billion flight
hours, which is the same safety level applied to large commercial jets such as the Boeing 777 or the Airbus A350. Similar to
airliners, the Lilium Jet is also designed against the criterion of ‘no single failure resulting in catastrophic effect’, a standard
which is typically not applicable to traditional VTOL aircraft such as helicopters. We verify all safety measures in accordance
with the means of compliance agreed with the regulating authorities.
We plan to achieve our safety standards in many cases through systems redundancy. For example, the Lilium Jet can lose a
battery pack or multiple engines and still implement a vertical landing because the Lilium Jet has 12 battery packs that work in
parallel to supply the required power, as well as 36 independent ducted fan engines. The engines can contain blade-loss and
other rotor failures within the engine ducts without damaging parts of the airframe. All avionics, engine controllers, battery
management and other complex electronics are based on dissimilar and redundant architectures.
The aircraft will be initially certified for Visual Flight Rule conditions, which means that a pilot operates an aircraft in
weather conditions generally clear enough to allow the pilot to see where the aircraft is going. We intend to apply to extend our
certification to Instrument Flight Rules all-weather capabilities soon after launch, although no assurances can be given as to
timing.
On February 28, 2020, our Phoenix technology demonstrator was damaged in a fire while undergoing maintenance,
including the installation of battery modules. As aerospace industry best practice, we invited an independent incident
investigator to lead the investigation, which was completed in June 2020. The result of the investigation identified that the most
likely cause of the fire was a thermal runaway. We have carried various lessons forward by redesigning the individual battery
modules and the energy system, as well as the assembly process, in our new technology demonstrator. The energy system
involved in this incident and used in our technology demonstrators is not the same system that we intend to use for Type
Certification or serial production.
Description of our Proprietary Technology and Intellectual Property
Our success depends in part upon our ability to secure and protect our core technology and intellectual property. To
establish and protect our proprietary rights, we rely on a combination of intellectual property rights (patents, trademarks,
copyrights, and trade secrets, including know-how and expertise) and contracts (license agreements, confidentiality, and non-
disclosure agreements with third parties, employee and contractor disclosure and invention assignment agreements, and other
similar contractual rights). We control access to and use of our proprietary technology and other confidential information
through various means, including physical access control systems, network security and contractual protections with employees,
contractors, and partners. We also attempt to mitigate the risk of intellectual property conflicts by regularly assessing and
avoiding any overlap of our innovative aircraft concepts, technology and components with third party patents and other
proprietary assets.
We have two granted U.S. patents covering the multi-wing aircraft architecture engine arrangement, and four additional
pending German patent applications related to the same aircraft architecture. Between February 19, 2021 and October 5, 2021,
we filed an additional 39 patent applications with the European Patent Office, which can be extended into other jurisdictions. To
protect the appearance of the Lilium Jet, two sets of design patents were filed. Our patents and patent applications cover
essential differentiated technology innovations, such as the aircraft’s general architecture, avionics, propulsion system, energy
storage system, safety, software, and flight control systems. Patent filings across the portfolio are intended to protect our key
inventions in the Lilium Jet and its sub-systems.


68
We regularly review our development efforts to assess the existence and patentability of new inventions, and we plan to file
additional patent applications when we determine it would benefit our business to do so.
Research and Development
Our research and development expenses for the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2020 were €38.1 million and
€90.3 million, respectively, and €58.8 million for the six months ended June 30, 2021. Our research and development expenses
represented a significant percentage of our operating expenses for the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2020 and for the six
months ended June 30, 2021, none of which have been capitalized. For more information about our research and development
expenses and our capital expenditures over the past two years, and for the six months ended June 30, 2021, as well as our
current capital expenditure plan and how we intend to finance our research and development expenses and our capital
expenditures, see “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations —Liquidity and
Capital Resources— Cash Flows” and “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of
Operations — Liquidity and Capital Resources.”
Production Facilities and Manufacturing Strategy
We have a 100,000 square foot prototype production facility near the Special Airport Oberpfaffenhofen in Munich,
Germany. At this site, we have developed and built our current technology demonstrator, and we plan to develop and install the
manufacturing facilities for series production. Our current prototype capability covers all aspects of flying and non-flying
technology demonstrators. We have established a tech lab for fast prototype manufacturing, including a computer numerical
control machine shop, metrology lab, special processes testing facilities and a 3D-print shop. We have also installed a composite
center to provide a final assembly line pre-assembly capability.
We intend to commence initial production of our conforming serial aircraft prototypes at the Munich production facility in
2022 through the expansion and further development of our existing 100,000 square foot prototype production facility, though
timing may depend on factors outside our control. We plan to focus our in-house production on our core technologies, final
aircraft assembly and testing. We are collaborating with leading, aerospace-approved Tier 1 suppliers for the remaining aircraft
components and parts. “Tier 1 suppliers” are typically manufacturers of major components or systems that receive parts or
subassemblies from the Tier 2 supply chain and then directly provide those parts to OEMs. Tier 1 suppliers are themselves
certified by the certification authorities to manufacture critical components and are the most important participants within the
aerospace industry supply chain.
We are in contract discussions with several Tier 1 aerospace companies for avionics and flight control system, electric
motors, the electrical wiring and interconnect system, seats and interiors as well as tires and landing gear. In November 2020,
we signed a supply agreement with Toray Industries, the world’s leading manufacturer of carbon fiber, for the supply of higher
performance carbon fiber composite. Toray Industries is recognized as a global leader in aerospace materials. In February 2021,
we signed a supply agreement with Aciturri Aeronáutica, a leading global manufacturer of aerostructures and aero engine
components, to provide the fuselage, wings and canards for our Lilium Jet. In June 2021, we signed a supply agreement with
Honeywell Aerospace (a leading technology company providing aerospace products and services) for the development, design
and manufacture of our avionics system. We intend to work with established, Tier 1 companies to ensure that proper aerospace
grade quality systems are established. In addition, on March 28, 2021, we entered into a non-cancelable purchase obligation for
a Palantir Foundry cloud subscription (which provides advanced data analytics capability), including support services, updates
and related professional services, with Palantir for $50.0 million payable in increasing annual installments over five years.
By the end of 2022, we intend to commence low-volume production of our conforming serial aircraft prototypes for ground
testing, flight testing and Type Certification. Our goal is achieving annual production capacity of 400 jets in 2026, beyond
which we intend to scale further through manufacturing partners. To keep the initial investment low and production flexible, we
plan to use a balanced approach of automation for high volume operations and simple technology for aircraft assembly.
We have also started to develop a blueprint for a larger scale factory with an annual capacity of at least 1,000 jets, which we
intend to roll out with manufacturing and supply chain parties in due course depending on the ramp-up of our service. The
global deployment of our high-volume factory units is planned to begin well in advance of reaching full capacity in our German
factory. For this phase, we intend to work with experienced aerospace or automotive manufacturers and key suppliers to scale a
‘capex-light’ manufacturing strategy. Our goal is to enter strong strategic relationships to ramp up series manufacturing globally,
using the scalable production blueprint developed during construction of our Munich facility.


69
Aircraft Program
Our serial aircraft certification application was accepted by EASA and FAA in 2018. From 2019, following publication by
EASA of the design requirements we must satisfy (as further discussed below under “— Regulation — Aircraft Certification”),
we had sufficient clarity on the eventual certification requirements to move ahead with our serial aircraft development program.
Our development program follows the rigorous, industry-standard process with maturity gates in each phase following a
typical ‘V-model’ Validation and Verification process. This industry-standard process means that requirements are validated
down to the jet’s component levels. Then, through the design, build and test phases, our final product is verified with a program
of analysis, ground and flight testing, pre-agreed with our EASA and FAA regulators to ensure that these requirements have
been satisfied and can be demonstrated to the regulators’ satisfaction. Our program builds upon the extensive technology
development work undertaken since 2015, including several generations of demonstrator aircraft and related flight testing.
We are investing significant focus and efforts into the preliminary design phase to mature the technology through extensive
testing and prototyping. We plan to leverage our supply chain’s capabilities both for the development program and to facilitate a
rapid transition into volume production once we have received Type Certification. We are also working to confirm the
airworthiness demonstration requirements to be agreed with the EASA and FAA regulators, which will help us to de-risk our
program up-front. We plan to start an extensive ground and flight test campaign during 2022, which will continue until the Type
Certification of our Lilium Jet, which we expect to receive in 2024.
Commercial and Business Operations
Pricing
Our pricing model for our B2C People Network assumes an average price per mile which varies with the distance of the
trip, such that the price per mile will decrease as the trip length increases. We plan to launch a premium service with an average
price per mile comparable to a typical taxi service. In the medium-term, we intend to reduce our pricing further, which we
believe will result in higher passenger demand. In the longer term, larger aircraft types will enable us to further decrease pricing,
bringing it in line with the price of high-speed rail.
Vertiports
We intend to work with infrastructure developers and operators to build and operate our vertiports. In Florida, our target is
for the initial network to comprise 14 vertiports across the major urban centers in southern and central Florida, creating a 2,000-
mile network of high-speed connectivity, equivalent to the entire high-speed rail network of some countries. All our networks
are intended to be built around the principle of working with other companies that will develop, own and, for the most part,
operate the infrastructure. Our business model contemplates that we will work with infrastructure developers to establish new
vertiports or retrofit existing aerodromes to be fit-for-purpose, in which we plan to reimburse them for the development costs
through a combination of lease payments and activity-based fees. We anticipate that some of the vertiports in our proposed
network will be exclusive to Lilium, while others, predominantly those developed by public institutions, will be provided on a
non-exclusive basis for use by Lilium. When developing our vertiports, we plan to work with landowners, who can provide
access to buildings (such as parking garages, vacant lots, and commercial loading depots); infrastructure developers, who will
provide financing, permits, and building the infrastructure; and ground service providers, who will work with our team to
operate the facilities and ensure the safe and comfortable operation of our services for our passengers and the rapid turnaround
of our passenger and good services.
We intend to provide our own customer service staff at vertiports to maintain the highest service quality, and we mainly
intend to outsource ground operations, such as security, cleaning, refreshments and baggage handling, with careful monitoring
of key customer touchpoints, such as front desk staff, boarding staff, and customer service representatives.


70
Our planned vertiports are based on a modular scalable design allowing for customization for vertiports of different sizes,
consisting of four modules:
In our standard vertiport configuration, as indicated in the example graphic above, our vertiports are intended to include
end-to-end charging posts at each parking bay. Our charging infrastructure on a pad with 7 parking positions will be designed to
accommodate up to a total of 20 charging sessions per hour, with 5 – 30 minute sessions per charge.
We expect to tailor our vertiports to the environments available to us at locations that are convenient for our customers.
Tavistock Vertiports
In November 2020, we signed an agreement with infrastructure development company Tavistock Acquisitions, LLC, to
build a vertiport in Tavistock’s upscale mixed-use community of Lake Nona, Florida, near to Orlando International Airport
(MCO) and a short distance from Orlando’s many attractions, including Walt Disney World and Universal Orlando Resort.
Locating our vertiports near to these popular destinations will allow us to establish a shuttle service with the cities of Tampa, St.
Petersburg and West Palm Beach. When launched in 2024, the Lake Nona vertiport is intended to be one of the first in a network
of vertiports connecting popular destinations and airports throughout Florida.
Ferrovial Vertiports
We have entered into an agreement with global infrastructure developer and operator Ferrovial setting out a framework to
build a network of at least 10 vertiports across Florida. Ferrovial intends to develop and operate these vertiports exclusively for
Lilium, enabling a rollout of high-speed RAM starting in 2024. Furthermore, with Ferrovial conducting ground operations at
these sites, we would have an operations leader with significant experience in aviation operations, with more than twenty years
investing, developing and operating in the airport sector, including managing airports such as Heathrow in London.
European Vertiport Opportunities
We have signed preliminary indications of interest with airport operators in Germany and the Netherlands to conduct
scoping studies, exploring the business case for building vertiports across Europe.
Strategic Commercial Collaboration
On July 31, 2021, we executed a term sheet in which we agreed to enter into negotiations with Brazilian airline Azul S.A.
and Azul Linhas Aereas Brasileiras S.A. (collectively, “Azul”) to establish a strategic collaboration whereby Azul is expected to
commit to purchase from us 220 Lilium Jets for an aggregate value of up to $1.0 billion, with anticipated delivery to commence
in 2025. As part of the anticipated agreement, we would provide an aircraft health monitoring platform to assist in the
maintenance of the Lilium Jets sold to Azul, and Azul would operate the Lilium Jets. In addition, Azul would assist us in
pursuing type certification of the Lilium Jet in Brazil and by marketing the service in Brazil, and the parties expect to jointly
launch a co-branded network in Brazil using Lilium Jets, subject to obtaining the requisite type certification for the Lilium Jet
from the applicable regulatory authorities. Both parties would also support the setup of a local vertiport network in Brazil. The
parties have further agreed to work exclusively with one another with respect to the establishment of eVTOL products or
services in Brazil until the earlier of the execution and delivery of definitive agreements or the expiration of the term sheet,
subject to earlier termination for certain non-performance events.
In consideration of the strategic commercial collaboration, we agreed to use all efforts to grant to Azul warrants to purchase
up to 8,000,000 Class A Shares at an exercise price of €0.12 a share, consisting of (i) warrants to purchase 1,800,000 Class A
Shares, which


71
warrants were issued to Azul on a fully vested basis on October 22, 2021, and (ii) subject to the execution of definitive
agreements, warrants to purchase up to an additional 6,200,000 Class A Shares, which are expected to vest in three tranches.
Completion of the strategic collaboration and the final commercial terms thereof are subject to further negotiation and
execution of definitive agreements, and the operation of a joint eVTOL service in Brazil is subject to obtaining the requisite type
certification for the Lilium Jet. There can be no assurance that definitive agreements for the contemplated strategic collaboration
with Azul will be entered into on the anticipated timeline or at all or that the final commercial terms for the proposed
collaboration with Azul will not differ, including materially, from the terms currently contemplated by the parties.
Digital platforms and user interface
Our digital platforms will provide the differentiating integration between our Lilium Jets and our vertiports, delivering a
high level of efficiency and effectiveness for both staff and customers. The digital platforms will contain a broad range of our
proprietary intellectual property, enabling us to efficiently operate a large fleet. We are building a bespoke digital platform
providing a seamless and integrated experience for our customers and passengers in each of our operations. Our online booking
channels will help customers find suitable flights, make reservations, select related travel products (from Lilium and our
partners) and collect necessary passenger information.
The digital platforms are planned to support passengers throughout their entire travel journey, both before and on the date of
travel. These support services include relevant flight status information, guides to our vertiports and flying in the Lilium Jet. Our
mobile app is planned to also enable passengers to access our vertiports and support them through pre-flight activities (such as
baggage and security), assist them with last minute amendments as well as send boarding and seating notifications.
Behind the scenes, the digital platforms are planned to enable our airline operations to plan and operate our flight schedule
and growing fleet. Alongside our Standard Operating Procedures, the digital platforms will be designed to meet the regulatory
requirements and obligations for safe operations under our airline operating licenses. These requirements include functionality
for flight planning and routing, energy management as well as managing and rostering pilots. On the day of flight, the digital
platforms are intended to provide functionality for pilot briefing, flight dispatch, flight operations, disruption management and
integration with the Lilium Jet (for uploading mission and pilot instructions, and downloading deep data on the location, status
and health of each individual jet).
The digital platforms are planned to also deliver functionality for maintaining our fleet and ensuring their ongoing
airworthiness, including scheduling and tracking of periodic planned maintenance, recording and resolving defects with
connection to our parts, supply, procurement and logistics departments to ensure we have a managed supply of spare and
replacement parts to minimize aircraft down time.
Within our vertiports, the digital platforms are planned to provide functionality to prepare aircraft for their next mission,
ground operations and passenger operations, including bespoke systems for coordinating and monitoring the rapid charging of a
jet’s batteries, with controlled temperature regulation for optimal throughput and battery health and longevity. The digital
platforms are planned to support the companies to whom we outsource our ground operations to coordinate the activities needed
to turn around our Lilium Jets for their next mission. For example, cleaning of the jet, loading and unloading of baggage, slot
and gate management, and assisting passengers with special needs.
Pilot Sourcing and Training
We have entered into a framework services agreement with Lufthansa Aviation Training to source and train our pilots.
Under the first phase of the program, we intend to collaborate on the creation of a Lilium-specific rating training course for
qualified commercial pilots. We intend to design the training to leverage technologies including mixed and virtual reality,
facilitating worldwide deployment of the course. As a leading European airline training organization, Lufthansa Aviation
Training has extensive experience in developing pilot competencies, which we believe will complement our own expertise in
aircraft design.
Regulation
The Lilium Jet and our operations are designed to comply with existing regulations, policies, and procedures of the relevant
aviation authorities, although we note for the avoidance of doubt that our business model has yet to be tested or regulatorily
approved. In the first years of service and as long as no “new” or changed regulatory framework is available and applicable, the
Lilium Jet will operate under the existing aviation regulatory framework using conventional means of navigation and
communication, facilitated by the on-board pilot.


72
We are required to comply with the safety regulations for the jet itself in addition to all operational aspects such as flight
operations, crew training and the vertiport requirements. While some adaptations are required to existing regulations, we believe
that the similarity of our operations to existing services (including piloted helicopters and other small aircraft) could mean that a
close-to-comprehensive set of rules already exists.
Aircraft Certification
We are designing and producing the Lilium Jet to industry aeronautical standards and applicable regulatory requirements.
For international certification, the first airworthiness authority we approached is EASA. We applied for EASA Type
Certification in 2017 and for concurrent FAA Type Certification validation through provisions provided by the bilateral
agreement between the European Union (“EU”) and the U.S authorities in 2018. The FAA will reserve the right to verify
compliance to their airworthiness requirements, but a maximum of regulatory alignment is being pursued. At the beginning of
2018, both authorities accepted our application for certification and we have been in frequent interaction with both authorities
since then.
In July 2019, EASA published a novel set of rules for the certification of eVTOL aircraft, “Special Conditions for Small-
Category VTOL Aircraft” (“SC-VTOL”), applicable to aircraft with a maximum of 9 passenger seats and a maximum
certificated take-off mass of 3,175kg or less. We intend that the Lilium Jet will be certified under SC-VTOL.
In relation to the FAA certification process, we intend that the Lilium Jet will be certified under the recently reformed
“Part 23 - Airworthiness Standards: Normal Category Airplanes”, modified by Special Conditions to address the novelties of e-
VTOL aircraft.
General and technical familiarization activities have been performed to engage EASA and FAA in the development of the
Lilium Jet. In December 2020, EASA issued the initial CRI A01 for the Lilium Jet. CRI A01 is the Type Certification basis for
SC-VTOL which is the equivalent to the G-1 issue paper from the FAA. This represents a significant milestone in the
certification process since it provides a roadmap of the tests and metrics that will be relevant for full Type Certification of the
Lilium Jet. Initial aircraft and system certification plans have been submitted.
A detailed certification program including all the means of compliance will be further defined over the course of 2021. The
certification program sets the stage for the design and testing process. After successful verification by EASA, the Lilium Jet will
receive Type Certification in accordance with stated regulatory standards, which certifies compliance to the applicable
airworthiness standards for the Lilium Jet.
Once certified by EASA and the FAA, we expect that the Lilium Jet Type Certification will be recognized by national civil
aviation authorities around the world, since many countries’ national civil aviation authorities have bilateral agreements,
working arrangements or other collaboration activities with EASA or FAA (examples may, but are not guaranteed to include,
India, Russia, and certain countries within the Middle East, South East Asia and major parts of Central and South America). As
a result, we believe that our Lilium Jet will be allowed to operate in any country that recognizes and accepts the EASA and FAA
regulatory standards (even though we cannot assure that this will be the case), which would potentially enable us global market
access. We cannot assure you that regulatory authorities in any other country will accept these standards; however, airlines
regularly rely on bilateral agreements to operate internationally.
We also initiated the process to obtain a Design Organization Approval (“DOA”) issued by the EASA for the Lilium Jet’s
design and a Production Organization Approval (“POA”) issued by the responsible national civil aviation authority of Germany
for the Lilium Jet’s manufacture. The DOA program has started with the Type Certification application in 2017. We have
prepared and submitted several DOA processes for engineering and airworthiness certification to EASA for the initial
investigation and desk audit. We started process roll-out, training and proper application in 2020. We intend to perform the first
comprehensive set of EASA on-site audits in the second half of 2021. The DOA approval program takes place in parallel with
the Lilium Jet Type Certification activities.
The POA program has started with the application to the airworthiness authorities in May 2020. Most of the required
processes and regulations have been filed with the German Federal Aviation Office (Luftfahrt-Bundesamt (LBA)) for review,
which is planning audits in 2022. We already have fast prototyping capabilities for 80 core processes in place. When we receive
our DOA, we expect to receive our POA thereafter, which is the final step before receiving our Type Certification.
Operations
We intend that the Lilium Jet will be operated by a fully-fledged airline (as defined, a holder of an Air Operator Certificate
(“AOC”)). AOCs are granted by the relevant authority in each jurisdiction, typically a national civil aviation authority. The
primary objective of airline certification is to ensure that operations are safe and compliant with regulation.


73
In the EU, commercial air transport operators apply for an AOC on the basis of the Commission Regulation (EU) No
965/2012, which outlines technical requirements and administrative procedures for airline certification. EASA is currently
leading a comprehensive rule-making exercise which will allow commercial passenger operations for manned eVTOL aircraft in
the European airspace. We have been actively participating in the rule-making process, which will be directly applicable in all
27 EU Member States.
In the U.S., commercial operators of an aircraft with a limited passenger-seating configuration and payload are typically
subject to FAA Part 135 certification and U.S. Department of Transportation authority. This certification has been designed to
accommodate operations using small airplanes or helicopters.
Both in Europe and in the U.S., we intend to collaborate with local AOC holders for our eVTOL operations, and we are in
discussions with several major players in both geographies.
The Lilium Jet will be flown by an on-board pilot holding a commercial pilot license. For initial operations, pilots will be
trained in a similar way to traditional airlines. During the training process, we plan to utilize, to the greatest extent possible, new
virtual and mixed reality technologies in order to provide a more realistic training experience for the pilots. A future, more
simplified pilot license, which takes into consideration the high degree of aircraft automation and the full range of its
capabilities, will ideally be developed and utilized to train air crew to operate the Lilium Jet and other eVTOL designs.
The Lilium Jet initially will operate at aerodromes certified on the basis of existing approval processes and designed to
comply with international and local heliport design regulations.
Our Marketing
Our marketing strategy is intended to build industry and consumer readiness for our technology and service. Short term, we
plan to develop industry credibility and recruiting success by establishing Lilium as a front-runner in electric aerospace. Longer
term, we plan to build affinity by developing a purpose-based product experience that will be rooted in social and environmental
responsibility and customer centricity; we believe that we will articulate our areas of value and differentiation through
educational and customer outreach campaigns. We intend to attract, retain and scale customers in preparation for our initial
commercial launch by focusing on the customer journey, being transparent and factual about our technological and commercial
progress and the overall benefits of our service to society and the environment. Our marketing strategy will be supported
through marketing campaigns on our website, through content marketing channels, social media platforms, and thought
leadership arenas. Communications will be a critical part of our strategy, as we clearly explain our business case and
commercial operating model through interviews, podcasts, social media posts and engagement, press releases and events to
build awareness and positive perception.
Competition
We believe that our primary competitors for our eVTOL services are ground-based mobility solutions, other eVTOL players
and local and regional incumbent aircraft charter services.
Amongst the eVTOL companies, we consider Joby Aviation and Archer as our two key competitors. Both California-based
companies are developing differing eVTOL aircraft with electric-powered tilt rotors that will have lower payload than our
Lilium Jet (announced capacity of 5 seats, including the pilot) and a focus on shorter routes, with an average trip length
approximately 25 miles. Joby Aviation has reported a projected average range of 150 miles on a single charge, and Archer has
reported a projected range of 60 miles at 150 miles per hour.
Capital Resources and Liquidity Requirements
Since our founding, we have relied on external financing for our research and development activities, as well as to the
organizational processes and resources required for these activities. Prior to the Business Combination we had raised
approximately $375 million from our investors through preferred share and convertible loan issuances. Pursuant to the Business
Combination and related PIPE Investment we received approximately $584 million (€493 million) in gross proceeds. Given our
development stage and operating structure, most of our expenses to date are tied to headcount. We expect to continue to incur
significant expenses in the foreseeable future, and we expect our cash burn to increase in connection with our ongoing activities,
particularly for completing the Type Certification process, building our serial production factory, launching commercial
operations and ensuring all infrastructure and talent resources are in place. In addition, we expect to incur additional costs
associated with operating as a U.S. public company.
We are subject to risks related to the development and commercialization of our Lilium Jets and our services, as further
discussed in “Risk Factors”, and we may encounter unforeseen expenses, difficulties, complications, delays and other unknown
factors that may


74
adversely affect our business. We estimate that we will need to obtain additional financing to fund our future operations as we
grow our production capabilities, expand into a global business and establish the right footprint for our customer services and
infrastructure. Furthermore, our operating plans may change in the future, and we may need additional funds to meet operational
needs and capital requirements associated with such operating plans.
If our cash resources, including the proceeds of the Business Combination and the PIPE Financing, are insufficient to
finance our future cash requirements, we will need to finance our future cash needs through a combination of public or private
equity offerings, debt financings, partnerships or grant funding, which may require certain covenants or restrictions on our
business.
Material Litigation
We may be subject to various claims, lawsuits and other legal and administrative proceedings arising in the ordinary course
of business. Some of these claims, lawsuits and other proceedings may involve highly complex issues that are subject to
substantial uncertainties, and could result in damages, fines, penalties, non-monetary sanctions or relief. However, we do not
consider any such claims, lawsuits or proceedings that are currently pending, individually or in the aggregate, to be material to
our business or likely to result in a material adverse effect on our future operating results, financial condition or cash flows.
Employees and Consultants
We believe that our employees are crucial to the success of our business, which depends on our human capital and a strong
leadership team. We aim to attract, retain and develop staff with the skills, experience and potential necessary to implement our
growth strategy. Our human capital resources objectives include identifying, recruiting, retaining, incentivizing and integrating
our existing and new employees. As of December 31, 2020, we had 593 employees and 95 full or part time contractors. As of
September 23, 2021, we had 922 employees, comprising internal employees as well as external contractors. Many of our
employees and contractors have had prior experience working for a wide variety of reputed aerospace, airline, jet design,
aerospace and customer service organizations. We have not experienced any work stoppages, and we consider our relationship
with our employees to be good. None of our employees is represented by a labor union or covered by collective bargaining
agreements.
Property
Our operations are based at a leased premise in Munich, Germany, and we have leased office space in Zurich, Switzerland
and London, England. We believe that such facilities meet our current and anticipated needs for the near term.


75
MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion and analysis provides information that our management believes is relevant to an assessment and
understanding of Lilium’s consolidated results of operations and financial condition. The discussion should be read together
with “Selected Historical Financial and Operating Data,” the historical audited annual statements for the years ended
December 31, 2020 and 2019 and the related notes that are included elsewhere in this prospectus, and the historical unaudited
interim statements for the six months ended June 30, 2021 and 2020, and the related notes that are included elsewhere in this
prospectus. The following discussion is based on the financial information of Lilium GmbH prepared in accordance with the
International Financial Reporting Standards (“IFRS”) as issued by the International Accounting Standards Board (“IASB”)
and related interpretations issued by the IFRS Interpretations Committee. Some of the information contained in this discussion
and analysis or set forth elsewhere in this prospectus, including information with respect to our plans and strategy for our
business, includes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. You should review the sections titled “Risk
Factors” and “Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements” for a discussion of important factors that could
cause actual results to differ materially from the results described in or implied by the forward-looking statements contained in
the following discussion and analysis. Our historical results are not necessarily indicative of the results that may be expected for
any period in the future.
Overview
We are a next-generation transportation company focused on developing an eVTOL aircraft for use in a new type of high-
speed air transport system for people and goods – one that would offer increased connectivity for communities around the world
as well as generate time savings to travelers, would be accessible from homes and workplaces, be affordable for a large part of
the population, and be more environmentally friendly than current air transportation.
We are developing the Lilium Jet, a fully electric, 7-seater jet aircraft that will take-off and land vertically with very low
noise. Our objective is for the Lilium Jet to be the basis for sustainable, high-speed air shuttle networks that will connect
communities within a region directly with one another. We believe such a network will require less infrastructure than
traditional airports or railway lines and a fully electric jet aircraft would produce minimal operating emissions. We expect our
Lilium Jets to generate 0.3 ounces CO2 of operating emissions per passenger mile, which is approximately 97% less when
compared to commercial aviation. A single trip might save hours for a traveler; in aggregate, these networks could save our
societies millions of travel hours — and significant carbon emissions — each year.
Currently, our development efforts are focused on the Lilium Jet, including our ongoing certification process with EASA
and FAA, and building out our manufacturing capacity to produce the Lilium Jet. We plan to rely on two business models. First,
we plan to use the Lilium Jet within regional passenger shuttle networks, initially in the U.S. and Europe, that we intend to
create and operate with third parties. Second, we plan to provide a turnkey enterprise solution by leasing fleets of Lilium Jets
directly to governments and enterprise customers.
We believe that our aerospace team is one of the most capable in the eVTOL sector. Collectively, they have held
instrumental roles in the delivery of the Airbus A350 XWB, Airbus A380, Airbus A320, the Gulfstream G-650 jet engine, the
Eurofighter Typhoon and the Harrier jet. They are supported by approximately 400 aerospace engineers and a business team
with a strong track record in building successful companies in Silicon Valley and Europe. In addition to our Co-Founder and
Chief Executive Officer, Daniel Wiegand, our Board includes our Chairman, Dr. Thomas Enders, as well as Henri Courpron,
Barry Engle, David Neeleman, Margaret M. Smyth, Gabrielle Toledano, David Wallerstein and Niklas Zennström.
Our Business Plan and Prospects
The specifications for the Lilium Jet under development call for the aircraft to be able to cruise at 175 mph in 10,000 feet
for up to 155 miles and to have 7 seats (one for the pilot) or 210 cubic feet of cargo space representing 50% more (passenger)
capacity than an open propeller eVTOL architecture would have at comparable noise levels. We believe the combination of
longer average trip lengths and higher passenger capacity per jet (thus a higher load factor) will provide greater time savings to
customers, more competitive pricing, and superior unit economics as compared to open propeller eVTOL architecture. We have
applied for Type Certification with the EASA in 2017 and for concurrent Type Certification with the FAA in 2018. Receiving a
Type Certificate in accordance with stated regulatory standards will certify compliance to the applicable airworthiness standards
for the Lilium Jet, which is a necessary prerequisite to undertaking commercial operations. In 2020, the Lilium Jet received
CRI-A01 certification basis from EASA (similar to the G-1 from the FAA), setting forth a set of performance requirements we
have agreed with the regulators for the Lilium Jet. We are progressing towards a targeted Type Certification in 2024, which
would position us as one of the first companies to enter the eVTOL market. See the section titled “Business of Lilium and
Certain Information About Lilium.”


76
We plan to create and operate, with commercial operators, high-speed regional air networks that utilize our aircraft and
deploy these for intercity passenger mobility (B2C) as well as turnkey enterprise solutions to governments and companies
(B2B). To date, we have not generated any revenue from our core operations as we continue to develop our eVTOL Jets, and do
not anticipate generating material revenue until we reach commercialization.
Since our inception in 2016, we have been primarily engaged in research and development of eVTOL aircraft and have 
consequently incurred significant operating losses. Our operating losses were €63.5 million and €188.4 million for the years 
ended December 31, 2019 and 2020, respectively, and €43.5 million and €110.5 million for the six months ended June 30, 2020 
and 2021, respectively. We expect to continue to incur substantial losses during 2021 and through 2024.  Our consolidated 
financial statements for the year ended December 31, 2020 and for the six months ended June 30, 2021 have been prepared on a 
basis that assumes we will continue as a going concern, as described in the notes to our consolidated financial statements 
included elsewhere in this prospectus.
Our research and development expenses for the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2020 were €38.1 million and €90.3
million, respectively, and were €27.6 million and €58.8 million for the six months ended June 30, 2020 and 2021 respectively.
Our research and development expenses represented a significant percentage of our operating expenses for the years ended
December 31, 2019 and 2020 as well as the six months ended June 30, 2020 and 2021, none of which have been capitalized.
In 2019 and 2020, we invested €4.8 million and €8.9 million, respectively, and for the six months ended June 30, 2020 and
2021 we have invested €2.5 million and €5.7 million, respectively, in capital expenditures.
We expect our capital investments and costs to increase significantly in connection with our ongoing activities and other
milestones we must achieve prior to starting our commercial operations. We expect our principal cash demands, and our results
in the medium term, to be driven by:
●
Ongoing design and development of the Lilium Jet in house and at our partners, completing Type Certification of the
Lilium Jet, continuing to build the German factory for serial production of the Lilium Jet, which includes purchasing
manufacturing equipment, tools, raw materials and components as well as ramp-up of the serial aircraft production.
●
Go-to-market activities, which includes expanding the commercial team and operations, increasing marketing efforts,
attaining relationships for our vertiport infrastructure and commercial operations and developing our digital platform.
●
Organizational build-up, which, among other costs, includes establishing the right infrastructure, processes and human
resources required to launch a global revenue generating business.
Many of these costs are unpredictable over the long-term and there may be other substantial costs that we are currently
unable to anticipate. Our targeted timeframe for achieving our objectives is also subject to known and unknown risks and
uncertainties. We are targeting 2024 for the commercial launch of our 7-seater Lilium Jet. Any delays in the successful
completion of our eVTOL Jets may impact our ability to generate revenue. See “Risk Factors.” We believe that our current cash
and cash equivalents, together with the cash that we have received from the Business Combination, including the PIPE
Financing, will provide sufficient funding to progress part of the certification, production and commercialization of the Lilium
Jet, though we cannot assure that this will actually be the case. Additionally, changing circumstances may cause us to consume
capital significantly faster than we currently anticipate, and we may need to spend more money than currently expected because
of circumstances beyond our control. The commercial launch of our RAM service has unpredictable costs and is subject to
significant risks, uncertainties and contingencies, many of which are beyond our control, that may affect the timing and
magnitude of these anticipated expenditures. Some of these risks and uncertainties are described in more detail in this
prospectus under the heading “Risk Factors.” In the event that we incur higher costs than expected or determine that it may be
beneficial to create additional capital buffer, we may raise additional funds to finance our ongoing series aircraft production.
Until we can generate material revenue to finance our cash requirements, we expect to finance our future cash needs through a
combination of public or private equity offerings, debt financings, partnerships, as well as potentially grant funding, which
funding may in any such case have certain covenants or restrictions on our business. See “Liquidity and Capital Resources.”


77
Impact of the COVID-19 Pandemic
The strict measures to stop the spread of COVID-19 adopted in several countries where we operate initially resulted in the
majority of our workforce working from home with a small number of teams with special purposes for development of the
Lilium Jet remaining onsite. Modern forms of communication enabled contact to be maintained between various members of
staff and deadlines defined before the period during which employees were working from home have been complied with.
Additional costs were incurred as a result of expenses related to health, safety and transportation of employees onsite, however,
the impact of these did not materially impact our consolidated financial statements. With COVID-19 vaccines becoming more
broadly available, most of our employees have returned to onsite work. However, there can be no assurance that future
developments regarding the spread of COVID-19 will not result in a return to working from home for large portions of our
workforce and the reinstatement of additional COVID-19 mitigation measures
Uncertainty regarding the consequences and duration of COVID-19 has negatively impacted the ability to develop a precise
forecast for product development. Based on the latest developments, we are expecting that business operations can be continued.
We are monitoring the global outbreak of COVID-19 and have taken steps to identify and mitigate the adverse effects and
risks to us as a result of the pandemic. We have continued to implement social distancing and other COVID-19 mitigation and
are ready to reintroduce additional modifications to our business practices depending on the ongoing development of the
COVID-19 pandemic. We expect to continue to take actions as may be required or recommended by government authorities or
in the best interests of our employees and business partners. While the pandemic has not resulted in a slowdown in our
engineering, testing, certification and production activities, our operations, and the operations of our vendors, suppliers, and
commercial partners, including infrastructure, airline, training, and other business partners, may be adversely impacted. Despite
vaccines becoming available, COVID-19’s ongoing economic and health repercussions may also negatively impact our future
field engineering, testing and certification processes, manufacturing capacity in the future, as well as our commercial activities
including potential delays and restrictions on our ability to recruit and train staff. COVID-19 could also affect the operations of
our suppliers and business partners, which has resulted and may continue to result in delays or disruptions in the supply chain of
our components and delay the development and rollout of a vertiport network and commercial operations. We will continue to
closely monitor the effects of the pandemic. For additional information on risks posed by the COVID-19 pandemic, see “Risk
Factors.”
Employee Stock Option Program
Historically, our Employee Stock Option Program (“ESOP”) has been viewed as providing under its original terms that the 
holders of options granted under the ESOP effectively had the discretion to determine the manner of settlement in the form of 
cash or shares, resulting in our classification of our obligations related to the ESOP as a liability. In November 2020, we 
modified certain terms and conditions of the ESOP to, among other things, stipulate that Lilium has the discretion to determine 
the form of settlement of the options. In addition, consent letters were sent to all holders of options granted under the ESOP and 
each such holder was asked to provide acceptance of the modifications before the end of December 2020. As of December 31, 
2020, 89% of our ESOP option holders accepted the terms of the modification, resulting in the reclassification of the relevant 
portion of our ESOP liability, amounting to €71.4 million, to equity and the remeasurement of its value. In 2020, €34.9 million 
of our total of €50.3 million in share-based compensation expense was attributable to this remeasurement. This compares to a 
total share-based compensation expense of €7.9 million in 2019. As of June 30, 2021, 95% of the holders of options granted 
under the ESOP accepted the terms of the modification,  which triggered a change in the accounting treatment from cash-settled 
to equity-settled. Consequently, these options were remeasured at the modification date fair value and the relevant contingent 
liability was included in the equity.
The remaining options continue to be classified as cash-settled awards. The settlement of these cash-settled awards is
dependent upon an exit event, which is not probable as of December 31, 2020 and as of June 30, 2021. The liability amounting
to €2.6 million (December 31, 2020: €6.9 million) has been recognized (refer to Note 18). The carrying amount of the liability
for the 2017 ESOP was €0 million at each of December 31, 2020 and June 30, 2021.
Recent Developments
On September 14, 2021, we closed our previously announced Business Combination pursuant to the Business Combination
Agreement, dated as of March 30, 2021, as amended, by and among Qell, Lilium GmbH, Lilium B.V. (which was converted into
a Dutch public limited liability company (naamloze vennootschap), Lilium N.V., prior to the closing of the Business
Combination), and Merger Sub.
On the Closing Date, (i) Qell converted the Qell Class A Ordinary Shares into a claim for corresponding equity in Merger
Sub, with such claim then contributed to Lilium in exchange for one Class A Share, (ii) the shareholders of Lilium GmbH
exchanged their shares of Lilium GmbH for shares in the capital of Lilium, with all Lilium GmbH shareholders, but Daniel
Wiegand, receiving


78
Class A Shares in the share capital of Lilium, and Daniel Wiegand receiving Class B Shares, and (iii) each outstanding warrant
to purchase a Qell Class A Ordinary Share was converted into a warrant to purchase one Class A Share. The outstanding
warrants associated with the Business Combination Agreement will be recognized in Lilium’s future reported financial position.
The Business Combination, which is not within the scope of IFRS 3 since Qell does not meet the definition of a business in
accordance with IFRS 3, will be accounted for within the scope of IFRS 2. As such, the Business Combination will be treated as
the equivalent of Lilium GmbH issuing shares at the closing of the Business Combination for the net assets of Qell as of the
closing date, accompanied by a recapitalization. The net assets of Qell will be stated at historical cost, with no goodwill or other
intangible assets recorded. Any excess of fair value of Lilium GmbH shares issued over the fair value of Qell's identifiable net
assets acquired represents compensation for the service of a stock exchange listing for its shares and will be recognized as an
expense.
On March 30, 2021, concurrently with the execution of the Business Combination Agreement, Qell and Lilium entered into
Subscription Agreements with certain PIPE Investors, pursuant to which the PIPE Investors agreed to subscribe for and
purchase, and Lilium agreed to issue and sell to such PIPE Investors, an aggregate of 45,000,000 Class A Shares at a price of
$10.00 per share, for gross proceeds of $450,000,000. The PIPE Financing closed concurrently with the Business Combination.
We received approximately $584 million (€493 million) in gross proceeds from the Business Combination and the PIPE
Financing. On a pro forma basis for the Business Combination, we estimate that we would have had approximately €493 million
of pro forma cash on hand at June 30, 2021.
We are closely monitoring the ongoing COVID-19 situation and broader inflationary environment, which has had, and may
continue to have, adverse impacts on our supply chain, which could put pressure on our unit costs in the future. Increased
upfront payments to our suppliers and earlier phasing of those payments may put pressure on our non-recurring costs in 2022.
Key Components of Operating Results
Research and Development Expense
Research and development activities are primarily in the fields of engineering, prototyping (including Phoenix, our
demonstrator aircraft), production, testing and certification. In addition to overall aircraft architecture and configuration, we are
undertaking research activities relating to energy system, propulsion system including acoustic characteristics and core engine
design, as well as software and control systems. We are continuing to invest in the development of our Lilium Jet, including
production, testing, spare parts and maintenance. Our research and development expenses for the years ended December 31,
2019 and 2020 were €38.1 million and €90.3 million, respectively, and €27.6 million and €58.8 million for the six months ended
June 30, 2020 and 2021, respectively, as further discussed below under “Results of Operations.”
The costs for internally generated research and development are expensed when incurred. Some costs for internally
generated development may be capitalized if the relevant conditions under International Accounting Standard (“IAS”) 38 are
met. See Note 3 to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this prospectus. To date, we have not capitalized
any research and developments costs.
Research and development activities primarily include engineering, prototyping, production, testing and certification of our
Lilium Jet and include mainly the following expenses:
●
personnel-related expenses for personnel performing research and development activities, including salaries, benefits,
social security contributions, travel and share-based compensation;
●
fees paid to third parties, such as consultants and contractors, for outsourced engineering services;
●
expenses related to materials, including various components used in development of the Lilium Jet, supplies, software
costs and licenses, and third-party services; and
●
depreciation for equipment used in research and development activities.
We expect our research and development costs to increase for the foreseeable future as we continue to invest in research
and development activities to achieve our operational and commercial goals.


79
General and Administrative Expense
General and administrative expenses consist of personnel-related expenses for our corporate, executive, finance, and other
administrative functions, expenses for outside professional services, including legal, audit and accounting services, as well as
expenses for facilities, software costs and licenses, depreciation, amortization, and travel. Personnel-related expenses consist of
salaries, benefits, social security contributions, and share-based compensation.
We expect our general and administrative expenses to increase for the foreseeable future as we scale headcount with the
growth of our business, and as a result of operating as a public company, including compliance with the rules and regulations of
the SEC, legal, audit, additional insurance expenses, investor relations activities and other administrative and professional
services.
Selling Expense
Selling expenses consist of personnel expenses, including salaries, benefits, and share-based compensation, for all
personnel directly involved in business development and marketing activities. Our sales and marketing efforts are conducted
through a highly specialized sales team relating to the commercialization of our service. Our investment in sales and marketing
will continue to grow as we continue to expand our team globally.
Finance Income
Finance income consists primarily of a gain from recognizing changes in fair value of convertible loans.
Finance Expense
Finance expenses consist of interest expense on our convertible loans, changes in the fair value of the derivatives embedded
in our convertible loans, and implied interest expense associated with our lease obligations under IFRS 16.
Investment in Zenlabs Energy, Inc.
On March 10, 2021 Lilium entered into a Share Purchase Agreement according to which Lilium acquired 25.7% of the
shares of Zenlabs Energy Inc. (“Zenlabs”) for a purchase price of €8.4 million. Zenlabs is a development partner of Lilium in
battery technology. Lilium’s investment in Zenlabs is accounted for as an “investment under the equity method.”
Under the equity method, the investment in an associate is initially recognized at cost. The carrying amount of the
investment is adjusted to recognize changes in Lilium’s share of net assets of the associate since the acquisition date.


80
Results of Operations
Comparison of the Six Months Ended June 30, 2021 to the Six Months Ended June 30, 2020
The following table summarizes our historical results of operations for the periods indicated (in € thousands, except
percentage):
Six Months Ended June 30,
Change
in € thousands, except percentages
    
2021
    
2020
    
€
    
%
 
Revenue
47
97
(50)
(52)%
Cost of sales
(11)
(10)
(1)
10%
Gross profit
36
87
(51)
(59)%
Research and development expenses
(58,762)
(27,639)
(31,123)
113%
General and administrative expenses
(38,718)
(10,804)
(27,914)
258%
Selling Expenses
(6,376)
(3,487)
(2,889)
83%
Other income
153
2,034
(1,881)
(92)%
Other expenses
(126)
(51)
(75)
147%
Operating loss
(103,793)
(39,860)
(63,933)
160%
Finance income
6,810
—
—
—
Finance expenses
(13,094)
(3,577)
(9,517)
266%
Financial result
(6,284)
(3,577)
(2,707)
(76)%
Share of income / (loss) of an associate
(201)
—
—
—
Loss before income tax
(110,278)
(43,437)
(66,841)
154%
Income tax expense
(199)
(20)
(179)
895%
Net loss for the period
(110,477)
(43,457)
(67,020)
154%


81
Revenue
We are currently not generating revenues from mobility services. In rolling out our business, we are engaged in
infrastructure and mobility consultancy services provided to airport authorities with which future collaborations are planned and
revenue amounting to €47,000 and €97,000 has been recognized from one customer for the six months ended June 30, 2021 and
June 30, 2020, respectively.
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development expenses increased by €31.1 million, or 113%, from €27.6 million during the six months ended
June 30, 2020 to €58.8 million during the six months ended June 30, 2021. The increase was primarily attributable to a €31.6
million increase in personnel costs to support aircraft engineering, software development, manufacturing process development,
and certification and increased materials used in prototype development and testing.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses increased by €27.9 million, or 258%, from €10.8 million during the six months ended
June 30, 2020 to €38.7 million during the six months ended June 20, 2021. In the six months ended June 30, 2021, additional
expenses were incurred in connection with the Business Combination for legal advice, external consultants and other related
expenses, in a total amount of €10.5 million.
Selling Expenses
Selling expenses increased by €2.9 million, or 83%, from €3.5 million during the six months ended June 30, 2020 to €6.4
million during the six months ended June 20, 2021. The increase was primarily attributable to increased headcount to support
operations growth and business development.
Finance Income
Finance income increased by €6.8 million, from €0 to during the six months ended June 30, 2020 to €6.8 million during the
six months ended June 30, 2021, driven mainly by the mark-to-market adjustments on an embedded derivative linked to the
Company’s convertible loan (which was converted to equity during the period).
Finance Expense
Finance expenses increased by €9.5 million from €3.6 million during the six months ended June 30, 2020 to €13.1 million
during the six months ended June 30, 2021 due to a fair value loss from a foreign exchange contract.
Comparison of the year Ended December 31, 2020 to the year Ended December 31, 2019
The following table summarizes our historical results of operations for the periods indicated (in € thousands,
except percentage):
     Year Ended December 31,     
Change
 
2020
    
2019
    
    
(%)
 
Revenue
 
 97  
 —
 97  
*n.m.
Cost of sales
 
 (10) 
 —
 (10) 
*n.m.
Gross profit
 
 87  
 —
 87  
*n.m.
Research and development expenses
 
 (90,345) 
 (38,136)
 (52,209) 
 137 %
General and administrative expenses
 
 (35,406) 
 (15,437)
 (19,969) 
 129 %
Selling expenses
 
 (15,272) 
 (4,645)
 (10,627) 
 229 %
Other income
 
 2,346  
 76
 2,270  
*n.m.
Other expenses
 
 (130) 
 (58)
 (72) 
 124 %
Operating Loss
 
 (138,720) 
 (58,200)
 (80,520) 
 138 %
Finance income
 
 80  
 518
 (438) 
*n.m.
Finance expenses
 
 (49,741) 
 (5,736)
 (44,005) 
 767 %
Financial result
 
 (49,661) 
 (5,218)
 (44,443) 
 852 %
Loss before income taxes
 
 (188,381) 
 (63,418)
 (124,963) 
 197 %
Income tax expense
 
 (46) 
 (61)
 15  
 (25)%
Net loss for the period
 
 (188,427) 
 (63,479)
 (124,948) 
 197 %


82
*
n.m. marks changes that are not meaningful for further discussion
Revenue
We are currently not generating revenues from mobility services. In rolling out our business, we are engaged in
infrastructure and mobility consultancy services provided to airport authorities with which future collaborations are planned and
revenue amounting to €97,000 has been recognized from one customer.
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development expenses increased by €52.2 million, or 137%, from €38.1 million for the year ended
December 31, 2019 to €90.3 million during the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was attributable mainly to
remeasurement of share-based compensation. The ramp-up was driven mainly by the completion of funding rounds in
March and May 2020 and the resulting ramp-up of the program of the serial aircraft. Personnel expenses accounted for €40.0
million of the €52.2 million increase, of which €20.1 million was attributable to the share-based compensation remeasurement
and the remainder was attributable to increased headcount and increased salaries. The remaining €12.2 million of the increase
was driven mainly by increases in costs of professional services of €6.0 million and materials of €3.2 million.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses increased by €20.0 million, or 129%, from €15.4 million during the year ended
December 31, 2019 to €35.4 million during the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was primarily attributable to a
€12.5 million increase in personnel expenses, of which €6.6 million was attributable to the share-based compensation
remeasurement and the remainder was due to increased headcount and new share-based compensation awards, reflecting the
growth of our organization. A €5.9 million increase in professional services costs, related primarily to accounting and other
consulting costs, also contributed to the increase.
Selling Expenses
Selling expenses increased by €10.6 million, or 229%, from €4.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 to €15.3
million during the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily attributable to a €9.9 million increase in personnel expenses, of
which €8.2 million was due to the aforementioned share-based compensation remeasurement.
Other Income
Other income increased by €2.2 million from €0.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 to €2.3 million for
the year ended December 31, 2020, driven mainly by a €1.9 million insurance recovery (of which €1.0 million was received
during financial year 2020 and the remainder was recorded based on an initial appraisal).
Finance Expense
Finance expenses increased by €44.0 million from €5.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 to €49.7 million
during the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily due to a €28.6 million increase in effective interest rate on our convertible
loans, reflecting an increase in the average amount of debt outstanding in 2020 relative to 2019. See “Liquidity and Capital
Resources — Debt.” A €15.2 million increase in the fair value of the embedded derivative relating to our convertible loans also
contributed to the increase.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Sources of Liquidity and Operational and Funding Requirements
We have incurred net losses and negative operating cash flows from operations since inception, and we expect to continue
to incur losses and negative operating cash flows for the foreseeable future, until we successfully commence sustainable
commercial operations. In addition, we expect our operating expenses to increase substantially in connection with our ongoing
activities, particularly as we continue to advance the development and certification of our Lilium Jets and the commercialization
of our network and turnkey enterprise solutions. Since inception, we have financed our operations primarily from the issuance
of our common and preferred equity and convertible loans. As of June 30, 2021, we had cash and cash equivalents of €62.7
million. As of December 31,


83
2020 and 2019, we had cash and cash equivalents of €102.1 million and €59.6 million, respectively, and no substantial debt,
other than the convertible loans described below. We hold our cash on hand mainly at banks, on hand, or invest in short-term
deposits with an original maturity of three months or less.
The development and commercialization of our products will continue to require substantial expenditures and we are reliant
upon continued investments and capital raises to fund operations. See Note 5 to our interim condensed consolidated financial
statements included elsewhere in this prospectus. However, we have received approximately $584 million (€493 million) in
gross proceeds from the Business Combination and the PIPE Financing. On a pro forma basis for such transactions (see the
section titled “Unaudited Pro Forma Condensed Combined Financial Information” elsewhere in this prospectus), we estimate
that we would have had approximately €493 million of pro forma cash on hand at June 30, 2021, which we believe would be
sufficient to meet our operational needs for at least 12 months from the date of this prospectus.
If our cash resources, including the proceeds of the Business Combination and the PIPE Financing, are insufficient to
finance our future cash requirements, we will need to finance our future cash needs through a combination of public or private
equity offerings, debt financings, partnerships or grant funding. To the extent that we raise additional capital through the sale of
equity or convertible debt securities, the ownership interest of shareholders may be diluted, and the terms of such securities may
include liquidation or other preferences that adversely affect the rights of existing shareholders. Debt financing, if available,
may involve agreements that include covenants limiting or restricting our ability to take specific actions, such as incurring
additional debt, making capital expenditures or declaring dividends. If we raise funds through partnerships, collaborations or
other similar arrangements with third parties, we may have to relinquish valuable rights to our Lilium Jet. If we are unable to
raise additional funds through equity or debt financings when needed, we may be required to delay, limit, reduce or, in the worst
case, to terminate our research and development and commercialization efforts and may not be able to fund our continuing
operations.
Debt
In 2019, we entered into two interest bearing, convertible loan arrangements for the following amounts: (i) €60.0 million in
May 2019 and (ii) €5.5 million in October 2019. Both convertible loans accrued interest at 5% per annum and had maturity
dates of fifteen months from the date of borrowing (or earlier upon the occurrence of certain conversion or termination events).
Both loans were converted into equity in March 2020, resulting in the issuance of 6,705 of Series B-2 preferred shares.
In March 2020 we entered into a new convertible loan arrangement for €85.9 million with a shareholder, the conversion of
which into 7,187 Lilium Series B-2 Shares (representing 9.4% of our total outstanding shares on a non-diluted basis) was
notarized on March 26, 2021. The loan accrued interest at 2% per annum and had a maturity date of March 11, 2027, or earlier
upon the occurrence of certain conversion or termination events.
On January 22, 2021, we obtained a new convertible loan for approximately €1.9 million from a stockholder, a portion of
which was held for the economic benefit of Dr. Thomas Enders. The loan accrued interest at 5% per annum and had a maturity
date of 18 months from the date of issuance, or earlier upon the occurrence of certain financing events, including the Business
Combination. The convertible loan was converted into Class A Shares upon the consummation of the Business Combination at a
15% discount to the deemed per share issue price. Accordingly, we no longer have any outstanding debt obligations.
Cash Flows
The following table summarizes our cash flows for each period presented (in € thousands):
    
Six months
    
Six months
 
ended June 30,
ended June 30,
in € thousand
2021
2020
Net cash (used in) / provided by:
Operating activities
(74,912)
(30,479)
Investing activities
34,767
(102,497)
Financing activities
752
149,482
Cash-based changes in cash and cash equivalents
(39,393)
16,506
Effect of foreign exchange rate changes on cash and cash equivalents
(15)
31
Net (decrease) increase in cash and cash equivalents
(39,408)
16,537


84
    
Year Ended December 31
2020
    
2019
Cash flow from:
 
   
  
Operating activities
 
 (77,883) 
 (47,047)
Investing activities
 
 (59,472) 
 (4,797)
Financing activities
 
 179,955  
 64,261
Net increase in cash and cash equivalents
 
 42,600  
 12,417
Cash flow from operating activities
Net cash used in operating activities for the six months ended June 30, 2021 was €74.9 million, consisting primarily of a net
loss of €110.5 million, which included €17.9 million stock-based compensation expense, a €3.0 million depreciation and
amortization expense, €3.6 million interest expense, and a decrease in our net working capital of €7.9 million, reflecting
primarily higher payables.
Net cash used in operating activities for the six months ended June 30, 2020 was €30.5 million, consisting primarily of a net
loss of €43.5 million, which included a €1.8 million depreciation and amortization expense, €3.5 million interest expense, €7.0
million stock-based compensation expense, and a reduction in our net working capital of €0.3 million.
Cash flow used in operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was €77.9 million, compared to €47.0 million
for the year ended December 31, 2019. The €30.8 million increase reflected the €124.9 million increase in our net loss, for the
reasons described above, net of a €89.3 million increase in non-cash operating costs (driven by higher share-based
compensation expense, higher interest expense on our convertible loans and an increase in the fair value of the derivatives
embedded in our convertible loans, as discussed above). Operating working capital increased by €4.8 million, driven mainly by
higher trade and other payables.
Cash flow from investing activities
Our recurring capital expenditures have historically consisted of investments in leasehold improvements, technical
equipment and machinery, vehicles and office and other equipment.
Net cash received from investing activities for the six months ended June 30, 2021 was €34.8 million primarily due to
purchases of property, equipment of €5.7 million, investments in and associated company of €8.5 million and in promissory
notes of €1.1 million, offset by proceeds from the sales of fixed term promissory notes of €50.0 million.
Net cash used in investing activities for the six months ended June 30, 2020 was primarily due to investments in fixed term
deposits of €100.0 million and purchases of property and equipment of €2.5 million.
Cash flow used in investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was €59.5 million, reflecting mainly the
investment in fixed term interest bearing deposits of €50.0 million. Capital expenditures for the year ended December 31, 2020
were €8.9 million, related mainly to leasehold improvements.
Cash flow from financing activities
Net cash provided by financing activities for the six months ended June 30, 2021 was €0.8 million primarily due to
proceeds from issuance of the convertible loan for a net amount of €1.9 million, offset by €1.0 million capital lease obligations.
Net cash provided by financing activities for the six months ended June 30, 2020 was €149.5 million primarily due to
proceeds from a convertible loan for a net amount of €85.9 million, and €65.1 million from share capital increase and capital
contributions, partially offset with payments on capital lease obligations of €0.9 million and transaction costs for capital
contribution of €0.5 million.
Cash flow from financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was €180.0 million, compared to €64.3 million
for the year ended December 31, 2019. In 2020, we obtained €97.3 million in proceeds from preferred equity issuances and
borrowed an additional €85.9 million in proceeds from convertible loans. In 2019, we obtained €65.5 million in borrowings
from convertible loans.
Other Commitments and Contingencies
We had €10.1 million in lease-related liabilities as of June 30, 2021 and €9.5 million December 31, 2020, respectively. We
also have various lease contracts that have not yet commenced as of June 30, 2021. The future lease payments relating to these
non-


85
cancellable leases are €2.3 million. Further, we have commitments of €9.9 million to acquire items of property, plant &
equipment and commitments of €0.7 million to acquire items of intangible assets as of June 30, 2021.
In March 2021, we acquired an approximately 26% equity interest in a development partner for approximately €8.4 million.
We also made convertible loans to this party of €0.4 million, €0.2 million and €1.0 million in July 2020, December 2020 and
March 2021, respectively. Each loan is due upon demand of Lilium after one year anniversary, accrues interest at 7% per annum
and is convertible early upon the occurrence of certain conversion or termination events.
Critical Accounting Estimates
Our consolidated financial statements for the years ended December 31, and the six months ended June 30, 2020 and 2019
have been prepared in accordance with IFRS as issued by the IASB. The preparation of the consolidated financial statements in
accordance with IFRS requires the use of estimates and assumptions that affect the value of assets and liabilities — as well as
contingent assets and liabilities — as reported on the balance sheet date, and revenues and expenses arising during the
fiscal year. We based our assumptions and estimates on parameters available when the consolidated financial statements were
prepared and reviewed on an ongoing basis. Existing circumstances and assumptions about future developments, however, may
change due to market changes or circumstances arising that are beyond our control. Hence, our estimates may vary from the
actual values. While our significant accounting judgments and estimates are described in more detail in Note 4 to our
consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this prospectus, we believe the following accounting policies and
estimates to be critical to the preparation of our consolidated financial statements because they involve significant judgments or
estimates and a change in such judgments or estimates could materially impact our financial statements:
Share-Based Compensation
Prior to completion of the Business Combination, as our common shares were not listed on a public marketplace, the
calculation of the fair value of our common shares was subject to a greater degree of estimation in determining the basis for
share-based awards that we issued. Given the absence of a public market, we were required to estimate the fair value of the
common shares at the time of each grant. We considered objective and subjective factors in determining the estimated fair value
and because there is no active trading of our equity shares on an established securities market, we determined the market price
of our equity, with input from management and an independent valuation specialist, based on an option pricing method or a
hybrid model, as further discussed in Note 15. Share-based Payments to our interim condensed consolidated financial statements
included elsewhere in this prospectus.
We determined the value of our common shares based on interpolating from the valuations in our most recent external
equity financing rounds and, when applicable, an expected valuation for an initial public offering, subject to discounts for the
probability and timing of an exit event and lack of marketability, among other factors.
The assumptions underlying the valuations represent our best estimates, which involve inherent uncertainties and the
application of management judgment. As a result, if we used significantly different assumptions or estimates, our share-based
compensation expense for prior periods could have been materially different. Following the consummation of the Business
Combination, we expect to use the market price of our Class A Shares as the basis for the valuation of future grants.
Convertible Loans and Embedded Derivatives
The initial fair value of our convertible loans (before bifurcation of the embedded derivatives) and the subsequent
measurement of the embedded derivatives was calculated using an internal valuation model where many of the input parameters
are not observable. See Note 16 to our interim condensed consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this
prospectus for a description of the valuation model and the input parameters used. All of our outstanding convertible loans have
been converted into Class A Shares upon the consummation of the Business Combination.
Leases
Lease term. We have lease agreements for rental properties with renewal options, requiring us to apply judgment in
evaluating whether we are reasonably certain to exercise the option to extend or terminate the lease. Accordingly, we evaluate
all relevant factors that create an economic incentive for us to exercise the respective extension options. We also reassess the
lease term when there is a significant event or change in circumstances that is within our control and affects our likelihood of
exercising an option to extend or terminate the lease term (for example, more than insignificant penalty, construction of
significant leasehold improvements or significant customization of the leased asset).


86
Incremental borrowing rate. We measure the amount of our lease liabilities based on an incremental borrowing rate
(“IBR”), which is the rate of interest that we would have to pay to borrow the funds necessary to obtain an asset of a similar
value to the leased asset over a similar term, with similar security and in a similar economic environment. We calculate our
IBRs based on the risk-free rate, individual country risk premiums of the relevant country and credit spread. The weighted
average IBR used in the valuation of our lease liabilities was 3.84% at June 30, 2021 (compared to 4.05% at December 31,
2020).
Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements
A number of new standards and amendments to standards and interpretations are effective for annual periods beginning on
or after January 1, 2021 and have not been applied in preparing the consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this
prospectus. None of these standards are expected to have a material impact on our consolidated financial statements. For
information on the new standards, please refer to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this prospectus.
Emerging Growth Company Status
Section 102(b)(1) of the Jumpstart Our Business Startups Act of 2012 (“JOBS Act”) exempts emerging growth companies
from certain SEC disclosure requirements and standards. We intend to take advantage of some of the reduced regulatory and
reporting requirements of emerging growth companies pursuant to the JOBS Act so long as we qualify as an emerging growth
company, including, but not limited to, not being required to comply with the auditor attestation requirements of
Section 404(b) of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act. See “Risk Factors — We are an “emerging growth company,” and our reduced SEC
reporting requirements may make our shares less attractive to investors.”
Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosures about Market Risk
As of June 30, 2021, we had other current financial assets in the amount of €2.3 million mainly comprising fixed  
promissory notes while at December 31, 2020 it also comprised term deposits which was converted into cash, meaning that we 
are exposed to interest rate and credit quality and credit default risks with respect to such investments. We mitigate this risk by 
investing only in short-term deposits (which currently pay only nominal interest) and investment grade credit instruments, and 
do not believe that these risks are material. In addition, in the ordinary course of business, we may become exposed to interest 
rate risk and foreign exchange risk, which may arise from future incurrences of debt and the international expansion of our 
business operations, but such risks are not expected to be material in the short-term. We do not engage in the trading of financial 
assets for speculative purposes.
Material Weaknesses in Internal Control Over Financial Reporting
In connection with the preparation of our consolidated financial statements for the years ended December 31, 2020 and
2019, we identified several material weaknesses in the design and operation of our internal control over financial reporting. The
company is currently working to remediate the material weaknesses. See “Risk Factors — We have identified material
weaknesses in our internal control over financial reporting and may identify additional material weaknesses in the future.
Failure to remediate such material weaknesses in the future or to maintain an effective system of internal control could impair
our ability to comply with the financial reporting and internal controls requirements for publicly traded companies.”


87
MANAGEMENT
Executive Officers and Directors
The following table lists the names, ages and positions of those individuals who serve as our directors and executive
officers as of September 14, 2021. The Board is comprised of nine directors. The Board consists of an executive director and
eight non-executive directors.
Name
    
Age
    
Position
 
Executive Officers
Commercial Leadership Team
Daniel Wiegand
36
Chief Executive Officer
Geoffrey Richardson
51
Chief Financial Officer
Board
Daniel Wiegand
36
Executive Director
Henri Courpron
58
Non-executive Director
Dr. Thomas Enders
62
Non-executive Director
Barry Engle
57
Non-executive Director
David Neeleman
62
Non-executive Director
Margaret M. Smyth
57
Non-executive Director
Gabrielle Toledano
54
Non-executive Director
David Wallerstein
47
Non-executive Director
Niklas Zennström
55
Non-executive Director
Executive Officers
Daniel Wiegand. Mr. Wiegand has served as our Chief Executive Officer and Executive Director of our Board since
September 2021 and previously served as a member of the Lilium GmbH board from February 2015. Mr. Wiegand is the Lilium
co-founder and also served as Lilium GmbH’s Chief Executive Officer from February 2015. Mr. Wiegand holds a degree in
Aerospace Engineering from Technische Universität München. We believe Mr. Wiegand is well qualified to serve on the Board
due to the perspective and experience he brings as our Chief Executive Officer and co-founder.
Geoffrey Richardson. Mr. Richardson serves as our Chief Financial Officer. Mr. Richardson has served as our Chief
Financial Officer since November 2020. Prior to joining Lilium, Mr. Richardson held a number of positions at Cruise LLC
(“Cruise”), a self-driving car service company, including Senior Advisor from May 2020 to November 2020 and Chief Financial
Officer from September 2017 to May 2020. Prior to Cruise, Mr. Richardson served as Chief Financial Officer of Kinestral
Technologies, Inc., a developer and manufacturer of glass products, from April 2014 to September 2017. Prior to Kinestral,
Mr. Richardson served as Vice President at Goldman Sachs, a leading global investment banking, securities, and investment
management firm, from 2010 to 2014. Prior to Goldman Sachs, Mr. Richardson served as Executive Director at Morgan Stanley,
a leading American multinational investment bank and financial services company from 2007 to 2010. Mr. Richardson holds a
J.D. from Tulane University.
The Board
Subject to our articles of association, the Board is charged with the management of the Company. In fulfilling their duties,
our directors serve the interest of the Company and the business connected with it. Supervision of the fulfilment of duties by the
executive director and of the general course of our affairs and our business are primarily carried out by the non-executive
directors. The executive director must in due time provide the non-executive directors with the information they need to carry
out their duties.
The Board consists of one executive director and eight non-executive directors. The total number of directors, including the
number of executive directors and non-executive directors, may be increased or decreased pursuant to a resolution of the Board
approved by a majority vote of all of the executive directors, and a majority vote of all of the non-executive directors, then in
office. The Board is a one-tier board.
Under our articles of association, our executive and non-executive directors will be appointed by the General Meeting of
our shareholders (the “General Meeting”) at the binding nomination of the non-executive directors and for such term as
proposed by the non-executive directors, provided that a director must retire at the close of the first annual General Meeting
following the expiry of the term of their appointment. A director may be reappointed one or more times. The General Meeting
may at all times overrule the binding nature of each nomination by at least a two thirds (2/3) majority of the votes cast, provided
such majority represents more than half of the issued share capital of the Company (a “General Meeting Supermajority”). If the
General Meeting overrules a binding


88
nomination, the non-executive directors will make a new nomination and a new General Meeting will be called at which the
resolution for appointment of a director will require at least a General Meeting Supermajority. If a nomination for such a
director has not been made or has not been made in due time, this will be stated in the notice of the General Meeting and the
General Meeting will be free to appoint a director at its discretion by the resolution of a General Meeting Supermajority.
Under our articles of association, the General Meeting may at any time suspend or dismiss a non-executive director or
executive director. The General Meeting may only adopt a resolution to suspend or dismiss a director by a General Meeting
Supermajority, unless the resolution is adopted on the basis of a proposal by the Board; in that case, the resolution may be
adopted by an absolute majority of the votes cast, representing more than half of the issued share capital of the Company.
Henri Courpron. Mr. Courpron has served as a member of our Board since September 2021. Since September 2014,
Mr. Courpron has been the Chairman and Co-Founder of Plane View Partners, LLC, a strategic advisory firm for aviation and
aerospace management and investments. He was the Chief Executive Officer of International Lease Finance Corporation
(“ILFC”), one of the largest aircraft financing firms in the world, from May 2010 to May 2014. Prior to joining ILFC,
Mr. Courpron was President of the Aerospace Division of Seabury Aviation & Aerospace, an advisory and investment banking
firm in New York focused on the aviation industry, from 2007 to 2010. Prior to that, Mr. Courpron had a 20-year career with
Airbus where he reached the position of Executive Vice President, Procurement at Airbus headquarters in Toulouse, France and
held a number of other executive positions, including President and Chief Executive Officer of Airbus, North America.
Mr. Courpron has also served as a director of Breeze Airways since September 2020 and previously served as a director of Azul
Linhas Aéreas Brasileiras from May 2015 to April 2020 and TAP Portugal from November 2015 to July 2017. Mr. Courpron
earned his degree in Computer Science in 1985 from Ecole Nationale Supérieure d’Electrotechnique d’Electronique
d’Informatique et d’Hydraulique (ENSEEIHT) in Toulouse, where he specialized in artificial intelligence. We believe that
Mr. Courpron is well qualified to serve on the Board due to his strong background in aerospace management and deep
knowledge of the aviation industry and broad experience as a director in aerospace companies.
Dr. Thomas Enders. Dr. Enders has served on our Board since September 2021 and previously served as a member of the
Lilium GmbH board from January 2021. Dr. Enders has served as a member of the Executive Committee and Audit Committee
of the board of directors of Linde plc, a global industrial gases and engineering company, since 2018. Prior to joining the Lilium
GmbH board, Dr. Enders held a number of positions at Airbus SE, a European multinational aerospace corporation, including
Chief Executive Officer of Airbus SE from June 2012 to April 2019 and Chief Executive Officer of Airbus’ Commercial Aircraft
Division from 2007 to 2012. Dr. Enders also held a number of positions at European Aeronautic Defense and Space Company
(“EADS”) (rebranded as Airbus Group), including co-Chief Executive Officer from 2005 to 2007 and Head of Defense Division
from 2000 to 2005. Dr. Enders served as a member of the Executive Committee of Airbus SE from its creation in 2000 until
2019. Dr. Enders studied Economics, Political Science and History at the University of Bonn and the University of California,
Los Angeles. He holds a degree as Dr. Phil from University of Bonn. We believe Dr. Enders is well qualified to serve on the
Board due to his extensive experience in the aerospace industry.
Barry Engle. Mr. Engle has served as a member of our Board since September 2021. Mr. Engle has experience in
operational, financial and managerial roles within the international automotive sector, as well as growth-oriented companies
across various industries. In September 2020, Mr. Engle founded the special purpose acquisition company, Qell Acquisition
Corp., our predecessor. Mr. Engle served as the Chief Executive Officer of Qell until the consummation of the Business
Combination. From September 2015 to August 2020, he served in various senior executive roles at General Motors (“GM”).
Most recently, Mr. Engle served as President of GM North America, the company’s largest segment with over $100+ billion in
sales during the year ended December 31, 2019. Under his leadership, GM frequently beat analysts’ expectations, including
during the unprecedented COVID-19 pandemic. Before this, Mr. Engle served as the President of GM International, where he
successfully worked with various stakeholders to improve the segment’s profitability. Mr. Engle joined GM in September 2015
as President of South America, leading the business unit through the region’s economic recession and achieving market
leadership in Brazil for 50+ months while restructuring the business to improve its profitability. Prior to joining GM, Mr. Engle
spent time leading high growth, private equity and venture capital-backed companies, serving as Chief Executive Officer of
Agility Fuel Systems, a leading provider of clean fuel solutions for medium- and heavy-duty commercial vehicles, and electric
vehicle manufacturer Think Holding AS, a Norwegian company, which, subsequent to his departure from the company entered
into Norwegian bankruptcy proceedings in June 2011. Before joining Think Holdings AS, Mr. Engle spent two years as
President and CEO of New Holland Agricultural Equipment in Turin, Italy. Mr. Engle also spent a number of years with Ford
Motor Company where he served as President & CEO of Ford Canada, President of Ford Brazil, and Head of North American
Marketing. Finally, Mr. Engle has also led entrepreneurial endeavors of his own; he previously owned Barry Engle Chrysler-
Plymouth-Jeep, near Salt Lake City, from 1997 to 2000. Mr. Engle earned a bachelor’s degree from Brigham Young University
and holds an MBA from the Wharton School at the University of Pennsylvania. We believe Mr. Engle is well qualified to serve
on the Board due to his extensive experience in the transportation industry and experience leading organizations around the
world.


89
David Neeleman. Mr. Neeleman has served as a member of our Board since September 2021. Since he founded Azul
Brazilian Airlines in January 2008, Mr. Neeleman has served as the Chairman of its board of directors and served as its Chief
Executive Officer until July 2017. Previously, Mr. Neeleman founded JetBlue, where he held the position of Chief Executive
Officer from 1998 to 2007 and Chairman of and served on the board of directors from 2002 to 2008. Mr. Neeleman’s career in
the airline industry began in 1984 when he co-founded Morris Air. As president of Morris Air, he implemented the industry’s
first electronic ticketing system and pioneered a home reservationist system that is now the foundation of JetBlue’s call center.
Mr. Neeleman sold Morris Air in 1993 and took the electronic ticketing to Open Skies. He sold Open Skies to Hewlett Packard
in 1999. Mr. Neeleman was also co-founder of WestJet Airlines and served as a member of its board of directors from 1996 to
1999. Mr. Neeleman was also part of a consortium that initially acquired a controlling interest in Tap Air Portugal (“TAP”)
through TAP’s privatization in 2015 and was a member of the board of directors of TAP from 2015 to 2020. We believe
Mr. Neeleman’s experience in the aerospace industry makes him well qualified to serve on the Board.
Margaret M. Smyth. Ms. Smyth has served as a member of our Board since September 2021. Since July 2021, Ms. Smyth
has served as the Senior Advisor, Global Infrastructure of QIC Global Infrastructure (“QIC”) and chair of CenTrio, QIC’s
subsidiary that is the largest pure-play US district energy provider. Previously, Ms. Smyth served as the Chief Financial Officer
of National Grid USA from October 2014 to June 2021, where she oversaw all finance, accounting, transactional, and property
services for National Grid. Prior to joining National Grid, Ms. Smyth served as Vice President of Finance for Consolidated
Edison, Inc. from August 2012 to September 2014. Ms. Smyth previously served as Vice President and Chief Financial Officer
of Hamilton Sundstrand, which is part of the former United Technologies Corp., from October 2010 to June 2011. Ms. Smyth
also served as Vice President and Corporate Controller of United Technologies Corp. from August 2007 to September 2010, and
Vice President and Chief Accounting Officer of 3M Corporation from April 2005 to August 2007. Ms. Smyth is currently a
board member of two subsidiaries of Mutual of America since February 2005, a board member and chair of the Audit
Committee of Etsy, Inc. since June 2016, a board member and chair of the Audit Committee of Remitly, Inc. since May 2021,
and a board member and chair of the Audit Committee of Frontier Communications Parent, Inc. since June 2021. We believe
that Ms. Smyth’s financial background and corporate leadership experience make her well qualified to serve on the Board.
Gabrielle B. Toledano. Ms. Toledano has served as a member of our Board since September 2021. Since January 2020,
Ms. Toledano has served as Chief Operating Officer at Keystone Strategy LLC, a strategy and economics consulting firm. From
January 2021 to March 2021, Ms. Toledano served as Chief Talent Officer of ServiceNow Inc., a software company. From
May 2017 to October 2018, Ms. Toledano served as the Chief People Officer of Tesla Inc., a manufacturer of electric vehicles
and energy storage products. From February 2006 to May 2017, Ms. Toledano served as Chief Talent Officer and Advisor at
Electronic Arts Inc., a video game company. Ms. Toledano has served as a director of Velo3D since July 2021, Better.com since
April 2021 and Bose Corporation since June 2020. Previously, Ms. Toledano served on the boards of Glu Mobile, Inc. from
December 2017 to April 2021 and Jive Software, Inc. from November 2015 to June 2017. Ms. Toledano holds a B.A. in Modern
Thought and Literature and an M.A. in Education from Stanford University. We believe that Ms. Toledano is well qualified to
serve on the Board because of her strong background in technology management and human capital management and her broad
experience as a director of technology companies.
David Wallerstein. Mr. Wallerstein has served as an independent member of our Board since September 2021 and
previously served as a member of the Lilium GmbH board from September 2017. Mr. Wallerstein has held a number of
positions at Tencent Holdings Limited, a Chinese multinational technology conglomerate holding company providing Internet-
related services and products, including Chief eXploration Officer since 2014 and Senior Executive Vice President since 2001.
Mr. Wallerstein holds a Master’s degree from the University of California, Berkeley and a B.A. from the University of
Washington. We believe Mr. Wallerstein is well qualified to serve on the Board due to his investment experience in new and
emerging technologies internationally.
Niklas Zennström. Mr. Zennström has served as a member of our Board since September 2021 and previously served as a
member of the Lilium GmbH board from December 2016. Mr. Zennström has served as Chief Executive Officer and Founding
Partner at Atomico, a European venture capital firm investing in innovative technology companies around the world, since 2007.
Prior to founding Atomico, Mr. Zennström co-founded and served as the Chief Executive Officer of Skype, a proprietary
telecommunications application specializing in voice and video communications, acquired by Microsoft, from 2002 to 2007.
Prior to Skype, Mr. Zennström co-founded and served as Chief Executive Officer of Kazaa B.V., a peer to peer content
distribution provider, from 2000 to 2002. Mr. Zennström also co-founded and served as the Chief Executive Officer of
Joltid Ltd., a provider of peer to peer technologies for content distributors, Internet Service Providers, websites and software
developers, from 2001 to 2003. Prior to Joltid, Mr. Zennström served in various General Manager positions at Tele2 AB, a
European telecommunications operator, from 1996 to 1999. Mr. Zennström holds a Master of Science degree in Engineering
Physics and a Bachelor of Science degree in Business Administration from Uppsala University. Mr. Zennström also currently
serves on the boards of H&M Hennes & Mauritz AB, Zennström Philanthropies, Varjo, Rekki and Oden Technologies. We
believe Mr. Zennström is well qualified to serve on the Board due to his investment experience with disruptive technology
companies.


90
The Board has determined that each of Dr. Thomas Enders, Barry Engle, Margaret M. Smyth, Gabrielle Toledano, David
Wallerstein and Niklas Zennström qualify as an independent director, as defined under the listing rules of Nasdaq.
There are no family relationships among any of our executive officers or directors.
Director and Officer Qualifications
We have not established any specific, minimum qualifications that must be met by each of our officers. However, we
generally evaluate the following qualities: educational background, diversity of professional experience, including whether the
person is a current or was a former chief executive officer or chief financial officer of a public company or the head of a division
of a prominent international organization, knowledge of our business, integrity, professional reputation, independence, wisdom,
and ability to represent the best interests of our shareholders.
The Nominating Committee of the Board has prepared policies regarding director qualification requirements and the
process for identifying and evaluating director candidates for adoption by the Board.
Committees of the Board of Directors
Our Board currently has three standing committees comprised of independent, non-executive directors: the Audit
Committee, the Compensation Committee, and the Nominating and Corporate Governance Committee. Each committee
operates under a charter approved by the Board. Copies of each committee charter are available on our website.
Audit Committee
Audit Committee members include Barry Engle, Margaret M. Smyth and Gabrielle Toledano, with Mr. Engle serving as
chair of the Audit Committee. Each member of the Audit Committee is expected to be financially literate and each of Mr. Engle
and Ms. Smyth is expected to qualify as an “Audit Committee financial expert” as defined in the applicable SEC rules.
The Audit Committee’s responsibilities include, among other things, oversight of:
●
our accounting and financial reporting and related processes and disclosures;
●
the adequacy and effectiveness of our internal control over financial reporting;
●
audits of the consolidated financial statements of the Company and our subsidiaries;
●
the public accounting firm engaged as our independent auditor, including with respect to its appointment,
qualifications, independence, performance, compensation, and retention, and related matters;
●
our internal audit function, including with respect to its performance, resources, and retention; and
●
the assessment and management of risks, including financial risks and risks related to information security.
The Audit Committee charter also provides that the Audit Committee will be responsible for pre-approving all audit
services, internal control-related services and non-audit services (other than de miminis non audit services), and establishing and
maintaining the necessary approval procedures.
Compensation Committee
Compensation Committee members include Gabrielle Toledano, Barry Engle, and David Wallerstein, with Ms. Toledano
serving as the chair of the Compensation Committee.
The Compensation Committee’s responsibilities include, among other things:
●
reviewing and making recommendations to the Board regarding the compensation of our non-executive directors;
●
reviewing and making recommendations to our non-executive directors regarding the compensation of executive
officers serving on the Board;


91
●
approving the compensation of our senior management;
●
recommending changes to the Company’s compensation policy, which governs the compensation of our non-executive
directors, executive officers and senior management;
●
reviewing and reporting to the Board, development and succession plans for our executive directors; and
●
overseeing the Company’s equity incentive and benefit plans and human capital management function.
The Compensation Committee charter also provides that the Compensation Committee may, in its sole discretion, retain or
obtain the advice of a compensation consultant, legal counsel or other adviser and is directly responsible for the appointment,
compensation and oversight of the work of any such adviser. However, before engaging or receiving advice from a
compensation consultant, external legal counsel or any other adviser, the Compensation Committee will consider the
independence of each such adviser, including in accordance with applicable regulations and Nasdaq listing standards.
Nominating and Corporate Governance Committee
Nominating and Corporate Governance Committee members include David Wallerstein, Thomas Enders, and Niklas
Zennström, with Mr. Wallerstein serving as the chair of the Nominating and Corporate Governance Committee.
The Nominating and Corporate Governance Committee’s responsibilities include, among other things:
●
identifying and recommending nominees for election by the Board;
●
evaluating the Board on its performance;
●
recommend changes to our corporate governance framework and guidelines to the Board; and
●
overseeing our environmental, social and governance policies and practices
Code of Business Conduct
We have adopted a code of business conduct that applies to all of our employees, officers and directors, including those
officers responsible for financial reporting. The code of business conduct is available on our website. We intend to disclose any
amendment to the code, or any waivers of its requirements, on our website.


92
EXECUTIVE COMPENSATION
Historical Compensation of Executive Officers
The amount of compensation, including benefits in kind, accrued or paid to our executive officers with respect to the year
ended December 31, 2020 is described in the table below:
    
Daniel
    
All other
(Euros in thousands)(*)
Wiegand
executives
Periodically-paid remuneration
   €
 170
  €
 52.3
Bonuses
   
 —
   
 —
Share-based compensation expense
   
 —
   
 —
Additional benefit payments
   
 —
   
 —
Total compensation
   
 170
   
 52.3
(*) Amounts paid in U.S. Dollars have been converted to Euros using an annual exchange rate for 2020 of €0.87 to one U.S.
dollar.
Compensation of Non-Executive Board Members
Niklas Zennström, David Wallerstein and Dr. Thomas Enders, our non-executive directors who served as members of the
Lilium GmbH board, did not receive any compensation from us for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Equity Awards
Our directors and executive officers held the following Lilium stock options (both vested and unvested) as of the Closing
Date:
    
    
Number of shares
    
subject to stock options
Exercise price per stock 
Beneficiary
Grant date
outstanding(1)
option(2)
Henri Courpron
 
—
 
 —  
 —
Dr. Thomas Enders
January 1, 2021
 
 48,569
(3)
(7)   €
 1.00
September 1, 2021  
 82,853 (4)(7)€
 1.00
Barry Engle
—
 
 —
 
 —
Geoffrey Richardson
November 16, 2020  
 714,250 (5)(7)€
 1.00
September 13,
2021
 
 1,374,217 (6)(7)$
 28,570
David Wallerstein
—
 
 —
 
 —
Daniel Wiegand
—
 
 —
 
 —
Niklas Zennström
—
 
 —
 
 —
Gabrielle Toledano
—
 
 —
 
 —
David Neeleman
—
 
 —
 
 —
Margaret M. Smyth
—
 
 —
 
 —
(1) Stock options granted before consummation of the Business Combination, subject to the consent of the individual award
holder were converted into options to purchase Class A Shares by using the following conversion method (simplified): the
number of shares subject to the options as of immediately prior to the Business Combination was multiplied by the
conversion ratio used for purposes of the Business Combination. The number of shares in this column reflect the post-
conversion amounts.
(2) Following the consummation of the Business Combination, 2,857 Class A Shares are subject to each stock option.
(3) The stock options vest in equal monthly installments over the 24-month period following the date of grant.
(4) The stock options shall vest 4% in the year 2021, 11% in the year 2022, 40% in the year 2023 and 45% in the year 2024, in
each case, in equal monthly installments within each such year on the first date of each month.
(5) Mr. Richardson provides services in the U.S. These stock options are treated as restricted stock units (“RSUs”) for U.S. tax
purposes. 25% of the RSUs are scheduled to vest on November 16, 2021, and 1/48th of the RSUs are scheduled to
vest monthly thereafter. The RSUs become fully vested if Mr. Richardson’s employment is terminated without cause or if
he resigns for good reason (each as defined in Mr. Richardson’s offer letter), in each case, within 12 months following a
change in control or prior to the consummation of a change in control if such termination is in connection with such change
in control.


93
(6) The stock options shall vest 4.4% on the last day each quarter during the period commencing on September 13, 2021 and
ending on December 31, 2023, 5.9% on the last day of each quarter during the period commencing on January 1, 2024 and
ending on December 31, 2024 and 9.5% on the last day of each quarter during the period commencing on January 1, 2025
and ending on December 31, 2025.
(7) Subject to the consent of each executive officer and board member, the stock options will become vested and exercisable
based on the satisfaction of the service-based vesting conditions applicable to such stock options as of immediately prior to
the Business Combination, provided that such stock options will not be exercisable during the 180-day lock-up period
immediately following the Business Combination. Following the 180-day lock-up period, vested stock options must be
exercised during certain exercise windows during each quarter of Lilium’s fiscal year (with the exact dates during each such
quarterly period to be determined by Lilium). Such stock options will generally expire on the tenth anniversary of the
applicable date the stock options become exercisable. Please see “Our Legacy Employee Stock Option Program” below for
more information, including certain exceptions to the foregoing.
Share Ownership of Executive Officers and Non-Executive Directors
See the section entitled “Principal Securityholders” below.
Our Legacy Employee Stock Option Program
Prior to the Business Combination, certain beneficiaries were given the opportunity to participate in an Employee Stock
Option Program (the “Legacy Stock Option Program”) as part of a long-term equity incentive scheme. The Legacy Stock Option
Program was adopted by our shareholders in 2017 and subsequently clarified for certain purposes in December 2020.
Under the Legacy Stock Option Program, the beneficiaries generally received stock options to purchase Lilium shares at a
per share exercise price equal to €1.00, provided that certain stock options granted to U.S. taxpayers are treated as RSUs for
U.S. tax purposes while other stock options granted to U.S. taxpayers were priced with an exercise price per stock option equal
to $28,570. Stock options granted under the Legacy Stock Option Program generally vest over a 4-year period, with 25%
vesting on the first anniversary of the grant date, and the remaining 75% vesting in equal monthly installments on the last day of
each calendar month thereafter, subject to deviating arrangements in the individual case. Employees who terminate employment
with us may retain any stock options vested as of the applicable termination date, unless such termination of employment is a
termination by us for cause or for person-related or conduct-related reasons under German labor law.
Subject to the consent of each executive officer and board member, the stock options (including any stock options treated as
RSUs for U.S. tax purposes) will become vested and exercisable, as applicable, based on the satisfaction of the service-based
vesting conditions applicable to such stock options as of immediately prior to the Business Combination, provided that such
stock options will not be exercisable or settled, as applicable, during the 180-day lock-up period immediately following the
Business Combination. Any stock options treated as RSUs for U.S. tax purposes may not be exercised, and will instead be
settled no later than March 15th of the calendar year immediately following the calendar year during which such RSUs become
vested. The terms and conditions for the exercise of all other stock options following the 180-day lock-up period are described
below.
Following the 180-day lock-up period, vested stock options must be exercised during certain exercise windows during each
quarter of Lilium’s fiscal year (with the exact dates during each such quarterly period to be determined by Lilium). The stock
options will generally expire on the tenth anniversary of the applicable date the stock options become exercisable.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, if the employment or service of the applicable option holder terminates for any reason prior to
the end of the 180-day lock-up period, the stock options will expire upon the later of (i) the end of the last day of the 90-day
period immediately following the month in which the 180-day lock-up period expires and (ii) if the stock options cannot be
exercised by the option holder due to legal reasons or because there is no exercise window during that period, the end of the
next exercise window in which the stock options can be exercised. In addition, notwithstanding the foregoing, if the
employment or service of the applicable option holder terminates for any reason after the end of the 180-day lock-up period, the
stock options will expire upon the later of (i) the last day of the 90-day period immediately following the date of termination and
(ii) if the stock options cannot be exercised by the option holder due to legal reasons or because there is no exercise window
during that period, the end of the next exercise window in which the stock options can be exercised.
2021 Equity Incentive Plan
The 2021 Equity Incentive Plan (the “2021 Plan”) was adopted in connection with the Business Combination in order to
facilitate the grant of equity awards to attract, retain and incentivize employees (including executive officers), independent
contractors and


94
directors of the Company and its affiliates, which is essential to the Company’s long-term success. The 2021 Plan is intended to
replace the Legacy Stock Option Program established by Lilium, which was assumed in the Business Combination.
Administration. The 2021 Plan is administered by our Compensation Committee, except with respect to matters that are not
delegated to the Compensation Committee by the Board. The Compensation Committee (or Board, as applicable) will have,
among other things, the discretionary authority to interpret the 2021 Plan and any awards granted under it, determine eligibility
for and grant awards, determine the exercise price, base value from which appreciation is measured or purchase price, if any,
applicable to any award, determine, modify, accelerate and waive the terms and conditions of any award, determine the form of
settlement of awards, prescribe forms, rules and procedures relating to the 2021 Plan and awards and otherwise to do all things
necessary or desirable to carry out the purposes of the 2021 Plan or any award; provided that, other than in connection with
certain corporate transactions or changes to our capital structure, shareholder approval will be required to reprice, amend, or
substitute stock options granted under the 2021 Plan with new stock options having a lower exercise price, and to pay any
consideration upon the cancellation of any stock options that have a per share exercise price greater than the fair market value of
a share on the date of such cancellation. The Compensation Committee (or Board, as applicable) may delegate such of its duties,
powers and responsibilities as it may determine to one or more of its members, members of the Board and, to the extent
permitted by law, our officers, and may delegate to employees and other persons such ministerial tasks as it deems appropriate.
As used in this summary, the term “EIP Administrator” refers to the Compensation Committee (or Board, as applicable) and its
authorized delegates, as applicable.
Eligibility. Our employees and independent contractors (including employees and independent contractors of our
subsidiaries and, to the extent permitted under applicable law, our affiliates) are eligible, as are our non-employee directors
(collectively, the “service providers”) to participate in the 2021 Plan. Eligibility for stock options intended to be incentive stock
options, or ISOs, is limited to our employees or employees of certain of our affiliates. Eligibility for nonstatutory stock options
and stock appreciation rights is limited to service providers who are providing direct services to us or certain of our affiliates on
the date of grant of the award.
Authorized Shares. Subject to adjustment as described below, the maximum number of shares that may be delivered in
satisfaction of awards under the 2021 Plan is 24,880,272 shares, which will be increased by that number of shares underlying
legacy options that are unallocated under the Legacy Stock Option Program, taking into account (i) any increases or adjustments
to the share reserve of the Legacy Stock Option Program prior to, or at, the consummation of the Business Combination and
(ii) forfeitures of options previously issued under the Legacy Stock Option Program following the consummation of the
Business Combination. The share pool may be increased on the first day of each fiscal year of the Company by such number of
shares determined by the Board on or prior to the date of any increase that will not exceed 5% of the outstanding shares on the
last day of the immediately preceding fiscal year. The number of shares delivered in satisfaction of awards under the 2021 Plan
is determined (i) by excluding shares withheld by us in payment of the exercise price or purchase price of the award or in
satisfaction of tax withholding requirements with respect to the award, (ii) by including only the number of shares delivered in
settlement of a SAR any portion of which is settled in shares, and (iii) by excluding any shares underlying awards settled in cash
or that expire, become unexercisable, terminate or are forfeited to us without the delivery (or retention, in the case of restricted
stock) of shares.
Director Limits. The aggregate value of all compensation granted or paid to any of our non-employee directors with respect
to any fiscal year, including awards under the 2021 Plan, for his or her services as a director during such calendar year, may not
exceed $1,000,000 in total value for any non-employee director serving as the lead director of the Board or chair of the Board
and $750,000 for any other non-employee director, with the value of any awards under the 2021 Plan calculated based on their
grant date fair value and assuming maximum payout. Such limits will include the value of any stock awards that are received in
lieu of all or a portion of any annual committee cash retainers or other similar cash based payments, but will not include stock
awards granted to an individual while he or she was serving in a service-provider capacity other than as a non-employee
director.
Stock Options.  The EIP Administrator may grant stock options, which is a right entitling the holder to acquire Class A 
shares of the Company upon payment of the applicable exercise price. Each stock option will be designated in the award 
agreement as either an incentive stock option, or ISO, or a nonstatutory stock option. The exercise price per share of each stock 
option granted under the 2021 Plan may be no less than 100% of the fair market value of a share on the date of grant (110% in 
the case of certain ISOs), except that stock options may be granted with an exercise price per share of less than 100% of the fair 
market value of a share on the date of grant in certain circumstances consistent with Section 424(a) of the Code, Section 409A 
of the Code and other applicable law, to the extent applicable. Each stock option will have a maximum term of not more than 
ten years from the date of grant (or five years, in the case of certain ISOs).
Restricted Stock.  The EIP Administrator may grant awards of restricted stock, which are Class A shares of the Company 
subject to restrictions requiring that they be forfeited, redelivered or offered for sale to us if specified performance or other 
vesting conditions are not satisfied. During the period of restriction, individuals holding shares of restricted stock may exercise 
full voting rights, and will be entitled to receive all dividends and other distributions paid, with respect to those shares, unless 
the EIP Administrator determines otherwise. During the period of restriction, any such dividends or distributions will be subject 
to the same restrictions and risk of 


95
forfeiture as the shares of restricted stock with respect to which the dividends accrue and will not be paid or distributed unless 
and until such related shares have vested and been earned.
Stock Appreciation Rights.  The EIP Administrator may grant stock appreciation rights, which is a right entitling the holder 
upon exercise to receive an amount (payable in cash or shares of equivalent value) equal to the excess of the fair market value of 
the shares subject to the right over the per share exercise price from which appreciation is measured. The per share exercise 
price for the shares to be issued pursuant to the exercise of a stock appreciation right will be determined by the EIP 
Administrator and will be no less than 100% of the fair market value of a share on the date of grant.
Stock Units.  The EIP Administrator may grant awards of stock units, which is a bookkeeping entry representing an amount 
equal to the fair market value of one share of Class A shares of the Company. The EIP Administrator may settle earned stock 
units in cash, shares, or a combination of both. The EIP Administrator may award dividend equivalents in connection with the 
grant of stock units that may be settled in cash, in shares of equivalent value, or in some combination thereof. Absent a contrary 
provision in an award agreement, such dividend equivalents will be subject to the same restrictions and risk of forfeiture as the 
restricted stock units with respect to which the dividends accrue and will not be paid or settled unless and until the related 
restricted stock units have vested and been earned.
Stock Bonuses.  The EIP Administrator may grant stock bonus awards, which are awards of Class A shares of the Company 
without a purchase price that are not subject to any restrictions.
Substitute Awards. The EIP Administrator may grant substitute awards in connection with certain corporate transactions,
which may have terms and conditions that are inconsistent with the terms and conditions of the 2021 Plan.
Adjustment Provisions. In the event of a stock dividend, stock split or combination of shares (including a reverse stock
split), recapitalization or other change in our capital structure, the EIP Administrator will make appropriate adjustments to the
maximum number of shares that may be delivered under the 2021 Plan, the individual award limits, the number and kind of
securities subject to, and, if applicable, the exercise or purchase prices (or base values) of outstanding awards, and any other
provisions affected by such event.
Effect of Certain Corporation Transactions. In the event of certain corporate transactions, the EIP Administrator may, with
respect to the outstanding awards, provide for any one or more of the following, without the participant’s consent (in each case,
on such terms and subject to such conditions as it deems appropriate): (i) the assumption, substitution or continuation of some or
all awards (or any portion thereof) by the acquiror or surviving entity; (ii) the acceleration of exercisability or delivery of shares
in respect of any award, in full or in part; (iii) the opportunity to exercise options prior to the occurrence of the corporate
transaction; (iv) the cancellation of some or all of the awards in exchange for a payment equal to the difference between the fair
market value of the shares subject to the award and its exercise or base price, if any; or (v) the cancellation of outstanding
awards in exchange for no consideration. The EIP Administrator need not treat all outstanding awards (or any portion thereof) in
an identical manner.
Clawback. The EIP Administrator may provide that any outstanding award, the proceeds of any award or shares acquired
thereunder and any other amounts received in respect of any award or shares acquired thereunder will be subject to reduction,
cancellation, forfeiture or recoupment upon the occurrence of specified events. In addition, awards are subject to our clawback
policy as may be established or amended from time to time. The EIP Administrator may require a participant to forfeit, return to
and/or reimburse the Company for all or any portion of the award and/or shares issued under any award, any amounts paid
under an award, and any payments or proceeds paid or provided upon the disposition of shares issued under the award, pursuant
to the terms of such company policy or as required by applicable law.
Amendments and Termination. The EIP Administrator may at any time amend the 2021 Plan or any outstanding award and
may at any time suspend or terminate the 2021 Plan as to future grants. However, except as expressly provided in the 2021 Plan
or applicable award agreement, the EIP Administrator may not alter the terms of an award so as to materially and adversely
affect a participant’s rights without the participant’s consent. Any amendments to the 2021 Plan will be conditioned on
shareholder approval to the extent required by applicable law, regulations or stock exchange requirements. Any termination of
the 2021 Plan will not affect the EIP Administrator’s ability to exercise the powers granted to it with respect to awards granted
prior to the date of such termination.
2021 Employee Share Purchase Plan
The 2021 Employee Share Purchase Plan (the “ESPP”) was adopted in connection with the Business Combination to permit
eligible employees and/or eligible service providers the opportunity to purchase Class A shares of the Company. The ESPP
promotes employee retention and incentives for such persons to exert maximum efforts for the success of the Company and its
affiliates.


96
Qualified and Non-qualified Offerings. The ESPP consists of two components: a 423 component and a non-423 component.
The 423 component is designed to qualify as an employee stock purchase plan under section 423 of the Code. The non-423
component need not satisfy the requirements applicable to the 423 component, but except as otherwise determined by the Board,
the non-433 component will operate and be administered in the same manner as the 423 component. Eligible service providers
(who may or may not be eligible employees) will only be able to participate in the non-423 component of the ESPP.
Administration. The Board has delegated the administration of the ESPP to the Compensation Committee (the “ESPP
Administrator”), which has the power and discretionary authority to interpret the ESPP, determine eligibility under the ESPP,
prescribe forms, rules and procedures relating to our ESPP, and otherwise do all things necessary or desirable to carry out the
purposes of the ESPP.
Shares Subject to the ESPP. Subject to adjustment as described below, zero shares are currently available for purchase
pursuant to the exercise of options under the ESPP. The share pool may be increased on the first day of each fiscal year of the
Company by such number of shares determined by the Board on or prior to the date of any increase that will not exceed the
lesser of (i) 1% of the number of shares outstanding as of the close of business on the last day of the immediately preceding
fiscal year and (ii) the number of shares equal to 1% of the number of shares of the Company immediately after the Business
Combination. If any option granted under the ESPP expires or terminates for any reason without having been exercised in full or
ceases for any reason to be exercisable in whole or in part, the unpurchased shares subject to such option will again be available
for purchase under the ESPP.
Eligibility. Participation in the ESPP is generally limited to our employees and service providers and employees and service
providers of our subsidiaries and affiliates (i) who have completed at least two years of service since the employee’s or service
provider’s last hire date, (ii) whose customary employment with us or one of our subsidiaries or affiliates, as applicable, is for
more than five months per calendar year, (iii) who customarily work 20 hours or more per week, (iv) who are not highly
compensated employees within the meaning of Section 423 of the Code and (v) who satisfy the requirements set forth in the
ESPP or such other criteria as the Board may determine consistent with Section 423 of the Code. Any employee who owns (or is
deemed under statutory attribution rules to own) shares possessing 5% or more of the total combined voting power or value of
all classes of shares of us or our parent or subsidiaries, if any, is not eligible to participate in the ESPP. Purchase rights granted
pursuant to any offering under the ESPP will terminate immediately if the participant either (i) is no longer an eligible employee
or eligible service provider for any reason or for no reason, or (ii) is otherwise no longer eligible to participate. As soon as
practicable, the ESPP Administrator will distribute to such individual all of his or her accumulated but unused contributions
without interest.
General Terms of Participation. The ESPP allows eligible employees and service providers to purchase shares during
specified offering periods. Offerings may be comprised of one or more purchase periods. The maximum length for an offering
under the ESPP is 27 months. During each offering period, eligible employees and service providers will be granted an option to
purchase shares on each purchase date within the offering (up to certain statutory limits), each corresponding to the end of a
purchase period within such offering. In connection with each offering, the ESPP Administrator may specify a maximum
number of shares that may be purchased by any participant or all participants.
The purchase price of each share issued pursuant to the exercise of an option under the ESPP on an exercise date will be
85% (or such greater percentage as specified by the ESPP Administrator) of the lesser of: (a) the fair market value of a share of
Class A shares of the Company on the date the option is granted, which will be the first day of the offering period, and (b) the
fair market value of a share of Class A shares of the Company on the exercise date, which will be the last business day of the
offering period.
Participants in our ESPP will pay for shares purchased under the ESPP through payroll deductions to the extent permitted
by applicable law. Participants may elect to authorize payroll deductions between 1% and 15% of the participant’s eligible
compensation each payroll period. To the extent permitted in the offering document, a participant may increase, reduce or
terminate his or her payroll deductions. All payroll deductions made on behalf of a participant are credited to his or her account
under the ESPP and deposited with our general funds. To the extent permitted in the offering document, a participant may make
additional payments into such account. If required under applicable laws or regulations or if specifically provided in the
offering, in addition to or instead of making contributions by payroll deductions, a participant may make contributions through a
payment by cash, check, or wire transfer prior to a purchase date, in a manner the ESPP Administrator directs.
Restart. To the extent more than one purchase period is provided during an offering, the ESPP Administrator will have the
discretion to structure such offering so that if the fair market value of a share on the first trading day of a new purchase period
within that offering is less than or equal to the fair market value of a share on the offering date for that offering, then (i) that
offering will terminate as of the purchase date specified with respect to such purchase period, after giving effect to such
purchase on the applicable purchase date, (ii) all contribution amounts not applied to the purchase of shares after giving effect to
such purchase on the applicable purchase date will be refunded to the applicable participants and (iii) the participants in such
terminated offering will be automatically enrolled in a new offering beginning on the first trading day of such new offering
period and purchase period.


97
Adjustments. In the event of a stock dividend, stock split or combination of shares (including a reverse stock split),
recapitalization, or other change in our capital structure that constitutes an equity restructuring, the ESPP Administrator will
make appropriate adjustments to the aggregate number and type of shares available for purchase under the ESPP, the number
and type of shares by which the share reserve may be increased each year, the number and type of shares granted under any
outstanding options, the maximum number and type of shares purchasable under any outstanding option and/or the purchase
price per share under any outstanding option.
Corporate Transactions. In the event of certain corporate transactions, the ESPP Administrator may provide that each
outstanding option will be assumed or continued or substituted for or, if any surviving or acquiring corporation (or its parent
company) does not agree to assume or continue such options or does not substitute similar rights, then participants’ accumulated
contributions will be used to purchase shares prior to the corporate transaction, and the options will terminate immediately after
such purchase.
Amendments and Termination. The Board has discretion to amend the ESPP to any extent and in any manner it may deem
advisable, provided that shareholder approval will be required for any amendment of the ESPP for which shareholder approval
is required by applicable laws.
Equity Grants to Management and Directors in Connection with the Closing of the Business Combination
Richardson Success Fee
On September 10, 2021, Lilium entered into a success fee letter with Geoffrey Richardson, our Chief Financial Officer,
pursuant to which Lilium has agreed to pay Mr. Richardson a success fee equal to 0.5% of financing proceeds secured by Lilium
(provided the value of the success fee may not exceed $4,000,000), including financing proceeds secured by Lilium in
connection with the Business Combination, subject to Mr. Richardson’s continued employment through the consummation of
the Business Combination. The success fee will be paid in the form of fully vested Class A Shares as soon as reasonably
practicable following the filing of a Form S-8 with the SEC in respect of shares authorized for issuance under the 2021 Plan. In
addition, to the extent that Mr. Richardson is required to make a payment to Lilium in respect of the Class A Shares, Lilium will
provide Mr. Richardson with a cash bonus equal to the amount of the required payment, increased by any taxes owed with
respect to such amount.
Other Arrangements with Management and Directors in Connection with the Closing of the Business Combination
Wiegand Service Agreements
On December 1, 2015, Lilium’s German subsidiary entered into a managing director service agreement with Mr. Wiegand,
which was later amended on September 20, 2017 and September 14, 2021. The service agreement, as amended, provides for,
among other things, a €200,000 annual base salary.
On September 14, 2021, Lilium also entered into a contract for services with Mr. Wiegand, which provides for, among other
things, a salary of €300,000 annual base salary.
Richardson Offer Letter and Employment Agreement
On November 14, 2020, Lilium’s U.S. subsidiary entered into an offer letter with Mr. Richardson, which was later amended
on September 19, 2021. The offer letter, as amended, provides for, among other things, a $350,000 base salary and eligibility to
receive equity awards and eligibility to participate in Lilium’s employee benefit plans. The offer letter further provides that if
Mr. Richardson’s employment is terminated by Lilium without cause or by Mr. Richardson for good reason (each as defined in
Mr. Richardson’s offer letter), Mr. Richardson will be entitled to receive 6 months’ base salary and benefits continuation for
6 months following the termination date, subject to his execution and nonrevocation of a release of claims.
On September 14, 2021, Lilium also entered into an employment agreement with Mr. Richardson, which provides for,
among other things, a $150,000 base salary.
Non-Executive Director Compensation
In connection with the Business Combination, Lilium adopted a board member compensation policy, which governs the
compensation of Lilium’s executive and non-executive directors. The terms and conditions of the board member compensation
policy that are applicable to non-executive directors (referred to herein as the “Non-Executive Director Compensation Policy”)
are designed


98
to attract and retain high quality non-executive board members by providing competitive compensation and aligning their
interests with the interests of shareholders through equity awards.
Cash Retainers
The Non-Executive Director Compensation Policy provides for annual cash retainers, which will be payable quarterly in
arrears and pro-rated for partial quarters of service and certain other benefits. Each non-executive board member may also elect
to convert all or a portion of his or her annual board member service retainer into RSUs, which will be subject to vesting on the
same payment schedule, and subject to the same conditions, as applied to the underlying retainer. Any portion of the RSUs that
vests in respect of a partial quarter of service will be pro-rated based on the number of days of service that the non-executive
board member provided in such quarter. In addition, subject to the approval of Lilium and applicable law, prior to a cash retainer
being earned, a non-executive board member may elect to defer such cash retainer into fully-vested deferred stock units
(“DSUs”), which will be granted after such retainer is earned and will be settled in Class A Shares upon the earlier of (i) the date
chosen on the applicable election form and (ii) a separation from service. Subject to the approval of Lilium and applicable law, a
non-executive board member may also elect to defer RSUs into DSUs with a settlement date that occurs at least one year after
the applicable vesting date and up to the time the non-executive board member has a separation from service.
Transitional Equity Grants
The Non-Executive Director Compensation Policy also provides that prior to the 2022 General Meeting of shareholders, in
lieu of the RSU grants described below, non-executive directors will receive transitional RSU grants upon the following terms
under the 2021 Plan, which will vest, subject to continuous service through the applicable vesting date:
●
Non-executive board members who are elected or appointed to the Board on or after the Closing (but before the 2022
General Meeting of shareholders) will be granted 32,500 RSUs covering an equal number of Class A Shares, which
will vest in three equal annual installments from the date of grant.
●
Non-executive directors who are elected or appointed on or after the Closing will be granted RSUs covering an equal
number of Class A Shares, which will be pro-rated based on an initial target of 17,500 Class A Shares and the number
of full months that are expected to lapse between the non-executive board member’s appointment to the Board and the
2022 General Meeting of shareholders. The RSUs will vest on the date immediately preceding the date of the next
annual General Meeting of shareholders.
Equity Compensation Beginning at the 2022 General Meeting of Shareholders
In addition, the Non-Executive Director Compensation Policy provides that non-executive directors will receive RSU
grants under the 2021 Plan on the date of each annual General Meeting of shareholders (beginning at the 2022 meeting), and
upon the beginning of service, which will vest, subject to continuous service through the applicable vesting date:
●
RSUs initially valued at $325,000 upon initial election or appointment to the Board, which will vest in three equal
annual installments from the date of grant; and
●
Additional RSUs initially valued at $175,000 annually, which will vest upon the earlier of the first anniversary of the
date of grant or the next annual General Meeting of shareholders, prorated for the initial year of service.
All vesting is subject to the non-executive board member’s continued service as a member of the Board through each
applicable vesting date. Notwithstanding the foregoing, if a non-executive board member remains in continuous service as a
member of the Board until immediately prior to: (a) the non-executive board member’s death, (b) the termination of the non-
executive board member’s service due to the non-executive board member’s disability or (c) the closing of a change in control
(as defined in the 2021 Plan) (each a “Director Acceleration Event”), any unvested RSUs will vest in full immediately prior to,
and contingent upon, the applicable Director Acceleration Event.
Notwithstanding the above, each non-executive board member may elect to waive any or all of his or her compensation
under the Non-Executive Director Compensation Policy prior to the payment of such compensation.


99
DESCRIPTION OF SECURITIES
This section of the prospectus includes a description of the material terms of our articles of association and of applicable
Dutch law. The following description is intended as a summary only and does not constitute legal advice regarding those
matters and should not be regarded as such. The description is qualified in its entirety by reference to the complete text of our
articles of association, which are included elsewhere in this registration statement. We urge you to read the full text of our
articles of association.
Overview
We were incorporated as Qell DutchCo B.V on March 11, 2021 as a private limited liability company (besloten
vennootschap met beperkte aansprakelijkheid) under Dutch law and were renamed to Lilium B.V. by separate deed of
amendment of the articles of association on April 8, 2021. In connection with the consummation of the Business Combination,
we converted into a Dutch public limited liability company (naamloze vennootschap) pursuant to a deed of conversion and
amendment of our articles of association adopted on September 10, 2021 (as so amended, the“articles of association”). We are
registered in the Commercial Register of the Chamber of Commerce (Kamer van Koophandel) in the Netherlands under number
82165874.
The Lilium Shares are subject to, and have been created under, Dutch law. Set forth below is a summary of relevant
information concerning the material provisions of the articles of association and applicable Dutch law.
Lilium is a Dutch public limited liability company (naamloze vennootschap). Lilium has a one-tier board structure which
consists of nine members, one executive director and eight non-executive directors, as discussed in more detail under
“Management — Executive Officers and Directors.”
Share Capital
Authorized Share Capital
Under Dutch law, the authorized share capital of a public limited liability company is the maximum capital that we may
issue without amending the articles of association and may be a maximum of five times the issued capital. The articles of
association provide for an authorized share capital in the amount of €194,454,208.32.
Our authorized share capital is divided into:
1,498,386,411 Class A ordinary shares with a nominal value of €0.12 per share;
24,413,065 Class B ordinary shares with a nominal value of €0.36 per share; and
24,413,065 Class C ordinary shares with a nominal value of €0.24 per share.
Issued Share Capital
Our issued and outstanding share capital as of September 14, 2021 consists of:
259,696,994 Class A ordinary shares with a nominal value of €0.12 each; and
24,413,065 Class B ordinary shares with a nominal value of €0.36 each.
We also held 375,000 issued Class A ordinary shares as treasury shares as of  September 14, 2021.
Issuance of Lilium Shares
Under Dutch law, shares are issued and rights to subscribe for shares are granted pursuant to a resolution of the General
Meeting. The articles of association provide that Lilium Shares may be issued pursuant to (i) a resolution proposed by the Board
and adopted by the General Meeting or (ii) a resolution of the Board if, pursuant to a resolution of the General Meeting, the
Board has been authorized for a specific period not exceeding five years to issue Lilium Shares. Pursuant to the articles of
association, the General Meeting may authorize the Board to issue Lilium Shares or grant rights to subscribe for Lilium Shares.
The authorization can be granted and extended, in each case for a period not exceeding five years. For as long as, and to the
extent, that such authorization is effective, the General Meeting will not have the power to issue Lilium Shares or grant rights to
subscribe for Lilium Shares. Pursuant to the articles


100
of association, Lilium Shares shall be issued up to the amount of the authorized share capital (from time to time). The Board is
irrevocably authorized to issue Lilium Shares and to grant rights to subscribe for Lilium Shares for a period of five years and up
to 25% of the issued share capital, both as from the date of the completion of the Business Combination.
Conversion of Class B Shares
Class B Shares may only be Transferred (as defined in the articles of association) to (i) Permitted Transferees (as defined in
the articles of association) or (ii) Lilium. A Class B Share will be converted into one Class A Share and one Class C ordinary
share, nominal value €0.24 per share (a “Class C Share”) (in accordance with the articles of association) upon the occurrence of
a Conversion Event or a Shares B Compulsory Conversion Event (each as defined in the articles of association). If a Class C
Share is held by anyone other than Lilium (regardless as a consequence of conversion), such holder of Class C Shares (a
Transferor) must notify Lilium of this fact by written notice within three days after the occurrence of such event, following the
failure of which Lilium is irrevocably empowered and authorized to offer and transfer the relevant Class C Shares. The
Transferor, other than Lilium itself, must transfer such Class C Shares to Lilium for no consideration. The end result of the
conversion of Class B Shares is that a Lilium shareholder acquires one Class A Share for each converted Class B Share. If
Lilium fails to accept the offered Class C Shares from the Transferor within three months after receipt of notice, the Transferor’s
dividend rights attached to its Class C Shares will revive.
Preemptive Rights
Under the articles of association, each holder of Class A Shares or Class B Shares (as applicable) shall have a pre-emption
right pro rata to the total number of (in aggregate) Class A Shares and Class B Shares (whereby the Class A Shares and Class B
Shares shall, for the purposes hereof, be treated as a single class of shares) held by such person on the date of the resolution to
issue the Class A Shares and/or Class B Shares, it being understood that this pre-emption right shall not apply to an issuance of
Class A Shares:
●
to employees of Lilium or employees of a Lilium group company; and
●
to a person exercising a previously obtained right to acquire Class A Shares or Class B Shares, in accordance with the
provisions of the articles of association.
No pre-emption rights shall apply in respect of an issuance of Class C Shares. The preemptive rights in respect of newly
issued Class A Shares or Class B Shares may be restricted or excluded by a resolution of the General Meeting, upon proposal by
the Board. Pursuant to the articles of association, the General Meeting may authorize the Board to limit or exclude the
preemptive rights in respect of newly issued Class A Shares or Class B Shares. Such authorization for the Board can be granted
and extended, in each case for a period not exceeding five years.
The Board is irrevocably authorized for a period of five years from the date of the Business Combination to limit or exclude
preemptive rights on Class A Shares and Class B Shares.
Transfer of Shares
Under Dutch law, transfers of Lilium Shares (other than in book-entry form) require a written deed of transfer and, unless
Lilium is a party to the deed of transfer, an acknowledgement by or proper service upon Lilium to be effective.
Under the articles of association, if one or more Lilium Shares are admitted to trading on the Nasdaq or any other Regulated
Market (as defined in the articles of association), Lilium may, by Board resolution, determine that the laws of the State of New
York will apply to the property law aspects of the Lilium Shares included in the part of the register of shareholders kept by the
relevant transfer agent. Such resolution, as well as the revocation thereof, must be made public as required by law and be made
available for inspection at our office and the Dutch trade register. The Board adopted such a resolution effective as of the closing
of the Business Combination.
All Lilium Shares and Public Warrants received by Qell public shareholders in the Business Combination are freely
tradable, except that Lilium Shares and Public Warrants received in the Business Combination by persons who become affiliates
of Lilium for purposes of Rule 144 under the Securities Act may be resold by them only in transactions permitted by Rule 144,
or as otherwise permitted under the Securities Act. Persons who may be deemed affiliates of Lilium generally include
individuals or entities that control, are controlled by or are under common control with, Lilium and may include the directors
and executive officers of Lilium, as well as its principal shareholders. Private Warrants received by the Sponsor in the Business
Combination may be resold by the Sponsor only in transactions permitted by Rule 144, or as otherwise permitted under the
Securities Act. For additional detail on the use of Rule 144, see “— Rule 144” below. For additional detail on the Warrants, see
“— Warrants” below.


101
Form of Lilium Shares
Pursuant to the articles of association, Lilium Shares are registered shares.
Purchase and Repurchase of Lilium Shares
Under Dutch law, Lilium may not subscribe for newly issued Lilium Shares. Lilium may acquire Lilium Shares, subject to
applicable provisions and restrictions of Dutch law and the articles of association, to the extent that:
●
such Lilium Shares are fully paid-up;
●
our equity capital, reduced by the acquisition price, is not less than the sum of the issued and paid-up capital and the
reserves to be maintained pursuant to the law or the articles of association;
●
following the transaction contemplated, at least one Lilium Share remains outstanding and is not held by Lilium; and
●
if Lilium is admitted to trading on a Regulated Market, the nominal value of the Lilium Shares to be acquired, already
held by Lilium or already held by Lilium as pledgee or which are held by Lilium subsidiaries, does not exceed 50% of
our issued capital.
Other than Lilium Shares acquired for gratuitously or under universal title of succession (onder algemene titel) (e.g.,
through a merger or demerger) under statutory Dutch or other law, Lilium may acquire Lilium Shares pursuant to the restrictions
set out above only if the General Meeting has authorized the Board to do so. An authorization by the General Meeting for the
acquisition of Lilium Shares can be granted for a maximum period of 18 months. Such authorization must specify the number of
Lilium Shares that may be acquired, the manner in which these shares may be acquired and the price range within which the
shares may be acquired. No authorization of the General Meeting is required if Lilium Shares are acquired by Lilium on Nasdaq
with the intention of transferring such Lilium Shares to our employees or employees of a group company pursuant to an
arrangement applicable to them. The General Meeting has adopted a resolution, with effect at the closing of the Business
Combination, to authorize the Board to repurchase Lilium Shares for a period of 18 months permitted under Dutch law and the
articles of association from time to time. For each annual General Meeting, Lilium expects that the Board will place on the
agenda a proposal to re-authorize the Board to repurchase Lilium Shares for a period of 18 months from the date of the
resolution. Lilium cannot derive any right to any distribution from Lilium Shares or voting rights attached to Lilium Shares
acquired by it.
Capital Reduction
The General Meeting may resolve to reduce our issued share capital by (i) cancelling Lilium Shares or (ii) reducing the
nominal value of the Lilium Shares by amending the articles of association (provided that the nominal value of a Lilium Shares
cannot be less than €0.01). In either case, this reduction would be subject to applicable statutory provisions. A resolution to
cancel Lilium Shares may only relate to Lilium Shares held by Lilium itself or in respect of which Lilium holds the depository
receipts. A resolution of the General Meeting to reduce the capital requires a majority of at least two-thirds of the votes cast, if
less than half of the issued capital is represented at the General Meeting.
A reduction of the nominal value of Lilium Shares without repayment and without release from the obligation to pay up the
Lilium Shares must be effectuated proportionally on shares of the same class (unless all affected shareholders agree to a
disproportional reduction).
A resolution that would result in a reduction of capital requires approval by a majority of the votes cast of each group of
shareholders of the same class whose rights are prejudiced by the reduction. In addition, a reduction of capital involves a two-
month waiting period during which creditors have the right to object to a reduction of capital under specified circumstances.
General Meeting and Voting Rights
General Meeting
General Meetings are held in Amsterdam , Rotterdam, Utrecht, the Hague or in Haarlemmermeer (Schiphol Airport), the
Netherlands. All of our shareholders and others entitled to attend the General Meetings are authorized to address the meeting
and, in so far as they have such right, to vote, either in person or by proxy.


102
We shall hold at least one General Meeting each year, to be held within six months after the end of our financial year. A
General Meeting shall also be held within three months after the Board has determined it to be likely that our equity has
decreased to an amount equal to or lower than half of its paid up and called up capital, in order to discuss the measures to be
taken if so required. If the Board fails to hold such General Meeting in a timely manner, each shareholder and other person
entitled to attend the General Meeting may be authorized by the Dutch court to convene the General Meeting.
The Board may convene additional extraordinary General Meetings at its discretion, subject to the notice requirements
described below. Pursuant to Dutch law, one or more shareholders and/or others entitled to attend General Meetings of
shareholders, alone or jointly representing at least 10% of our issued share capital, may on their application be authorized by the
Dutch court to convene a General Meeting. The Dutch court will disallow the application if (i) the applicants have not
previously requested in writing that the Board convenes a General Meeting, (ii) the Board convenes a General Meeting or
(iii) the Board has not taken the necessary steps so that the General Meeting could be held within six weeks after such request.
The General Meeting is convened by a notice, which includes an agenda stating the items to be discussed and the location
and time of the General Meeting. For the annual General Meeting the agenda will include, among other things, the management
report (as far as required by law), the adoption of our annual accounts and the granting of discharge from liability to members of
the Board for actions in respect of their management during the preceding financial year. In addition, the agenda for a General
Meeting includes such additional items as determined by the Board. Pursuant to Dutch law, one or more shareholders and/or
others entitled to attend General Meetings, alone or jointly representing at least 3% of the issued share capital, have the right to
request the inclusion of additional items on the agenda of General Meetings. Such requests must be made in writing, and may
include a proposal for a shareholder resolution, and must be received by us no later than on the 60th day before the day the
relevant General Meeting is scheduled to be held. No resolutions will be adopted on items other than those which have been
included in the agenda.
We will give notice of each General Meeting by publication on our website and, to the extent required by applicable law, in
a Dutch daily newspaper with national distribution, and in any other manner that we may be required to follow in order to
comply with Dutch law and applicable stock exchange and SEC requirements. We will observe the statutory minimum
convening notice period for a General Meeting. Holders of registered shares may further be provided notice of the meeting in
writing at their addresses as stated in our shareholders’ register.
Pursuant to the articles of association and Dutch law, the Board may determine a record date (registratiedatum) of 28
calendar days prior to a General Meeting to establish which shareholders and others with meeting rights are entitled to attend
and, if applicable, vote at the General Meeting. The record date, if any, and the manner in which shareholders can register and
exercise their rights will be set out in the notice of the General Meeting.
Pursuant to the articles of association, the General Meeting is presided by the Chairman of the Board, or, if he is absent, by
one of the other non-executive directors designated for that purpose by the Board. If no non-executive directors are present at
the meeting, the General Meeting shall be presided by one of the executive directors designated for that purpose by the Board.
Voting Rights and Quorum
In accordance with Dutch law and the articles of association, and in each case without prejudice to the Voting Cap (as
defined hereinafter) being applicable to any of shareholder:
●
each Class A Share confers the right to cast 12 votes in a General Meeting;
●
each Class B Share confers the right to cast 36 votes in a General Meeting; and
●
each Class C Share confers the right to cast 24 votes in a General Meeting.
Lilium Shares owned by the Company shall not bear any dividend rights unless rights of usufruct are created in respect of
such Lilium Shares prior to the acquisition by the Company, in which case the holder of usufruct shall be entitled to any
dividends on the underlying Lilium Shares.
Voting rights may be exercised by shareholders or by a duly appointed proxy holder (the written proxy being acceptable to
the chairman of the General Meeting) of a shareholder, which proxy holder does not need to be a shareholder. Only the holder of
a usufruct or pledge on Class A Shares shall have the voting rights attached thereto if so transferred and provided for when the
usufruct or pledge was created.


103
The voting of any Lilium shareholder who opts in for the Shareholders’ Covenant (as defined in the articles of association)
and is in breach of its commitment not to hold and/or acquire more than 24.9% of the total voting rights exercisable in the
General Meeting, is capped at 24.9% of the votes which may be issued in the relevant General Meeting (the “Voting Cap”). The
foregoing is subject to the Board determining that the relevant shareholder is in breach of its Shareholders’ Covenant.
Each of our shareholders is obliged to provide the Board with all information relevant to assess the applicability of the
Voting Cap to the number of votes in the General Meeting available to such shareholder.
Under the articles of association, blank votes (votes where no choice has been made), abstentions and invalid votes shall not
be counted as votes cast.
Resolutions of the shareholders are adopted at a General Meeting by a majority of votes cast, except where Dutch law or
the articles of association provide for a special majority in relation to specified resolutions. The articles of association do not
provide for a quorum requirement, subject to any provision of mandatory Dutch law.
Subject to certain restrictions in the articles of association, the determination during the General Meeting made by the
chairman of that General Meeting with regard to the results of a vote shall be decisive. The Board will keep a record of the
resolutions taken at each General Meeting.
Amendment of Articles of Association
At a General Meeting, at the proposal of the Board, the General Meeting may resolve to amend the articles of association.
Such resolution requires a majority of at least two-thirds of the votes cast, if less than half of the issued capital is represented at
the General Meeting. A resolution to amend the articles of association which negatively impacts the rights of holders of Class B
Shares requires the prior approval of the Class B Shares voting as a separate class.
Merger, Demerger and Dissolution
At a General Meeting, at the proposal of the Board, the General Meeting may resolve to dissolve, or to legally merge or
demerge the Company within the meaning of Title 7, Book 2 of the Dutch Civil Code. Such resolution requires a majority of at
least two-thirds the votes cast, if less than half of the issued capital is represented at the General Meeting.
In the event of dissolution of the Company and unless Dutch law provides otherwise, the liquidation shall be effected by the
Board unless the General Meeting appoints one or more other persons for this purpose.
Squeeze Out
A shareholder who for its own account (or together with its group companies) holds at least 95% of our issued share capital
may institute proceedings against the other shareholders jointly for the transfer of their shares to the shareholder who holds such
95% majority. The proceedings are held before the Enterprise Chamber of the Amsterdam Court of Appeal
(Ondernemingskamer van het Gerechtshof Amsterdam) (the “Enterprise Chamber”) and can be instituted by means of a writ of
summons served upon each of the minority shareholders in accordance with the provisions of the Dutch Code of Civil
Procedure (Wetboek van Burgerlijke Rechtsvordering). The Enterprise Chamber may grant the claim for squeeze-out in relation
to all minority shareholders and will determine the price to be paid for the shares, if necessary after appointment of one or three
experts who will offer an opinion to the Enterprise Chamber on the value of the shares of the minority shareholders. Once the
order to transfer by the Enterprise Chamber becomes final and irrevocable, the majority shareholder that instituted the squeeze-
out proceedings shall give written notice of the date and place of payment and the price to the holders of the shares to be
acquired whose addresses are known to the majority shareholder. Unless the addresses of all minority shareholders are known to
the majority shareholder acquiring the shares, the majority shareholder is required to publish the same in a newspaper with a
national circulation.
A shareholder that holds a majority of our issued share capital, but less than the 95% required to institute the squeeze-out
proceedings described above, may seek to propose and implement one or more restructuring transactions with the objective of
obtaining at least 95% of our issued share capital so the shareholder may initiate squeeze-out proceedings. Those restructuring
transactions could, among other things, include a merger or demerger involving the Company, a contribution of cash and/or
assets against issuance of Lilium Shares, the issue of Lilium Shares to the majority shareholder without preemptive rights for
minority shareholders or an asset sale transaction.


104
Depending on the circumstances, an asset sale of a Dutch public limited liability company (naamloze vennootschap) is
sometimes used as a way to squeeze out minority shareholders, for example, after a successful tender offer through which a
third party acquires a supermajority, but less than all, of the Company’s shares. In such a scenario, the business of the target
company is sold to a third party or a special purpose vehicle, followed by the liquidation of the target company. The purchase
price is distributed to all shareholders in proportion to their respective shareholding as liquidation proceeds, thus separating the
business from the Company in which minority shareholders had an interest.
Any sale or transfer of all of our assets (see “— Certain Other Major Transactions” below) and our dissolution or
liquidation is subject to approval by a majority of the votes cast in our General Meeting (see “— Merger, Demerger and
Dissolution” above).
Certain Other Major Transactions
The articles of association and Dutch law provide that resolutions of the Board concerning a material change in our identity,
character or business are subject to the approval of the General Meeting. Such changes include:
●
a transfer of all or materially all of our business/enterprise to a third party;
●
the entry into or termination of a long-lasting cooperation of the Company or of a subsidiary either with another legal
person or company, or as a fully liable general partner of a limited partnership or a general partnership, if this
cooperation or termination is of essential importance to the Company; and
●
the acquisition or disposition of a participating interest in the capital of a company by the Company or by one of our
subsidiaries with a value of at least one third of the value of our assets, according to the balance sheet with explanatory
notes or, if we prepare a consolidated balance sheet, according to the consolidated balance sheet with explanatory notes
in our most recently adopted annual accounts.
Dividends and Other Distributions
We may only make distributions to our shareholders if our shareholders’ equity exceeds the sum of the paid-up and called-
up share capital and the reserves that must be maintained under to Dutch law or by the articles of association.
The holders of Class A Shares and Class B Shares shall be entitled pari passu to the profits of the Company, pro rata to the
total number of Class A Shares and Class B Shares held, provided that out of the profit of any financial year, the holders of
Class C Shares shall be entitled to a maximum amount per financial year equal to 0.1% of the nominal value of such Class C
Shares. The Board is permitted to declare interim dividends without the approval of the General Meeting. Interim dividends may
be declared as provided in the articles of association and may be distributed to the extent that our shareholders’ equity, based on
interim financial statements, exceeds the sum of the paid-up and called-up share capital and the reserves that must be maintained
under Dutch law or the articles of association. We may reclaim any distributions, whether interim or not interim, made in
contravention of Dutch law or the articles of association from our shareholders that knew or should have known that such
distribution was not permissible. In addition, on the basis of Dutch case law, if after a distribution we are not able to pay our due
and collectable debts, then our shareholders or directors who at the time of the distribution knew or reasonably should have
foreseen that result may be liable to our creditors.
The corporate body that declares the (interim) dividend may determine that distributions shall be made in whole or in part
in a currency other than the Euro. The Board will set the record date to establish which shareholders (or usufructuaries or
pledgees, as the case may be) are entitled to the distribution, such date not being earlier than the date on which the distribution
was announced. Claims for payment of dividends and other distributions not made within five years from the date that such
dividends or distributions became payable will lapse, and any such amounts will be considered to have been forfeited to us
(verjaring). Unless the General Meeting resolves, at the proposal of the Board, upon a different term for that purpose, dividends
shall be made payable within 30 days after they are declared.
We do not anticipate paying any dividends on Lilium Shares for the foreseeable future, see the section entitled “Dividend
Policy.”
Warrants
There are 12,650,000 Public Warrants outstanding. The Public Warrants, which entitle the holder to purchase one Class A
Share at an exercise price of $11.50 per Class A Share, become exercisable thirty days after the completion of the Business
Combination. The Public Warrants will expire five years after the completion of the Business Combination or earlier upon
redemption or liquidation in accordance with their terms. There are also 7,060,000 Private Warrants outstanding. The Private
Warrants are identical to the Public


105
Warrants in all material respects, except that the Private Warrants are not transferable, assignable or salable until 30 days after
the completion of the Business Combination. In addition, on October 22, 2021, we issued the Azul Warrants to Azul on a fully
vested basis, which are exercisable for 1,800,000 Class A Shares at an exercise price of €0.12 per Class A Share. Azul is entitled
to exercise the Azul Warrants at any time on or prior to October 22, 2026.
Lilium will have the ability to redeem outstanding SPAC Warrants at any time after they become exercisable and prior to
their expiration, at a price of $0.01 per SPAC Warrant, provided that the closing price of the Class A Shares equals or exceeds
$18.00 per share (as adjusted for share subdivisions, share capitalizations, reorganizations, recapitalizations and the like) for any
20 trading days within a 30 trading day period ending on the third trading day prior to the date on which a notice of redemption
is sent to the warrant holders. Lilium will not redeem the SPAC Warrants as described above unless a registration statement
under the Securities Act covering the Class A Shares issuable upon exercise of such warrants is effective and a current
prospectus relating to those Class A Shares is available throughout the 30-day redemption period. If and when the SPAC
Warrants become redeemable by Lilium, Lilium may exercise its redemption right even if it is unable to register or qualify the
underlying securities for sale under all applicable state securities laws. Redemption of the outstanding SPAC Warrants could
force holders of SPAC Warrants to (i) exercise their SPAC Warrants and pay the exercise price therefor, (ii) sell their SPAC
Warrants at the then-current market price, or (iii) accept the nominal redemption price which, at the time the outstanding SPAC
Warrants are called for redemption, is likely to be substantially less than the market value of the SPAC Warrants.
In addition, Lilium will have the ability to redeem the outstanding SPAC Warrants at any time after they become
exercisable and prior to their expiration, at a price of $0.10 per warrant if, among other things, the closing price of the Class A
Shares equals or exceeds $10.00 per share (as adjusted for share sub-divisions, share dividends, rights issuances, subdivisions,
reorganizations, recapitalizations and the like) on the trading day prior to the date on which a notice of redemption is sent to the
warrant holders. If trading prices for the Class A Shares have not exceeded the $10.00 per share threshold at which the SPAC
Warrants would become redeemable, holders will be able to exercise their SPAC Warrants prior to redemption for a number of
Class A Shares determined based on the redemption date and the fair market value of the Class A Shares.
Notices
We will give notice of each General Meeting by publication on our website and, to the extent required by applicable law, in
a Dutch daily newspaper with national distribution, and in any other manner that we may be required to follow to comply with
Dutch law and applicable stock exchange and SEC requirements. Holders of registered shares may further be provided notice of
the meeting in writing at their addresses as stated in our shareholders’ register.
Certain Disclosure Obligations
We are subject to certain disclosure obligations under Dutch and U.S. law and the rules of Nasdaq. The following is a
description of the general disclosure obligations of public companies under Dutch and U.S. law and the rules of Nasdaq as such
laws and rules exist as of the date of this document, and should not be viewed as legal advice for specific circumstances.
Financial Reporting Under Dutch Law
The Dutch Financial Reporting Supervision Act (Wet toezicht financiële verslaggeving, the “FRSA”), applies to our
financial reporting. Under the FRSA, the Dutch Authority for the Financial Markets (Autoriteit Financiële Markten, “AFM”)
supervises the application of financial reporting standards by, among others, companies whose corporate seats are in the
Netherlands and whose securities are listed on a regulated market within the EU or on an equivalent third (non-EU) country
market. As our corporate seat is in the Netherlands and most of our shares are listed on Nasdaq, the FRSA will supervise our
financial reporting standards.
Pursuant to the FRSA, the AFM has an independent right to (i) request an explanation from the Company regarding the
application of the applicable financial reporting standards if, based on publicly known facts or circumstances, it has reason to
doubt our financial reporting meets such standards and (ii) recommend to the Company that we make available further
explanations and file these with the AFM. If we do not comply with such a request or recommendation, the AFM may request
that the Enterprise Chamber orders us to (i) make available further explanations as recommended by the AFM, (ii) provide an
explanation on the way we have applied the applicable financial reporting standards to our financial reports or (iii) prepare our
financial reports in accordance with the Enterprise Chamber’s instructions.
Periodic Reporting Under U.S. Securities Law
We are a “foreign private issuer” under the securities laws of the United States and the rules of the Nasdaq. Under the
securities laws of the United States, “foreign private issuers” are subject to different disclosure requirements than U.S.
registrants. We intend to


106
take all actions necessary to maintain compliance as a foreign private issuer under the applicable corporate governance
requirements of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002, the rules adopted by the SEC and Nasdaq’s listing standards. Under the
Nasdaq rules, a “foreign private issuer” is subject to less stringent corporate governance requirements. Subject to certain
exceptions, the Nasdaq rules permit a “foreign private issuer” to comply with our home country rules in lieu of the listing
requirements of Nasdaq.
Nasdaq Rules
For so long as our shares are listed on Nasdaq, we will be required to meet certain requirements relating to ongoing
communication and disclosure to Lilium shareholders, including a requirement to make any annual report filed with the SEC
available on or through our website and to comply with the “prompt disclosure” requirement of Nasdaq with respect to earnings
and dividend announcements, combination transactions, stock splits, major management changes and any substantive items of
an unusual or non-recurrent nature. Issuers listing shares on Nasdaq must also meet certain corporate governance standards,
such as those relating to annual meetings, board independence, the formation and composition of nominating/corporate
governance, compensation and audit committees and shareholder approval of certain transactions.
Certain Insider Trading and Market Manipulation Laws
Dutch and U.S. law each contain rules intended to prevent insider trading and market manipulation. The following is a
general description of those laws as such laws exist as of the date of this document and should not be viewed as legal advice for
specific circumstances.
In connection with our listing on Nasdaq, we have adopted an insider trading policy. This policy provides for, among other
things, rules on transactions by members of the Board and our employees in Lilium Shares or in financial instruments the value
of which is determined by the value of the shares.
The Netherlands
On July 3, 2016, the Regulation (EU) No 596/2014 of the European Parliament and of the Council of April 16, 2014 (the
“MAR”) replaced all of the Dutch market abuse rules. The MAR does not apply to us or to the Lilium Shares as the Lilium
Shares are solely listed on Nasdaq, a stock exchange outside the European Economic Area. As a result, there are no EU
rules applicable to us relating to market abuse, such as insider trading, tipping, market manipulation and notification rules for
director dealings applicable to us.
United States
The United States securities laws generally prohibit any person from trading in a security while in possession of material,
non-public information or assisting someone who is engaged in doing the same. The insider trading laws cover not only those
who trade based on material, non-public information, but also those who disclose material non-public information to others who
might trade on the basis of that information (known as “tipping”). A “security” includes not just equity securities, but any
security (e.g., derivatives). Thus, members of the Board, officers and other employees of the Company may not purchase or sell
shares or other securities of the Company when in possession of material, non-public information about the Company (including
our business, prospects or financial condition), nor may they tip any other person by disclosing material, non-public information
about the Company.
We have identified those persons working for it who could have access to inside information on a regular or incidental basis
and have informed such persons of the prohibitions on insider trading and market manipulation imposed by U.S. laws, including
the sanctions which can be imposed in the event of a violation of those rules.
Certain Disclosure and Reporting Obligations of Directors, Officers and Shareholders of Lilium
Our directors, (non-) executive officers and shareholders are subject to certain disclosure and reporting obligations under
Dutch and U.S. law. The following is a description of the general disclosure obligations of directors, officers, and shareholders
under Dutch law as such laws exist as of the date of this document and should not be viewed as legal advice for specific
circumstances.
DCGC
As we have our registered seat in the Netherlands and have our Lilium Shares listed on an equivalent third (non-EU)
country market to a regulated market (e.g., Nasdaq), we are subject to the Dutch Corporate Governance Code (the “DCGC”).
The DCGC contains both principles and best practice provisions for the Board, shareholders and the General Meeting, financial
reporting, auditors, disclosure compliance and enforcement standards.


107
The DCGC is based on a “comply or explain” principle. Accordingly, we are required to disclose in our management report
publicly filed in the Netherlands, whether or not we are complying with the various provisions of the DCGC. If we do not
comply with one or more of those provisions (e.g., because of a conflicting Nasdaq requirement or U.S. market practice), we are
required to explain the reasons for such non-compliance.
Dutch Civil Code
The Dutch Civil Code provides for certain disclosure obligations in our annual accounts. Information on directors’
remuneration and rights to acquire Lilium Shares must be disclosed in our annual accounts.
Transfer Agent and Warrant Agent
Under the articles of association, the Board may resolve, with due observation of the statutory requirements, that the laws
of the State of New York apply to the property law aspects of the Lilium Shares for as long as the Lilium Shares are in book-
entry form, as included in the part of the register of shareholders kept by the relevant transfer agent and/or listed on a Regulated
Market.
We have listed the Lilium Shares in book-entry form and such Lilium Shares, through the transfer agent, are not
certificated. We have appointed Continental Stock Transfer & Trust Company as our agent in New York to maintain our
shareholders’ and warrant holders’ register on behalf of the Board and to act as transfer agent and registrar for the Lilium Shares.
Our Class A Shares and the Public Warrants trade on Nasdaq in book-entry form.
Rule 144
Pursuant to Rule 144, a person who has beneficially owned restricted Lilium Shares or Public Warrants for at least
six months would be entitled to sell their securities provided that (i) such person is not deemed to have been one of our affiliates
at the time of, or at any time during the three months preceding, a sale and (ii) we are subject to the Exchange Act periodic
reporting requirements for at least three months before the sale and has filed all required reports under Section 13 or 15(d) of the
Exchange Act during the 12 months (or such shorter period as we were required to file reports) preceding the sale.
Persons who have beneficially owned restricted Lilium Shares or Public Warrants for at least six months but who are our
affiliates at the time of, or at any time during the three months preceding, a sale, would be subject to additional restrictions, by
which such person would be entitled to sell within any three-month period only a number of securities that does not exceed the
greater of:
●
1% of the total number of ordinary shares then outstanding; or
●
the average weekly reported trading volume of the our ordinary shares during the four calendar weeks preceding the
filing of a notice on Form 144 with respect to the sale.
Sales by our affiliates under Rule 144 are also limited by manner of sale provisions and notice requirements and to the
availability of current public information about us.
Restrictions on the Use of Rule 144 by Shell Companies or Former Shell Companies
Rule 144 is not available for the resale of securities initially issued by shell companies (other than business combination
related shell companies) or issuers that have been at any time previously a shell company. However, Rule 144 also includes an
important exception to this prohibition if the following conditions are met:
●
the issuer of the securities that was formerly a shell company has ceased to be a shell company;
●
the issuer of the securities is subject to the reporting requirements of Section 13 or 15(d) of the Exchange Act;
●
the issuer of the securities has filed all Exchange Act reports and materials required to be filed, as applicable, during
the preceding 12 months (or such shorter period that the issuer was required to file such reports and materials), other
than Current Reports; and
●
at least one year has elapsed from the time that the issuer filed current Form 10 type information with the SEC
reflecting our status as an entity that is not a shell company. As a result, our initial shareholders will be able to sell their
Lilium Shares and Warrants pursuant to Rule 144 without registration one year after the Closing Date.


108
Registration Rights and Lock-Up Arrangements
In connection with the closing of the Business Combination Agreement, the Sponsor and certain current shareholders of
Lilium receiving Lilium Shares in the Business Combination (the “Lilium Holders” and, together with the Sponsor, the
“Registration Rights Holders”) entered into an amended and restated registration rights agreement, dated as of September 13,
2021 (the “Registration Rights Agreement”). Pursuant to the Registration Rights Agreement, we agreed that, within 30
calendar days after the consummation of the Business Combination, we would file with the SEC (at our sole cost and expense) a
registration statement registering the resale of certain securities held by or issuable to the Registration Rights Holders (the
“Resale Registration Statement”), and would use our commercially reasonable efforts to have the Resale Registration Statement
declared effective as soon as reasonably practicable after the filing thereof. In certain circumstances, the Registration Rights
Holders can demand up to two underwritten offerings in any six month period (and we are not required to effect more than four
underwritten offerings in any 12 month period), and the Registration Rights Holders will be entitled to customary piggyback
registration rights. The Registration Rights Agreement does not provide for the payment of any cash penalties by Lilium if we
fail to satisfy any of our obligations under the Registration Rights Agreement.
In addition, pursuant to the Registration Rights Agreement, the Sponsor and the Lilium Holders have agreed to be bound by
certain restrictions on transfer of their Lilium Shares (and securities convertible into or exercisable for Lilium Shares, including
the Private Warrants) to be held by the Sponsor or the Lilium Holders immediately following the consummation of the Business
Combination (the “Lock-Up Shares”), other than to certain permitted transferees. The Sponsor and the Lilium Holders have
agreed, for the duration of the applicable Lock-Up Period (as defined below) with respect to any such persons, not to (a) sell or
assign, offer to sell, contract or agree to sell, hypothecate, pledge, grant any option to purchase or otherwise dispose of agree to
dispose of, directly or indirectly, or establish or increase a put equivalent position or liquidation with respect to or decrease a call
equivalent position within the meaning of Section 16 of the Exchange Act with respect to, any Lock-Up Shares, (b) enter into
any swap or other arrangement that transfers to another, in whole or in part, any of the economic consequences of ownership of
any Lock-Up Shares, whether settled by delivery of such Lock-Up Shares, in cash or otherwise, or (c) publicly announce any
intention to effect any transaction described in clause (a) or (b) above. The restrictions described above will be effective for a
period (the “Lock-Up Period”) beginning on the Final Closing Date and ending (i) with respect to the Lilium Holders, 180 days
after the Final Closing Date and (ii) with respect to the Sponsor, the earlier of (A) 360 days after the Final Closing Date and
(B) (x) the first date on which the closing price of the Class A Shares equals or exceeds $12.00 per share (as adjusted for share
sub-divisions, share capitalizations, reorganizations, recapitalizations and the like) for any 20 trading days within any 30-trading
day period commencing at least 150 days after the Final Closing Date and (y) the date on which Lilium consummates a
liquidation, merger, share exchange, reorganization or other similar transaction which results in all of our shareholders having
the right to exchange their Lilium Shares for cash, securities or other property.
In addition, we expect to enter into a registration rights agreement granting customary registration rights to Azul in respect
of the Class A Shares issuable upon the exercise of the Azul Warrants.
Listing of Securities
Our Class A Shares and the Public Warrants are listed on Nasdaq under the symbols “LILM” and “LILMW,” respectively.
Holders of our securities should obtain current market quotations for their securities. There can be no assurance that our Class A
Shares and/or warrants will remain listed on Nasdaq. If we fail to comply with the Nasdaq listing requirements, our Class A
Shares and/or warrants could be delisted from Nasdaq. A delisting of our Class A Shares will likely affect the liquidity of our
Class A Shares and warrants and could inhibit or restrict our ability to raise additional financing.


109
CERTAIN RELATIONSHIPS AND RELATED PERSON TRANSACTIONS
The following is a summary of transactions since January 1, 2018 to which we have been a party and in which any
members of the Board or senior management who became a member of the Board or senior management upon completion of the
Business Combination had or will have a direct or indirect material interest, other than compensation arrangements and the
share ownership described under “Principal Securityholders.”
In August 2020, we repurchased 18 shares from Mr. Wiegand for €190,800.
In May 2018, Lilium Beteiligungs UG (haftungsbeschränkt) & Co. KG, an entity in which Mr. Wallerstein holds a legal and
economic interest, acquired 218 Lilium Series B Shares for approximately €1.3 million. These shares are held for
Mr. Wallerstein’s economic benefit. These shares were converted into Class A Shares upon consummation of the Business
Combination.
In October 2019, we obtained a €1.0 million convertible loan from Mr. Wallerstein. The loan accrued interest at 5% per
annum and was converted into 101 Lilium Series B-2 Shares in April 2020 at a 15% discount to the Lilium Series B-2 Share
investment price. The shares were issued in trust Mr. Wallerstein through Stichting Evtol Investment, an investment trust, and
are held for Mr. Wallerstein’s economic benefit.
In March 2020, Stichting Evtol Investment subscribed for 50 Lilium Series B-2 Shares for approximately €597,600. These
shares are held for Mr. Wallerstein’s economic benefit.
In January 2021, we obtained a €1.0 million convertible loan from Stichting Evtol Investment, an investment trust, for the
benefit of Dr. Enders. The loan accrued interest at 5% per annum and was converted into Class A Shares upon the
consummation of the Business Combination at a 15% discount to the deemed per share issue price. These Class A Shares are
held for Dr. Enders’ economic benefit.
Strategic Collaboration with Azul
On July 31, 2021, we executed a term sheet in which we agreed to enter into negotiations Azul to establish a strategic
collaboration whereby Azul is expected to commit to purchase from Lilium 220 Lilium Jets for an aggregate value of up to $1.0
billion, with anticipated delivery to commence in 2025. In consideration of the strategic commercial collaboration, we agreed to
use all efforts to grant to Azul warrants to purchase up to 8,000,000 Class A Shares at an exercise price of €0.12 a share,
consisting of (i) warrants to purchase 1,800,000 Class A Shares, which warrants were issued to Azul on a fully vested basis on
October 22, 2021, and (ii) subject to the execution of definitive agreements, warrants to purchase up to an additional 6,200,000
Class A Shares, which are expected to vest in three tranches. We expect to enter into a registration rights agreement granting
customary registration rights to Azul in respect of the Class A Shares issuable upon the exercise of the Azul Warrants. David
Neeleman, the founder and controlling shareholder of Azul, is one of our non-executive directors. Additional information
regarding our arrangement with Azul is described above under the section titled “Business of Lilium and Certain Information
About Lilium — Commercial and Business Operations — Strategic Commercial Collaboration.”
Closing of PIPE Financing
The Company consummated the PIPE Financing concurrently with the closing of the Business Combination. Entities
affiliated with Atomico (together, the “Atomico Entities”), and Tencent Mobility (Luxembourg) S.a.rl, each a greater than 10%
shareholder of the Company, acquired PIPE Shares in the PIPE Financing.
Remuneration Agreements with Board Members and Senior Management
For a description of our remuneration agreements with members of the Board and senior management, see the section titled
“Executive Compensation.”
Indemnification Agreements
Our Articles of Association provide for certain indemnification rights for our directors and executive officers, and we have
entered into an indemnification agreement with each of our directors and executive officers providing for procedures for
indemnification and advancements by Lilium of certain expenses and costs relating to claims, suits or proceedings arising from
his or her service to Lilium or, at our request, service to other entities, as directors or officers to the maximum extent permitted
by Dutch law.


110
Review, Approval or Ratification of Transactions with Related Persons
We have adopted a code of business conduct and ethics that prohibits directors and executive officers from engaging in the
decision making process relating to transactions in which such director or officer has a conflict of interest. Consistent with
Dutch law, if the Board must approve a transaction in which a director has a conflict of interest, such transaction can only be
effected if it has been approved by a majority of the Board (including a majority of independent directors) not otherwise
interested in the transaction and such transaction must be fair and such transaction must be fair and reasonable to the Company
and on terms not less favorable to the Company than those available from unaffiliated third parties. In addition, we have adopted
a policy requiring that our Audit Committee review and approve any transaction that would require disclosure under Item 7.B.
of Form 20-F.


111
PRINCIPAL SECURITYHOLDERS
The following table sets forth information relating to the beneficial ownership of our ordinary shares as of September 14,
2021 by:
●
each person, or group of affiliated persons, known by us to beneficially own more than 5% of our outstanding ordinary
shares;
●
each of our named executive officers; and
●
all of our directors and executive officers as a group.
The SEC has defined “beneficial ownership” of a security to mean the possession, directly or indirectly, of voting power
and/or investment power over such security. A shareholder is also deemed to be, as of any date, the beneficial owner of all
securities that such shareholder has the right to acquire within 60 days after that date through (i) the exercise of any option,
warrant or right, (ii) the conversion of a security, (iii) the power to revoke a trust, discretionary account or similar arrangement,
or (iv) the automatic termination of a trust, discretionary account or similar arrangement. In computing the number of shares
beneficially owned by a person and the percentage ownership of that person, ordinary shares subject to options or other rights
(as set forth above) held by that person that are currently exercisable, or will become exercisable within 60 days thereafter, are
deemed outstanding, while such shares are not deemed outstanding for purposes of computing percentage ownership of any
other person. Each person named in the table has sole voting and investment power with respect to all of the ordinary shares
shown as beneficially owned by such person, except as otherwise indicated in the table or footnotes below.
The percentage of our ordinary shares beneficially owned is computed on the basis of 259,696,994 Class A Shares and
24,413,065 Class B Shares issued and outstanding as of September 14, 2021, immediately following the consummation of the
Business Combination, and does not include 12,650,000 Class A Shares issuable upon the exercise of the Public Warrants,
7,060,000 Class A Shares issuable upon the exercise of the Private Warrants, 1,800,000 Class A Shares issuable upon the
exercise of the Azul Warrants or 6,219,889 Class A Shares issuable upon exercise of the Specified Options.
Unless otherwise indicated we believe that all persons named in the table below have sole voting and investment power
with respect to all shares of capital stock beneficially owned by them. To our knowledge, no ordinary shares beneficially owned
by any executive officer, director or director nominee have been pledged as security.
Unless otherwise indicated, the address of each person named below is c/o Claude-Dornier Straße 1, Bldg. 335, 82234,
Wessling, Germany.
Number of
    
    
Number of
    
    
% of Total  
Name and Address of Beneficial
Class A
% of Class A
Class B
% of Class B
Voting
 
Owners
    
Shares
    
Shares
    
Shares
    
Shares
    
Power(1)
 
Henri Courpron
 
 —  
*  
 —  
*  
*
Dr. Thomas Enders(2)
 
 171,010  
*  
 —  
*  
*
Barry Engle(3)
 
 4,211,590  
1.6 %
 —  
*  
1.3 %
David Neeleman
 
 —  
*  
 —  
*  
*
Geoffrey Richardson
 
 —  
*  
 —  
*  
*
Margaret M. Smyth
 
 —  
*  
 —  
*  
*
Gabrielle B. Toledano
 
 —  
*  
 —  
*  
*
David Wallerstein(4)
 
 1,054,233  
*  
 —  
*  
*
Daniel Wiegand
 
 —  
*  
 24,413,065  
 100 %  
 22.0 %
Niklas Zennström(5)
 
 40,943,742  
 15.8 %  
 —  
*  
 12.3 %
All Directors and Executive Officers as a
Group (10 Individuals)
 
 46,380,575  
 17.9 %  
 24,413,065  
 100 %  
 34.7 %
5% and Greater Holders:
 
   
   
   
   
  
Sebastian Born
 
 18,064,811  
 7.0 %  
 —  
*  
 5.4 %
Mattias Meiner
 
 18,064,811  
 7.0 %  
 —  
*  
 5.4 %
Atomico Entities(5)
 
 40,943,742  
 15.8 %  
 —  
*  
 12.3 %
Tencent Mobility (Luxembourg) S.a r.l(6).
 
 76,196,615  
 29.3 %  
 —  
*  
 22.9 %
Scottish Mortgage Investment Trust plc(7)
 
 17,699,615  
 6.8 %  
 —  
*  
 5.3 %


112
*
Less than 1%
(1) Percentage of total voting power represents voting power with respect to all Class A Shares and Class B Shares, as a single
class. The holders of Class B Shares are entitled to three times as many votes per share as holders of Class A Shares.
(2) Consists of (i) 148,564 Class A Shares held of record and (ii) 22,446 Class A Shares issuable upon exercise of options
granted before the consummation of the Business Combination that will become exercisable within 60 days following
September 14, 2021.
(3) Consists of (i) 913,358 Class A Shares held of record and (ii) 3,298,232 Private Warrants, including 3,298,232 Class A
Shares issuable upon exercise of such Private Warrants. Mr. Engle’s business address is c/o Qell Partners LLC, 505
Montgomery Street, Suite 1100, San Francisco, CA 94111 USA.
(4) Consists of 1,054,233 Class A Shares held of record by the David Wallerstein and Jun Yu Living Trust for the benefit of
Mr. Wallerstein. The business address for the David Wallerstein and Jun Yu Living Trust is 481 N Santa Cruz #148, Los
Gatos, CA 95030, United States.
(5) Consists of (i) 33,419,323 Class A Shares held of record by Atomico IV L.P. (“Atomico IV”) and (ii) 7,524,419 Class A
Shares held of record by Atomico IV (Guernsey) L.P. (“Atomico IV (Guernsey)”). Atomico Advisors IV, Ltd. (“Atomico
Advisors IV”) is the general partner of each of Atomico IV and Atomico IV (Guernsey). Niklas Zennström, Mark Dyne,
Nicole Ramroop and Claris Ruwende, the members of the board of directors of Atomico Advisors IV, may be deemed to
have shared voting and dispositive power over the shares held by each of Atomico IV and Atomico IV (Guernsey). The
business address of Atomico IV and Atomico Advisors IV is One Capital Place, Grand Cayman, KY1-1103 Cayman
Islands. The business address of Atomico IV (Guernsey) is Old Bank Chambers, La Grande Rue St. Martin’s, Guernsey,
GY4 6RT, Channel Islands.
(6) Consists of 76,196,615 Class A Shares held of record by Tencent Mobility (Luxembourg) S.à r.l. (“Tencent Mobility
(Luxembourg)”). Tencent Mobility (Luxembourg) is a wholly-owned subsidiary of Tencent Mobility Limited, a company
limited by shares incorporated in Hong Kong. Tencent Mobility Limited is a direct wholly-owned subsidiary of Tencent
Holdings Limited. Tencent Holdings Limited is a publicly traded company. The business address of Tencent Mobility
(Luxembourg) S.à r.l. is 6 rue Eugène Ruppert, 2453 Luxembourg, Grand Duchy of Luxembourg. The business address of
Tencent Mobility Limited and Tencent Holdings Limited is 29/F., Three Pacific Place No. 1, Queen’s Road East, Wanchai,
Hong Kong.
(7) Consists of 17,699,615 Class A Shares held of record by Scottish Mortgage Investment Trust plc (“SMIT”). As agent for
SMIT, Baillie Gifford & Co may be deemed to share the power to direct the disposition and vote of the securities held by
SMIT. Baillie Gifford & Co disclaims beneficial ownership of all shares held by SMIT. SMIT is a publicly traded company.
The business address of SMIT is c/o Baillie Gifford & Co, Calton Square, 1 Greenside Row, Edinburgh EH1 3AN,
Scotland.


113
SELLING SECURITYHOLDERS
This prospectus relates to the possible offer and sale from time to time of up to 210,665,118 Class A Shares and up to
7,060,000 Private Warrants by the selling securityholders. The PIPE Investors acquired Class A Shares pursuant to the
Subscription Agreements. The Sponsor acquired Class A Shares and Private Warrants exercisable for Class A Shares
concurrently with the Qell IPO and subsequently distributed such Class A Shares and Private Warrants to certain of the selling
securityholders listed below. Daniel Wiegand, our Chief Executive Officer, received Class B Shares convertible into Class A
Shares in the Exchange at the closing of the Business Combination and certain of other directors and officers affiliated with us
received Class A Shares in the Exchange at the closing of the Business Combination. Certain of our directors and employees
received Specified Options exercisable for Class A Shares in connection with their roles with us. Former holders of public
warrants of Qell received our Public Warrants, exercisable for Class A Shares, at the closing of the Business Combination.
The selling securityholders may from time to time offer and sell any or all of the Class A Shares or Private Warrants set
forth below pursuant to this prospectus. When we refer to the “selling securityholders” in this prospectus, we mean the persons
listed in the tables below, and the pledgees, donees, transferees, assignees, successors and others who later come to hold any of
the selling securityholders’ interest in our securities after the date of this prospectus.
The following table is prepared based on information provided to us by the selling securityholders. It sets forth the name
and address of the selling securityholders, the aggregate number of Class A Shares and Private Warrants that the selling
securityholders may offer pursuant to this prospectus, and the beneficial ownership of the selling securityholders both before
and after the offering. We have based percentage ownership prior to this offering on 284,110,059 Lilium ordinary shares
(assuming conversion of all Class B Shares into Class A Shares) and 7,060,000 Private Warrants outstanding, in each case as of
September 14, 2021, immediately following the consummation of the Business Combination. In calculating percentages of
Class A Shares owned by a particular selling securityholder, we treated as outstanding the number of Class A Shares issuable
upon exercise of that particular selling securityholder’s Private Warrants, if any, and did not assume the exercise of any other
selling securityholder’s Private Warrants.
The individuals and entities listed below have beneficial ownership over their respective securities. The SEC has defined
“beneficial ownership” of a security to mean the possession, directly or indirectly, of voting power and/or investment power
over such security. A shareholder is also deemed to be, as of any date, the beneficial owner of all securities that such shareholder
has the right to acquire within 60 days after that date through (i) the exercise of any option, warrant or right, (ii) the conversion
of a security, (iii) the power to revoke a trust, discretionary account or similar arrangement, or (iv) the automatic termination of
a trust, discretionary account or similar arrangement. In computing the number of shares beneficially owned by a person and
the percentage ownership of that person, ordinary shares subject to options or other rights (as set forth above) held by that
person that are currently exercisable, or will become exercisable within 60 days thereafter, are deemed outstanding, while such
shares are not deemed outstanding for purposes of computing percentage ownership of any other person.
We cannot advise you as to whether the selling securityholders will in fact sell any or all of such Class A Shares or Private
Warrants. In addition, the selling securityholders may sell, transfer or otherwise dispose of, at any time and from time to time,
the Class A Shares or Private Warrants in transactions exempt from the registration requirements of the Securities Act after the
date of this prospectus, subject to applicable law.
Selling securityholder information for each additional selling securityholder, if any, will be set forth by prospectus
supplement to the extent required prior to the time of any offer or sale of such selling securityholder’s securities pursuant to this
prospectus. Any prospectus supplement may add, update, substitute, or change the information contained in this prospectus,
including the identity of each selling securityholder and the number of Class A Shares or Private Warrants registered on its
behalf. A selling securityholder may sell all, some or none of such securities in this offering. See the section titled “Plan of
Distribution.”


114
Unless otherwise indicated, the address of each Claude-Dornier Straße 1, Bldg. 335, 82234, Wessling, Germany.
Name of Selling
Class A
Shares
Beneficially
Owned Prior
to the
Private
Warrants
Beneficially
Owned
Prior to
Number of
Class A
Shares
Being
Number
of Private
Warrants
Being
Class A Shares
Beneficially Owned
After the Class A
Shares are Sold
Private Warrants
Beneficially Owned
After the Warrants
are Sold
 
Securityholder
    
Offering
    
Offering
    
Offered
    
Offered
    
Shares
    
Percent
     Number      Percent
Dr. Thomas Enders
171,010(1)
— 
279,986(2)
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
Barry Engle(3)
4,211,590 
3,298,232 
4,211,590 
3,298,232 
— 
— 
— 
— 
Geoffrey Richardson
— 
— 
2,088,467(4)
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
David Wallerstein and Jun Yu Living Trust(5)
1,054,233 
— 
1,054,233 
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
Daniel Wiegand(6)
24,413,065 
— 
24,413,065 
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
Kepos Alpha Master Fund L.P.(7)
993,933 
— 
920,600 
— 
73,333 
*
— 
— 
Kepos Carbon Transition Master Fund L.P.(8)
113,933 
— 
79,400 
— 
34,533 
*
— 
— 
NewGen Alternative Income Fund(9)
312,900 
— 
312,900 
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
NewGen Equity Long/Short Fund(9)
687,100 
— 
687,100 
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
TIG Arbitrage Associates Master Fund, L.P.(10)
125,777 
— 
125,777 
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
TIG Arbitrage Enhanced Master Fund, L.P.(10)
959,990 
— 
959,990 
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
PM Manager Fund, SPC - Segregated Portfolio 14(10)
554,233 
— 
554,233 
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
Alyeska Master Fund, L.P.(11)
620,000 
— 
500,000 
— 
120,000 
*
— 
— 
Atlas Point Energy Infrastructure Fund, LLC(12)
1,000,000 
— 
1,000,000 
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
FII Institute(13)
200,000 
— 
200,000 
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
CVI Investments, Inc.(14)
824,300 
— 
390,000 
— 
434,300 
*
— 
— 
Honeywell International Inc.(15)
1,000,000 
— 
1,000,000 
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
Tech Opportunities LLC(16)
500,000 
— 
500,000 
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
Marshall Wace Investment Strategies - Eureka
Fund(17)
388,967 
— 
232,825 
— 
156,142 
*
— 
— 
Marshall Wace Investment Strategies - Market Neutral
TOPS Fund(18)
143,672 
— 
135,278 
— 
8,394 
*
— 
— 
Marshall Wace Investment Strategies - Systematic
Alpha Plus Fund(19)
55,209 
— 
52,070 
— 
3,139 
*
— 
— 
Marshall Wace Investment Strategies - TOPS Fund(20)
84,452 
— 
79,827 
— 
4,625 
*
— 
— 
Melqart Opportunities Master Fund Limited(21)
1,000,000 
— 
1,000,000 
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
Palantir Technologies Inc.(22)
4,100,000 
— 
4,100,000 
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
TLP ONE LLC(23)
170,000 
170,000 
— 
— 
— 
— 
BlackRock, Inc.(24)
4,000,000 
— 
4,000,000 
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
Atomico IV, L.P. (25)
33,419,323 
— 
33,419,323 
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
Atomico IV (Guernsey), L.P.(25)
7,524,419 
— 
7,524,419 
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
Scottish Mortgage Investment Trust plc(26)
17,699,615 
— 
10,000,000 
— 
7,699,615 
2.7% 
— 
— 
Ferrovial, S.A.(27)
1,500,000 
— 
1,500,000 
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
LGT Global Invest Limited(28)
8,808,206 
— 
8,808,206 
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
Lightrock Growth Fund I S.A., SICAV-RAIF(29)
6,982,558 
— 
6,982,558 
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
Stiftung Fürst Liechtenstein III(30)
2,500,000 
— 
2,500,000 
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
Tencent Mobility (Luxembourg) S.à r.l(31)
76,196,615 
— 
76,196,615 
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
Stichting JSOP(32)
879,691 
— 
879,691 
— 
— 
— 
— 
Engle Family 2020 Grantor Retained Annuity Trust(33)
2,740,072 
— 
2,740,072 
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
Sam Gabbita(34)
1,539,093 
534,848 
1,539,093 
534,848 
— 
— 
— 
— 
Joseph Walker(35)
697,960 
356,566 
697,960 
356,566 
— 
— 
— 
— 
Ellen G. Adams Family 2020 Grantor Retained
Annuity Trust(36)
157,167 
— 
157,167 
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
Steven R. Adams(37)
205,343 
178,283 
205,343 
178,283 
— 
— 
— 
— 
Kathleen Ligocki(38)
362,510 
178,283 
362,510 
178,283 
— 
— 
— 
— 
David W. Cozzens Trust established July 10, 2018(39)
851,247 
499,192 
851,247 
499,192 
— 
— 
— 
— 
The Susan Lynn Heystee Revocable Trust established
February 7, 2017(40)
322,031 
171,151 
322,031 
171,151 
— 
— 
— 
— 
David W. Cozzens Family Irrevocable Trust dated
December 15, 2020(41)
88,013 
— 
88,013 
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
Susan L. Heystee Family Irrevocable Trust established
November 11, 2020(42)
80,508 
42,788 
80,508 
42,788 
— 
— 
— 
— 
David W. Cozzens(43)
27,060 
— 
27,060 
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
Ryan Popple(44)
139,250 
35,657 
139,250 
35,657 
— 
— 
— 
— 
GCCU V LLC(45)
1,598,903 
588,333 
1,598,903 
588,333 
— 
— 
— 
— 
OC III LVS VIII LP(46)
1,598,903 
588,333 
1,598,903 
588,333 
— 
— 
— 
— 
TOCU XXXVIII LLC(47)
1,598,905 
588,334 
1,598,905 
588,334 
— 
— 
— 
— 
Azul Linhas Aereas Brasileiras S.A.(48)
1,800,000
— 
1,800,000
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
*
Represents beneficial ownership of less than one percent
(1) Consists of (i) 148,564 Class A Shares held of record and (ii) 22,446 Class A Shares issuable upon exercise of options
granted before the consummation of the Business Combination that will become exercisable within 60 days following
September 14, 2021. Dr. Enders is the Chairman of the Board and a member of the Company’s Nominating and Corporate
Governance Committee.


115
(2) Consists of (i) 148,564 Class A Shares held of record and (ii) 131,422 Class A Shares issuable upon exercise of options
granted before the consummation of the Business Combination.
(3) Consists of (i) 913,358 Class A Shares held of record and (ii) 3,298,232 Private Warrants, including 3,298,232 Class A 
Shares issuable upon exercise of such Private Warrants. Mr. Engle is a member of the Board and the chair of the Company’s 
Audit Committee.  In addition, Mr. Engle was a director and the CEO of the Company from its formation on March 11, 
2021 until his resignation on September 13, 2021 in connection with the Business Combination.  During that period, Mr. 
Engle also had voting or dispositive control over 100% of the equity securities of the Company by virtue of his relationship 
with Qell Partners LLC, which owned of record 100% of such securities prior to the Business Combination. Mr. Engle was 
also a director and the CEO of Qell Acquisition Corp., a predecessor of the Company, until September 13, 2021. Mr. 
Engle’s business address is c/o Qell Partners LLC, 505 Montgomery Street, Suite 1100, San Francisco, CA 94111 USA.
(4) Consists of 2,088,467 Class A Shares issuable upon exercise or settlement, as applicable, of options and RSUs granted prior
to the Business Combination. Mr. Richardson is the Chief Financial Officer of the Company.
(5) Consists of 1,054,233 Class A Shares held of record by the David Wallerstein and Jun Yu Living Trust for the benefit of
David Wallerstein. Mr. Wallerstein is a member of the Board and serves as the Chair of the Company’s Nominating and
Corporate Governance Committee. The business address for the David Wallerstein and Jun Yu Living Trust is 481 N Santa
Cruz #148, Los Gatos, CA 95030, United States.
(6) Consists of 24,413,065 Class A Shares issuable upon conversion of 24,413,065 outstanding Class B Shares. Mr. Wiegand is
the Chief Executive Officer of the Company and Executive Director of the Board.
(7) Consists of (i) 920,600 Class A Shares held of record and (ii) 73,333 Class A Shares issuable upon exercise of Public
Warrants and not registered for resale under this prospectus. The business address of Kepos Alpha Master Fund L.P. is c/o
Kepos Capital LP, 11 Times Square, 35th Flr, New York NY, 10036.
(8) Consists of (i) 79,400 Class A Shares held of record,  (ii) 8,633 Class A Shares issuable upon exercise of Public Warrants 
and not registered for resale under this prospectus, and (iii) 25,900 Class A Shares not registered for resale under this 
prospectus. The business address of Kepos Carbon Transition Master Fund L.P. is c/o Kepos Capital LP, 11 Times Square, 
35th Flr, New York NY, 10036.
(9) The business address of NewGen Alternative Income Fund is Commerce Court N, 25 King St. W, Suite 2900, POB 405,
Toronto, Ontario M5L1G3. The business address of NewGen Equity Long/Short Fund is Regatta Office Park, Windward
Three, 4th Floor, West Ban Road, POB 10312, Grand Cayman KY-10003.
(10)The business address for each of TIG Arbitrage Associates Master Fund, L.P., TIG Arbitrage Enhanced Master Fund, L.P. 
and PM Manager Fund, SPC - Segregated Portfolio 14 is c/o TIG Advisors, LLC, 520 Madison  Ave, 26th Fl, NY, NY
10022.
(11) Consists of (i) 500,000 shares of Class A Shares held of record and (ii) 120,000 Class A Shares issuable upon exercise of
Public Warrants and not registered for resale under this prospectus. The registered address of Alyeska Master Fund, L.P. is
at c/o Maples Corporate Services Limited, P.O. Box 309, Ugland House, South Church Street George Town, Grand
Cayman, KY1-1104, Cayman Islands.
(12)The business address of Atlas Point Energy Infrastructure Fund, LLC is 100 Saint Paul Street, Suite 700, Denver, CO
80206.
(13)The business address of FII Institute is Digital City, Prince Turki Al-Awal Street, Building No.CS01, 4th Floor, Riyadh,
Saudi Arabia.
(14)Consists of (i) 390,000 Class A Shares held of record and (ii) 434,300 Class A Shares issuable upon exercise of Public
Warrants and not registered for resale under this prospectus. The business address of CVI Investments, Inc. is c/o Heights
Capital Management, Inc., 101 California Street, Suite 3250, San Francisco, CA 94111.
(15)The Company and Honeywell International Inc. have an arms-length commercial relationship whereby the Company has
agreed to purchase certain avionics and other systems from Honeywell. The business address of Honeywell International
Inc. is 855 S. Mint Street, Charlotte, NC 28202.


116
(16)Hudson Bay Capital Management LP, the investment manager of Tech Opportunities LLC, has voting and investment
power over these securities. Sander Gerber is the managing member of Hudson Bay Capital GP LLC, which is the general
partner of Hudson Bay Capital Management LP. Each of Tech Opportunities LLC and Sander Gerber disclaims beneficial
ownership over these securities. The address of the foregoing individuals and entities and individuals is c/o Hudson Bay
Capital Management LP, 28 Havemeyer Place, 2nd Floor, Greenwich, CT 06830.
(17)Consists of (i) 232,825 Class A Shares held of record and (ii) 156,142 Class A Shares issuable upon exercise of Public
Warrants and not registered for resale under this prospectus. The business address of Marshall Wace Investment Strategies -
Eureka Fund is 32 Molesworth Street, Dublin 2, Ireland.
(18)Consists of (i) 135,278 Class A Shares held of record and (ii) 8,394 Class A Shares issuable upon exercise of Public
Warrants and not registered for resale under this prospectus. The business address of Marshall Wace Investment Strategies -
Market Neutral TOPS Fund is 32 Molesworth Street, Dublin 2, Ireland.
(19)Consists of (i) 52,070 Class A Shares held of record and (ii) 3,139 Class A Shares issuable upon exercise of Public Warrants
and not registered for resale under this prospectus. The business address of Marshall Wace Investment Strategies -
Systematic Alpha Plus Fund is 32 Molesworth Street, Dublin 2, Ireland.
(20)Consists of (i) 79,827 Class A Shares held of record and (ii) 4,625 Class A Shares issuable upon exercise of Public Warrants
and not registered for resale under this prospectus. The business address of Marshall Wace Investment Strategies - TOPS
Fund is 32 Molesworth Street, Dublin 2, Ireland.
(21)The registered address of Melqart Opportunities Master Fund Limited is P.O. Box 309, Ugland House, Grand Cayman,
Cayman Islands KY1-1104.
(22)Palantir Technologies Inc. has certain commercial arrangements with the Company, the materiality of which is not being
opined upon. The business address of Palantir Technologies Inc. is 1555 Blake Street, Suite 250, Denver, CO 80202.
(23)The business address of TLP ONE LLC is 129 Banks Place, Southport, CT 06890.
(24)The registered holders of the referenced shares to be registered are the following funds and accounts under management by 
subsidiaries of BlackRock, Inc.: BlackRock Science and Technology Trust; BlackRock Science and Technology Trust II; 
BlackRock Global Funds – Next Generation Technology Fund; and BlackRock Global Funds – Future of Transport Fund. 
BlackRock, Inc. is the ultimate parent holding company of such subsidiaries.  On behalf of such subsidiaries, the applicable 
portfolio managers, as managing directors (or in other capacities) of such entities, and/or the applicable investment 
committee members of such funds and accounts, have voting and investment power over the shares held by the funds and 
accounts which are the registered holders of the referenced shares.  Such portfolio managers and/or investment committee 
members expressly disclaim beneficial ownership of all shares held by such funds and accounts. The addresses of such 
funds and accounts, such subsidiaries and such portfolio managers and/or investment committee members are 400 Howard 
Street, San Francisco CA 94105 and Drapers Gardens, 12 Throgmorton Avenue London EC2N 2DL - LO9. Shares shown 
include only the securities being registered for resale and may not incorporate all shares deemed to be beneficially held by 
the registered holders or BlackRock, Inc.
(25)Atomico Advisors IV, Ltd. (“Atomico Advisors IV”) is the general partner of each of Atomico IV L.P. (“Atomico IV”) and
Atomico IV (Guernsey) L.P. “(Atomico IV (Guernsey)”). Niklas Zennström, Mark Dyne, Nicole Ramroop and Claris
Ruwende, the members of the board of directors of Atomico Advisors IV, may be deemed to have shared voting and
dispositive power over the shares held by each of Atomico IV and Atomico IV (Guernsey). Niklas Zennström is a member
of the Board and a member of the Company’s Nominating and Corporate Governance Committee. The business address of
Atomico IV and Atomico Advisors IV is One Capital Place, Grand Cayman, KY1-1103 Cayman Islands. The business
address of Atomico IV (Guernsey) is Old Bank Chambers, La Grande Rue, St. Martin’s, Guernsey, GY4 6RT, Channel
Islands.
(26)The business address of Scottish Mortgage Investment Trust plc is c/o Baillie Gifford & Co, Calton Square, 1 Greenside
Row, Edinburgh EH1 3AN, Scotland.
(27)Ferrovial Airports International SE (“Ferrovial Airports”), which is an affiliate of Ferrovial, S.A., entered into a preferred
partner agreement as of March 2021 with Lilium GmbH whereby Ferrovial Airports was generally granted a right of first
offer for the development and/or operation of any new vertiport for a project in certain territories. Additionally, Ferrovial
Vertiports Florida, LLC, which is an affiliate of Ferrovial, S.A., entered into a commercial agreement with Lilium Aviation
Inc. as of September 15, 2021 by virtue of which the parties may collaborate for the joint analysis (and, to the extent
agreed, development) of vertiports


117
projects in certain locations in the state of Florida, USA. Certain preferential rights are granted between the parties to
explore partnering together on potential vertiports opportunities in specific locations in Florida. The business address of
Ferrovial, S.A. is Calle Príncipe de Vergara, 135 (28002) Madrid, España.
(28)The business address of LGT Global Invest Limited is Grand Pavilion Commercial Centre, 1st Floor, 802 West Bay Road,
Grand Cayman, Georgetown, Cayman Islands.
(29)The business address of Lightrock Growth Fund is 8, rue Lou Hemmer, L-1748 Senningerberg, Grand Duchy of
Luxembourg.
(30)The business address of Stiftung Fürst Liechtenstein III is Bergstrasse 5, 9490 Vaduz, Liechtenstein.
(31)David Wallerstein is an employee at an affiliate of Tencent Mobility (Luxembourg) S.à r.l. He also serves as a member of
the Board, a member of the Company’s Compensation Committee and the Chair of the Company’s Nominating and
Corporate Governance Committee. Tencent Mobility (Luxembourg) S.à r.l. expressly disclaims beneficial ownership of any
of the Class A Shares beneficially owned by David Wallerstein. The business address of Tencent Mobility (Luxembourg)
S.à r.l. is Level 29, Three Pacific Place No. 1, Queen’s Road East, Wanchai, Hong Kong.
(32)The business address of Stichting JSOP is Naritaweg 165, 1043 BW Amsterdam, the Netherlands.
(33)Barry Engle is trustee of this stockholder; see note 3 for material relationships between Mr. Engle and the Company. The
business address of Engle Family 2020 Grantor Retained Annuity Trust is c/o Qell Partners LLC, 505 Montgomery Street,
Suite 1100, San Francisco, CA 94111 USA.
(34)Consists of (i) 1,004,245 Class A Shares held of record and (ii) 534,848 Private Warrants, including 534,848 Class A Shares 
issuable upon exercise of such Private Warrants. Sam Gabbita was a director and the CFO of the Company from its 
formation on March 11, 2021 until his resignation on September 13, 2021 in connection with the Business Combination.  
Mr. Gabbita was also a director and the CFO of Qell Acquisition Corp., a predecessor of the Company, until September 13, 
2021. The business address of Sam Gabbita is c/o Qell Partners LLC, 505 Montgomery Street, Suite 1100, San Francisco, 
CA 94111 USA.
(35)Consists of (i) 341,394 Class A Shares held of record and (ii) 356,566 Private Warrants, including 356,566 Class A Shares 
issuable upon exercise of such Private Warrants. Joseph Walker was a director of Qell Acquisition Corp., a predecessor of 
the Company, until September 13, 2021.  The business address of Joseph Walker is c/o Qell Partners LLC, 505 
Montgomery Street, Suite 1100, San Francisco, CA 94111 USA.
(36)Steven R. Adams is trustee of this stockholder; see note 37 for material relationships between Mr. Adams and a predecessor
of the Company. The business address of Ellen G. Adams Family 2020 Grantor Retained Annuity Trust is c/o Qell Partners
LLC, 505 Montgomery Street, Suite 1100, San Francisco, CA 94111 USA.
(37)Consists of (i) 27,060 Class A Shares held of record and (ii) 178,283 Private Warrants, including 178,283 Class A Shares
issuable upon exercise of such Private Warrants. Steven R. Adams was a director of Qell Acquisition Corp., a predecessor
of the Company, until September 13, 2021. The business address of Steven R. Adams is c/o Qell Partners LLC, 505
Montgomery Street, Suite 1100, San Francisco, CA 94111 USA.
(38)Consists of (i) 184,227 Class A Shares held of record and (ii) 178,283 Private Warrants, including 178,283 Class A Shares
issuable upon exercise of such Private Warrants. Kathleen Ligocki was a director of Qell Acquisition Corp., a predecessor
of the Company, until September 13, 2021. The business address of Kathleen Ligocki is c/o Qell Partners LLC, 505
Montgomery Street, Suite 1100, San Francisco, CA 94111 USA.
(39)Consists of (i) 352,055 Class A Shares held of record and (ii) 499,192 Private Warrants, including 499,192 Class A Shares
issuable upon exercise of such Private Warrants. David W. Cozzens is trustee of this stockholder; see note 43 for material
relationships between Mr. Cozzens and a predecessor of the Company. The business address of David W. Cozzens Trust
established July 10, 2018 is c/o Qell Partners LLC, 505 Montgomery Street, Suite 1100, San Francisco, CA 94111 USA.
(40)Consists of (i) 150,880 Class A Shares held of record and (ii) 171,151 Private Warrants, including 171,151 Class A Shares
issuable upon exercise of such Private Warrants. The business address of The Susan Lynn Heystee Revocable Trust
established February 7, 2017 is c/o Qell Partners LLC, 505 Montgomery Street, Suite 1100, San Francisco, CA 94111 USA.


118
(41)The business address of David W. Cozzens Family Irrevocable Trust dated December 15, 2020 is c/o Qell Partners LLC,
505 Montgomery Street, Suite 1100, San Francisco, CA 94111 USA.
(42)Consists of (i) 37,720 Class A Shares held of record and (ii) 42,788 Private Warrants, including 42,788 Class A Shares
issuable upon exercise of such Private Warrants. David W. Cozzens is investment advisor to this trust; see note 43 for
material relationships between Mr. Cozzens and a predecessor of the Company. The business address of Susan L. Heystee
Family Irrevocable Trust established November 11, 2020 is c/o Qell Partners LLC, 505 Montgomery Street, Suite 1100, San
Francisco, CA 94111 USA.
(43)David W. Cozzens was a director of Qell Acquisition Corp., a predecessor of the Company, until September 13, 2021. The
business address of David W. Cozzens is c/o Qell Partners LLC, 505 Montgomery Street, Suite 1100, San Francisco, CA
94111 USA.
(44)Consists of (i) 103,593 Class A Shares held of record and (ii) 35,657 Private Warrants, including 35,657 Class A Shares
issuable upon exercise of such Private Warrants. Ryan Popple was a director of Qell Acquisition Corp., a predecessor of the
Company, until September 13, 2021. The business address of Ryan Popple is c/o Qell Partners LLC, 505 Montgomery
Street, Suite 1100, San Francisco, CA 94111 USA.
(45)Consists of (i) 1,010,570 Class A Shares held of record and (ii) 588,333 Private Warrants, including 588,333 Class A Shares
issuable upon exercise of such Private Warrants. The business address of GCCU V LLC is 650 Newport Center Drive,
Newport Beach, CA 92660.
(46)Consists of (i) 1,010,570 Class A Shares held of record and (ii) 588,333 Private Warrants, including 588,333 Class A Shares
issuable upon exercise of such Private Warrants. The business address of OC III LVS VIII LP is 650 Newport Center Drive,
Newport Beach, CA 92660.
(47)Consists of (i) 1,010,571 Class A Shares held of record and (ii) 588,334 Private Warrants, including 588,334 Class A Shares
issuable upon exercise of such Private Warrants. The business address of TOCU XXXVIII LLC is 650 Newport Center
Drive, Newport Beach, CA 92660.
(48)Consists of 1,800,000 Class A Shares issuable upon exercise of the Azul Warrants. Azul is entitled to the exercise of the
Azul Warrants at any time on or prior to October 22, 2026. The business address of Azul Linhas Aereas Brasileiras S.A. is
Edifício Jatobá, 8 floor, Castelo Branco Office Park, Avenida Marcos Penteado de Ulhôa Rodrigues, 939 Tamboré, Barueri,
São Paulo, SP 06460-040, Federative Republic of Brazil.


119
TAXATION
Material U.S. Federal Income Tax Considerations for U.S. Holders
The following is a description of the material U.S. federal income tax consequences to the U.S. Holders (as defined below)
described below of owning and disposing of our Class A Shares and Warrants, which we refer to collectively as our securities. It
is not a comprehensive description of all tax considerations that may be relevant to a particular person’s decision to acquire
securities. This discussion applies only to a U.S. Holder that is an initial purchaser of securities pursuant to the offering and that
holds our securities as a capital asset for tax purposes (generally, property held for investment). References in this section to
“Warrants” refer only to the SPAC Warrants, and not to the Azul Warrants. In addition, this discussion does not describe all of
the tax consequences that may be relevant in light of a U.S. Holder’s particular circumstances, including state and local tax
consequences, estate tax consequences, alternative minimum tax consequences, the potential application of the Medicare
contribution tax, and tax consequences applicable to U.S. Holders subject to special rules, such as:
●
banks, insurance companies, and certain other financial institutions;
●
mutual funds and pension plans;
●
U.S. expatriates and certain former citizens or long-term residents of the United States;
●
dealers or traders in securities who use a mark-to-market method of tax accounting;
●
persons holding Class A Shares or Warrants as part of a hedging transaction, “straddle,” “hedge,” “conversion,”
“synthetic security,” “constructive ownership transaction,” “constructive sale” or other integrated transaction for U.S.
federal income tax purposes;
●
persons whose “functional currency” for U.S. federal income tax purposes is not the U.S. dollar;
●
brokers, dealers or traders in securities, commodities or currencies;
●
tax-exempt entities (including private foundations) or government organizations;
●
S corporations, partnerships, or other entities or arrangements classified as partnerships or S corporations for U.S.
federal income tax purposes;
●
regulated investment companies or real estate investment trusts;
●
trusts and estates;
●
persons who acquired our Class A Shares or Warrants pursuant to the exercise of any employee stock option or
otherwise as compensation;
●
persons holding our Class A Shares or Warrants in connection with a trade or business, permanent establishment, or
fixed base outside the United States; and
●
persons who own (directly or through attribution) 10% or more (by vote or value) of our outstanding Class A Shares.
If an entity that is classified as a partnership for U.S. federal income tax purposes holds our securities, the U.S. federal
income tax treatment of a partner will generally depend on the status of the partner and the activities of the partnership.
Partnerships holding our securities and partners in such partnerships are encouraged to consult their tax advisors as to the
particular U.S. federal income tax consequences of holding and disposing of our securities.
The discussion is based on the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended (the “Code”), administrative pronouncements,
judicial decisions, final, temporary and proposed Treasury Regulations, all as of the date hereof, changes to any of which may
affect the tax consequences described herein — possibly with retroactive effect.
A “U.S. Holder” is a holder who, for U.S. federal income tax purposes, is a beneficial owner of securities and is:


120
(A) An individual who is a citizen or individual resident of the United States;
(B) a corporation, or other entity taxable as a corporation, created or organized in or under the laws of the United States,
any state therein or the District of Columbia;
(C) an estate the income of which is subject to U.S. federal income taxation regardless of its source; or
(D) a trust if (1) a U.S. court is able to exercise primary supervision over the administration of the trust and one or more
U.S. persons have authority to control all substantial decisions of the trust or (2) the trust has a valid election to be
treated as a U.S. person under applicable U.S. Treasury Regulations.
PERSONS CONSIDERING AN INVESTMENT IN OUR SECURITIES SHOULD CONSULT THEIR OWN TAX
ADVISORS AS TO THE PARTICULAR TAX CONSEQUENCES APPLICABLE TO THEM RELATING TO THE
ACQUISITION, OWNERSHIP AND DISPOSITION OF OUR SECURITIES, INCLUDING THE APPLICABILITY OF U.S.
FEDERAL, STATE AND LOCAL TAX LAWS.
Taxation of Distributions
Subject to the discussion below under “Passive Foreign Investment Company Rules,” distributions paid on Class A Shares,
other than certain pro rata distributions of Class A Shares, will generally be treated as dividends to the extent paid out of our
current or accumulated earnings and profits (as determined under U.S. federal income tax principles). Distributions in excess of
our current and accumulated earnings and profits will constitute a return of capital that will be applied against and reduce (but
not below zero) the U.S. Holder’s adjusted tax basis in its Class A Shares. Any remaining excess will be treated as gain realized
on the sale or other disposition of the Class A Shares and will be treated as described below under “Sale or Other Taxable
Disposition of Class A Shares.” Subject to applicable limitations, amounts treated as dividend income to certain non-corporate
U.S. Holders may be taxable at preferential rates applicable to “qualified dividend income” if we are a “qualified foreign
corporation” and certain other requirements are met. However, the qualified dividend income treatment will not apply if we are
treated as a PFIC (as defined below) with respect to the U.S. Holder. The amount of any such distribution will include any
amounts of foreign taxes withheld by us (or another applicable withholding agent). The amount of the dividend will be treated
as foreign-source dividend income to U.S. Holders and will not be eligible for the dividends-received deduction generally
available to U.S. corporations under the Code. Dividends will generally be included in a U.S. Holder’s income on the date of the
U.S. Holder’s receipt of the dividend. The amount of any dividend income paid in foreign currency will be the U.S. dollar
amount calculated by reference to the exchange rate in effect on the date of actual or constructive receipt, regardless of whether
the payment is in fact converted into U.S. dollars. If the dividend is converted into U.S. dollars on the date of receipt, a U.S.
Holder should not be required to recognize foreign currency gain or loss in respect of the dividend income. A U.S. Holder may
have foreign currency gain or loss if the dividend is converted into U.S. dollars after the date of receipt. Such gain or loss would
generally be treated as U.S.-source ordinary income or loss. The amount of any distribution of property other than cash (and
other than certain pro rata distributions of Class A Shares or rights to acquire Class A Shares) will be the fair market value of
such property on the date of distribution.
For foreign tax credit limitation purposes, our dividends will generally be treated as passive category income. The
rules governing foreign tax credits are complex and U.S. Holders should therefore consult their tax advisors regarding the effect
of the receipt of dividends for foreign tax credit limitation purposes.
Subject to applicable limitations, non-U.S. income taxes withheld from dividends on Class A Shares may be eligible for
credit against the U.S. Holder’s U.S. federal income tax liability. The U.S. tax rules governing eligibility for foreign tax credits
are complex and U.S. Holders are urged to consult their tax advisors regarding the creditability of foreign taxes withheld with
respect to dividends or other distributions on Class A Shares in their particular circumstances. In lieu of claiming a foreign tax
credit, a U.S. Holder may deduct foreign taxes in computing their taxable income, subject to generally applicable limitations
under U.S. law. An election to deduct foreign taxes instead of claiming foreign tax credits applies to all foreign taxes paid or
accrued in the taxable year.
Sale or Other Taxable Disposition of Class A Shares or Warrants
Subject to the discussion below under “Passive Foreign Investment Company Rules,” gain or loss realized on the sale or
other taxable disposition of Class A Shares or Warrants will be capital gain or loss, and will be long-term capital gain or loss if
the U.S. Holder held the Class A Shares or Warrants for more than one year at the time of sale or other taxable disposition. The
amount of the gain or loss will equal the difference between the U.S. Holder’s tax basis in the Class A Shares or Warrants
disposed of and the amount realized on the disposition, in each case as determined in U.S. dollars. Subject to the PFIC rules
described below, long-term capital gains recognized by certain non-corporate U.S. Holders (including individuals) will generally
be subject to reduced rates of U.S. federal income tax. The deductibility of capital losses is subject to limitations. A U.S.
Holder’s adjusted tax basis in its Class A


121
Shares or Warrants generally will be equal to the U.S. Holder’s acquisition cost for the Class A Shares or Warrants, less, in the
case of Class A Shares, any prior distributions treated as a return of capital.
If  the consideration received by a U.S. Holder is in the form of currency other than U.S. dollars, the amount realized will 
be the U.S. dollar value of the payment received determined by reference to the spot rate of exchange on the date of the sale or 
other disposition. However, if the securities disposed of in the transaction are treated as traded on an “established securities 
market” and you are either a cash basis taxpayer or an accrual basis taxpayer that has made a special election (which must be 
applied consistently from year to year and cannot be changed without the consent of the U.S. Internal Revenue Service (the 
“IRS”)), you will determine the U.S. dollar value of the amount realized in a non-U.S. dollar currency by translating the amount 
received at the spot rate of exchange on the settlement date of the sale. If you are an accrual basis taxpayer that is not eligible to 
or does not elect to determine the amount realized using the spot rate on the settlement date, you will recognize foreign currency 
gain or loss to the extent of any difference between the U.S. dollar amount realized on the date of sale or disposition and the 
U.S. dollar value of the currency received at the spot rate on the settlement date.
Exercise or Lapse of a Warrant
Except as discussed below with respect to the cashless exercise of a Warrant, a U.S. Holder generally will not recognize
taxable gain or loss upon the exercise of a Warrant for cash. The U.S. Holder’s initial tax basis in our Class A Shares received
upon exercise of the Warrant will generally be an amount equal to the sum of the U.S. Holder’s acquisition cost of the Warrant
and the exercise price of such Warrant. It is unclear whether a U.S. Holder’s holding period for the Class A Shares received
upon exercise of the Warrant would commence on the date of exercise of the Warrant or the day following the date of exercise
of the Warrant; however, in either case the holding period will not include the period during which the U.S. Holder held the
Warrants. If a Warrant is allowed to lapse unexercised, a U.S. Holder generally will recognize a capital loss equal to such
holder’s tax basis in the Warrant.
The tax consequences of a cashless exercise of a Warrant are not clear under current tax law. A cashless exercise may be
nontaxable, either because the exercise is not a realization event or because the exercise is treated as a recapitalization for U.S.
federal income tax purposes. In either situation, a U.S. Holder’s initial tax basis in the Class A Shares received generally should
equal the holder’s adjusted tax basis in the Warrant. If the cashless exercise were treated as not being a realization event, it is
unclear whether a U.S. Holder’s holding period for the Class A Shares would commence on the date of exercise of the Warrant
or the day following the date of exercise of the Warrant; in either case, the holding period would not include the period during
which the U.S. Holder held the Warrant. If, instead, the cashless exercise were treated as a recapitalization, the holding period of
the Class A Shares generally would include the holding period of the Warrant.
It is also possible that a cashless exercise of a Warrant could be treated in part as a taxable exchange in which gain or loss is
recognized. In such event, a U.S. Holder could be deemed to have surrendered a portion of the Warrants being exercised having
a value equal to the exercise price of such Warrants in satisfaction of such exercise price. Although not free from doubt, such
U.S. Holder generally should recognize capital gain or loss in an amount equal to the difference between the fair market value of
the Warrants deemed surrendered to satisfy the exercise price and the U.S. Holder’s adjusted tax basis in such Warrants. In this
case, a U.S. Holder’s initial tax basis in the Class A Shares received would equal the sum of the exercise price and the U.S.
holder’s adjusted tax basis in the Warrants exercised. It is unclear whether a U.S. Holder’s holding period for the Class A Shares
would commence on the date of exercise of the Warrant or the day following the date of exercise of the Warrant; in either case,
the holding period would not include the period during which the U.S. Holder held the Warrant. Due to the uncertainty and
absence of authority on the U.S. federal income tax treatment of a cashless exercise, including when a U.S. Holder’s holding
period would commence with respect to the Class A Shares received, U.S. Holders are urged to consult their tax advisors
regarding the tax consequences of a cashless exercise.
Passive Foreign Investment Company Rules
If we are classified as a passive foreign investment company under Section 1297 of the Code (a “PFIC”) in any
taxable year, a U.S. Holder will be subject to special rules generally intended to reduce or eliminate any benefits from the
deferral of U.S. federal income tax that a U.S. Holder could derive from investing in a non-U.S. company that does not
distribute all of its earnings on a current basis.
A non-U.S. corporation will be classified as a PFIC for any taxable year in which, after applying certain look-through rules,
either:
●
at least 75% of its gross income is passive income (such as interest income) (the “Income Test”); or


122
●
at least 50% of its gross assets (determined on the basis of a quarterly average) is attributable to assets that produce
passive income or are held for the production of passive income (the “Asset Test”).
It is uncertain whether we or any of our subsidiaries will be treated as a PFIC for U.S. federal income tax purposes for the
current or any subsequent tax year. The determination of whether we are a PFIC is a fact-intensive determination made on an
annual basis applying principles and methodologies that in some circumstances are unclear and subject to varying interpretation.
Under the Income Test, our status as a PFIC depends on the composition of our income which will depend on the transactions
we enter into in the future and our corporate structure. The composition of our income and assets is also affected by the
spending of the cash we raise in any offering, including this offering. Because PFIC status is based on our income, assets, and
activities for the entire taxable year, it is not possible to determine whether we will be characterized as a PFIC for the 2021
taxable year or any subsequent year until after the close of the relevant taxable year.
If we are classified as a PFIC in any year with respect to which a U.S. Holder owns the our securities, we will continue to
be treated as a PFIC with respect to such U.S. Holder in all succeeding years during which the U.S. Holder owns the our
securities, regardless of whether we continue to meet the tests described above unless (i) we cease to be a PFIC and the U.S.
Holder has made a “deemed sale” election under the PFIC rules, or (ii) the U.S. Holder makes a QEF Election (as defined
below) with respect to all taxable years during such U.S. Holders holding period in which we are a PFIC. If the “deemed sale”
election is made, a U.S. Holder will be deemed to have sold the securities the U.S. Holder holds at their fair market value and
any gain from such deemed sale would be subject to the rules described below. After the deemed sale election, so long as we do
not become a PFIC in a subsequent taxable year, the U.S. Holder’s securities with respect to which such election was made will
not be treated as shares in a PFIC and the U.S. Holder will not be subject to the rules described below with respect to any
“excess distribution” the U.S. Holder receives from us or any gain from an actual sale or other disposition of the securities. U.S.
Holders should consult their tax advisors as to the possibility and consequences of making a deemed sale election if we cease to
be a PFIC and such election becomes available.
For each taxable year we are treated as a PFIC with respect to U.S. Holders, U.S. Holders will be subject to special tax
rules with respect to any “excess distribution” such U.S. Holder receives and any gain such U.S. Holder recognizes from a sale
or other disposition (including, under certain circumstances, a pledge) of securities, unless (i) such U.S. Holder makes a QEF
Election (as defined below) or (ii) our securities constitute “marketable” securities, and such U.S. Holder makes a mark-to-
market election as discussed below. Distributions a U.S. Holder receives in a taxable year that are greater than 125% of the
average annual distributions a U.S. Holder received during the shorter of the three preceding taxable years or the U.S. Holder’s
holding period for the securities will be treated as an excess distribution. Under these special tax rules:
●
the excess distribution or gain will be allocated ratably over a U.S. Holder’s holding period for the securities;
●
the amount allocated to the taxable year of disposition, and any taxable year prior to the first taxable year in which we
became a PFIC, will be treated as ordinary income; and
●
the amount allocated to each other year will be subject to the highest tax rate in effect for that year for individuals or
corporations, as appropriate, and the interest charge generally applicable to underpayments of tax will be imposed on
the resulting tax attributable to each such year.
The tax liability for amounts allocated to years prior to the year of disposition or “excess distribution” cannot be offset by
any net operating losses for such years, and gains (but not losses) realized on the sale of the securities cannot be treated as
capital, even if a U.S. Holder holds the securities as capital assets.
If we are a PFIC, a U.S. Holder will generally be subject to similar rules with respect to distributions we receive from, and
our dispositions of the stock of, any of our direct or indirect subsidiaries that also are PFICs, as if such distributions were
indirectly received by, and/or dispositions were indirectly carried out by, such U.S. Holder. U.S. Holders should consult their tax
advisors regarding the application of the PFIC rules to our subsidiaries.
Certain elections exist that may alleviate some of the adverse consequences of PFIC status and would result in an
alternative treatment of the securities. A U.S. Holder may avoid the general tax treatment for PFICs described above by electing
to treat us as a “qualified electing fund” under Section 1295 of the Code (a “QEF,” and such election, a “QEF Election”) for
each of the taxable years during the U.S. Holder’s holding period that we are a PFIC. If a QEF Election is not in effect for the
first taxable year in the U.S. Holder’s holding period in which we are a PFIC, a QEF Election generally can only be made if the
U.S. Holder elects to make an applicable deemed sale or deemed dividend election on the first day of its taxable year in which
the PFIC becomes a QEF pursuant to the QEF Election. The deemed gain or deemed dividend recognized with respect to such
an election would be subject to the general tax treatment of PFICs discussed above. In order to comply with the requirements of
a QEF Election, a U.S. Holder must receive a


123
PFIC Annual Information Statement from us. We intend to provide the information necessary for U.S. Holders to make or
maintain a QEF Election, including information necessary to determine the appropriate income inclusion amounts for purposes
of the QEF Election. However, there is also no assurance that we will have timely knowledge of our status as a PFIC in the
future or of the required information to be provided.
If a U.S. Holder makes a QEF Election with respect to a PFIC, it will be taxed currently on its pro rata share of the PFIC’s
ordinary earnings and net capital gain (at ordinary income and capital gain rates, respectively) for each taxable year that the
entity is a PFIC, even if no distributions were received. Any distributions we make out of our earnings and profits that were
previously included in such a U.S. Holder’s income under the QEF Election would not be taxable to such U.S. Holder. Such
U.S. Holder’s tax basis in its securities would be increased by an amount equal to any income included under the QEF Election
and decreased by any amount distributed on the securities that is not included in its income. In addition, a U.S. Holder will
recognize capital gain or loss on the disposition of its securities in an amount equal to the difference between the amount
realized and its adjusted tax basis in the securities, each as determined in U.S. dollars. Once made, a QEF Election remains in
effect unless invalidated or terminated by the IRS or revoked by the shareholder. A QEF Election can be revoked only with the
consent of the IRS. A U.S. Holder will not be currently taxed on the ordinary income and net capital gain of a PFIC with respect
to which a QEF Election was made for any taxable year of the non-U.S. corporation that such corporation does not satisfy the
Income Test or Asset Test. Each U.S. Holder should consult its tax advisor regarding the availability of, and procedure for
making, any deemed gain, deemed dividend or QEF Election.
Alternatively, U.S. Holders can avoid the interest charge on excess distributions or gain relating to the securities by making
a mark-to-market election with respect to the securities, provided that the securities constitute “marketable stock.” “Marketable
stock” is, generally, stock that is “regularly traded” on certain U.S. stock exchanges or on a foreign stock exchange that meets
certain conditions. For these purposes, the securities will be considered regularly traded during any calendar year during which
they are traded, other than in de minimis quantities, on at least 15 days during each calendar quarter. Any trades that have as
their principal purpose meeting this requirement will be disregarded. Our securities are listed on Nasdaq, which is a qualified
exchange for these purposes. Consequently, if our Class A Shares remain listed on Nasdaq and are regularly traded, and you are
a U.S. Holder of securities, we expect the mark-to-market election would be available to you if we are a classified as a PFIC.
Each U.S. Holder should consult its tax advisor as to the whether a mark-to-market election is available or advisable with
respect to the securities.
A U.S. Holder that makes a mark-to-market election must include in ordinary income for each year an amount equal to the
excess, if any, of the fair market value of the securities at the close of the taxable year over the U.S. Holder’s adjusted tax basis
in the securities. An electing holder may also claim an ordinary loss deduction for the excess, if any, of the U.S. Holder’s
adjusted basis in the securities over the fair market value of the securities at the close of the taxable year, but this deduction is
allowable only to the extent of any net mark-to-market gains for prior years. Gains from an actual sale or other disposition of the
securities will be treated as ordinary income, and any losses incurred on a sale or other disposition of the shares will be treated
as an ordinary loss to the extent of any net mark-to-market gains for prior years. Once made, the election cannot be revoked
without the consent of the IRS, unless the securities cease to be marketable.
However, a mark-to-market election generally cannot be made for equity interests in any lower-tier PFICs that we own,
unless shares of such lower-tier PFIC are themselves “marketable.” As a result, even if a U.S. Holder validly makes a mark-to-
market election with respect to our securities, the U.S. Holder may continue to be subject to the PFIC rules (described above)
with respect to its indirect interest in any of our investments that are treated as an equity interest in a PFIC for U.S. federal
income tax purposes. U.S. Holders should consult their tax advisors to determine whether any of these elections would be
available and if so, what the consequences of the alternative treatments would be in their particular circumstances.
Unless otherwise provided by the IRS, each U.S. shareholder of a PFIC is required to file an annual report containing such
information as the IRS may require. A U.S. Holder’s failure to file the annual report will cause the statute of limitations for such
U.S. Holder’s U.S. federal income tax return to remain open with regard to the items required to be included in such report until
three years after the U.S. Holder files the annual report, and, unless such failure is due to reasonable cause and not willful
neglect, the statute of limitations for the U.S. Holder’s entire U.S. federal income tax return will remain open during such
period. U.S. Holders should consult their tax advisors regarding the requirements of filing such information returns under these
rules.
WE STRONGLY URGE YOU TO CONSULT YOUR TAX ADVISOR REGARDING THE IMPACT OF OUR PFIC
STATUS ON YOUR INVESTMENT IN THE SECURITIES AS WELL AS THE APPLICATION OF THE PFIC RULES TO
YOUR INVESTMENT IN THE SECURITIES.
Information Reporting and Backup Withholding
Payments of dividends and sales proceeds that are made within the United States or through certain U.S.-related financial
intermediaries generally are subject to information reporting, and may be subject to backup withholding, unless (i) the U.S.
Holder is a


124
corporation or other exempt recipient or (ii) in the case of backup withholding, the U.S. Holder provides a correct taxpayer
identification number and certifies that it is not subject to backup withholding on a duly executed IRS Form W-9 or otherwise
establishes an exemption.
The amount of any backup withholding from a payment to a U.S. Holder may be allowed as a credit against the U.S.
Holder’s U.S. federal income tax liability and may entitle the U.S. Holder to a refund, provided that the required information is
timely furnished to the IRS.
Information with Respect to Foreign Financial Assets
Certain U.S. Holders who are individuals (and, under regulations, certain entities) may be required to report information
relating to the securities, subject to certain exceptions (including an exception for securities held in accounts maintained by
certain U.S. financial institutions), by filing IRS Form 8938 (Statement of Specified Foreign Financial Assets) with their federal
income tax return. Such U.S. Holders who fail to timely furnish the required information may be subject to a penalty.
Additionally, if a U.S. Holder does not file the required information, the statute of limitations with respect to tax returns of the
U.S. Holder to which the information relates may not close until three years after such information is filed. U.S. Holders should
consult their tax advisors regarding their reporting obligations with respect to their ownership and disposition of the securities.
U.S. Treasury Regulations meant to require the reporting of certain tax shelter transactions could be interpreted to cover
transactions generally not regarded as tax shelters, including certain foreign currency transactions. Under the applicable U.S.
Treasury Regulations, certain transactions are required to be reported to the IRS including, in certain circumstances, a sale,
exchange, retirement or other taxable disposition of foreign currency, to the extent that such sale, exchange, retirement or other
taxable disposition results in a tax loss in excess of a threshold amount. U.S. Holders should consult their tax advisors to
determine the tax return obligations, if any, with respect to our securities, and the receipt of Euro in respect thereof, including
any requirement to file IRS Form 8886 (Reportable Transaction Disclosure Statement).
Material Dutch Tax Considerations
Taxation in the Netherlands
This section outlines the principal Dutch tax consequences of the acquisition, holding, settlement, redemption and disposal
of Class A Shares and the acquisition, holding, exercise, and disposal of the Warrants. References in this section to “Warrants”
refer only to the SPAC Warrants, and not to the Azu Warrants. This section does not purport to present a comprehensive or
complete description of all aspects of Dutch tax law which could be of relevance to a holder of Class A Shares in the capital of
Lilium, which we refer to as a shareholder, or a holder of Warrants. For Dutch tax purposes, a shareholder or holder of Warrants
may include an individual who, or an entity that, does not hold the legal title to the Class A Shares or Warrants, but to whom, or
to which, nevertheless the Class A Shares or Warrants or the income thereof, are attributed based either on such individual or
entity owning a beneficial interest in the Class A Shares or Warrants or based on specific statutory provisions. These include
statutory provisions pursuant to which Class A Shares or Warrants are attributed to an individual who is, or who has directly or
indirectly inherited from a person who was, the settlor, grantor or similar originator of a trust, foundation or similar entity that
holds the Class A Shares or Warrants.
This section is intended as general information only. A prospective shareholder or prospective holder of Warrants should
consult his own tax adviser regarding the tax consequences of any acquisition, holding, redemption and disposal of Class A
Shares or acquisition, holding, exercise or disposal of Warrants.
Except as otherwise provided, this section is based on Dutch tax law as applied and interpreted by Dutch tax courts and as
published and in effect on the date of this prospectus, including, for the avoidance of doubt, the tax rates applicable on the date
hereof, without prejudice to any amendments introduced at a later date and implemented with or without retroactive effect. On
this basis, the statements included in this section are the opinion of Van Doorne N.V., Dutch counsel to Lilium.
Any reference in this section made to Dutch taxes, Dutch tax or Dutch tax law must be construed as a reference to any taxes
of any nature levied by or on behalf of the Netherlands or any of its subdivisions or taxing authorities or to the law governing
such taxes, respectively. The Netherlands means the part of the Kingdom of the Netherlands located in Europe.
Any reference hereafter made to a treaty for the avoidance of double taxation concluded by the Netherlands includes the
Tax Regulation for the Kingdom of the Netherlands (Belastingregeling voor het Koninkrijk), the Tax Regulations for the
Netherlands and Curacao (Belastingregeling Nederland Curaçao), the Tax Regulations for the Netherlands and Sint Maarten
(Belastingregeling Nederland Sint Maarten), the Tax Regulation for the State of the Netherlands (Belastingregeling voor het
land Nederland) and the


125
Agreement between the Taipei Representative Office in the Netherlands and the Netherlands Trade and Investment Office in
Taipei for the avoidance of double taxation.
This section does not describe any Dutch tax considerations or consequences that may be relevant to a shareholder or holder
of Warrants:
i.
who is an individual and for whom the income or capital gains derived from the Class A Shares or Warrants are
attributable to employment activities, the income from which is taxable in the Netherlands;
ii.
who has, or that has, a substantial interest (aanmerkelijk belang) or a fictitious substantial interest (fictief aanmerkelijk
belang) in Lilium within the meaning of chapter 4 of the Dutch Income Tax Act 2001 (Wet inkomstenbelasting 2001).
Generally, a shareholder or holder of Warrants has a substantial interest in Lilium if such shareholder or holder of
Warrants, alone or — in case of an individual — together with a partner for Dutch tax purposes, or any relative by
blood or by marriage in the ascending or descending line (including foster-children) of either of them, directly or
indirectly:
1.
owns, or holds, or is deemed to own or hold, certain rights to shares representing 5% or more of the total issued
capital of Lilium, or of the issued and outstanding capital of any class of shares of Lilium;
2.
holds, or is deemed to hold, rights, including Warrants, to, directly or indirectly, acquire shares, whether or not
already issued, representing 5% or more of the total issued capital of Lilium, or of the issued capital of any class
of shares of Lilium; or
3.
owns, or holds, or is deemed to own or hold, certain rights on profit participating certificates (winstbewijzen) that
relate to 5% or more of the annual profit of Lilium or to 5% or more of the liquidation proceeds of Lilium.
A shareholder or holder of Warrants who is an individual will also have a substantial interest if a partner for Dutch tax
purposes or any relative by blood or by marriage in the ascending or descending line (including foster-children) of either of
them has a substantial interest in Lilium.
iii. that is an entity which is, pursuant to the Dutch Corporate Income Tax Act 1969 (Wet op de vennootschapsbelasting
1969) (the “CITA”), not subject to Dutch corporate income tax or is in full or in part exempt from Dutch corporate
income tax (such as a qualifying pension fund);
iv.
that is an investment institution (beleggingsinstelling) as described in clause 6a or 28 CITA; or
v.
that is required to apply the participation exemption (deelnemingsvrijstelling) with respect to the Class A Shares,
Warrants, or a combination thereof (as defined in clause 13 CITA). Generally, a holding of Class A Shares or Warrants
is considered to qualify as a participation for the participation exemption if it represents a holding of, or right to
acquire, an interest of 5% or more of the nominal paid-up share capital in Lilium.
Withholding Tax on Dividend Payments
Shareholders
A shareholder is generally subject to Dutch dividend withholding tax at a rate of 15% on dividends distributed by Lilium.
Generally, Lilium is responsible for the withholding of such dividend withholding tax at source. However, a shareholder will not
be subject to Dutch dividend withholding tax on dividends distributed by Lilium if, and for as long as, Lilium is resident solely
in Germany for purposes of the convention between Germany and the Netherlands for the avoidance of double taxation and the
prevention of fiscal evasion with respect to taxes on income (the “German-Dutch tax treaty”), unless:
i.
the shareholder is a Dutch Individual (as defined below) or a Dutch Corporate Entity (as defined below); or
ii.
the shareholder is a Non-Dutch Individual (as defined below) or a Non-Dutch Corporate Entity (as defined below) and
derives profits from an enterprise, which enterprise is, in whole or in part, carried on through a permanent
establishment (vaste inrichting) or a permanent representative (vaste vertegenwoordiger) in the Netherlands, to which
the Class A Shares are attributable.


126
The current German-Dutch tax treaty stipulates that if a company is treated as tax resident of both the Netherlands and
Germany it shall be treated as resident of the country in which it has its place of effective management for purposes of the
treaty. It is currently envisaged that Lilium shall have its place of effective management in Germany.
It is currently uncertain what evidence, information and documentation will be required by the Dutch tax authorities for
purposes of accepting application of the German-Dutch tax treaty as described above, either at source or through a refund
request by a shareholder or a holder of Warrants.
Dividends distributed by Lilium include, but are not limited to:
i.
distributions of profits in cash or in kind, whatever they be named or in whatever form;
ii.
proceeds from the liquidation of Lilium or proceeds from the repurchase of Class A Shares by Lilium, other than as a
temporary portfolio investment (tijdelijke belegging), in excess of the average paid-in capital recognized for Dutch
dividend withholding tax purposes;
iii. the nominal value of Class A Shares issued to a shareholder or an increase in the nominal value of Class A Shares, to
the extent that no related contribution, recognized for Dutch dividend withholding tax purposes, has been made or will
be made; and
iv.
partial repayment of paid-in capital, that is not recognized for Dutch dividend withholding tax purposes, or if
recognized for Dutch dividend withholding tax purposes, to the extent that Lilium has “net profits”(zuivere winst),
unless
1.
the General Meeting has resolved in advance to make such repayment; and
2.
the nominal value of the Class A Shares concerned has been reduced with an equal amount by way of an
amendment to the articles of association of Lilium. The term “net profits” includes anticipated profits that have yet
to be realized.
If a shareholder is resident or deemed to be resident in the Netherlands, such shareholder is generally entitled to an
exemption or a credit for any Dutch dividend withholding tax against his Dutch (corporate) income tax liability and to a refund
of any residual Dutch dividend withholding tax. Depending on his specific circumstances, a shareholder resident in a country
other than the Netherlands, may be entitled to exemptions from, reduction of, or full or partial refund of, Dutch dividend
withholding tax pursuant to Dutch law, EU law, or treaties for avoidance of double taxation.
A shareholder that is resident (i) in an EU member state or (ii) in a state that is a party to the Agreement on the European
Economic Area (“EEA”; Iceland, Liechtenstein or Norway), or (iii) in a designated third state with which the Netherlands has
agreed to an arrangement for the exchange of information on tax matters, is entitled to a full or partial refund of Dutch dividend
withholding tax incurred in respect of Class A Shares if the final tax burden in respect of the dividends distributed by Lilium of
a comparable Dutch resident shareholder is lower than the withholding tax incurred by the non-Dutch resident shareholder. The
refund is granted upon request, and is subject to conditions and limitations. No entitlement to a refund exists if the disadvantage
for the non-Dutch resident shareholder is entirely compensated in his state of residence under the provisions of a treaty for the
avoidance of double taxation concluded between this state of residence and the Netherlands.
According to Dutch domestic anti-dividend stripping rules, no credit against Dutch (corporate) income tax, exemption
from, reduction in or refund of, Dutch dividend withholding tax will be granted if the recipient of the dividends paid by Lilium
is not considered to be the beneficial owner (uiteindelijk gerechtigde) of such dividends. The DWTA provides for a non-
exhaustive negative description of a beneficial owner. According to the DWTA, a shareholder will not be considered the
beneficial owner of the dividends if as a consequence of a combination of transactions:
i.
a person other than the shareholder wholly or partly, directly or indirectly, benefits from the dividends;
ii.
whereby this other person retains or acquires, directly or indirectly, an interest similar to that in the Class A Shares on
which the dividends were paid; and
iii. that other person is entitled to a credit, reduction or refund of Dutch dividend withholding tax that is less than that of
the shareholder.
Please refer to the paragraph “Risk Factors” for a risk regarding Lilium’s tax residency and the consequences thereof.


127
Holders of Warrants
The exercise of a Warrant does in the view of Lilium not give rise to Dutch dividend withholding tax, except to the extent
(i) the exercise price paid in cash per issued Class A Share is below the nominal value of a Class A Share (currently, the nominal
value per Class A Share is €0.12 and the exercise price is $11.50) and (ii) such difference is not charged against Lilium’s share
premium reserve recognized for purposes of Dutch dividend withholding tax. If any Dutch dividend withholding tax due is not
effectively withheld for the account of the relevant holder of a Warrant, Dutch dividend withholding tax shall be due by Holdco
on a grossed-up basis, meaning that the Dutch dividend withholding tax basis shall be equal to the amount referred to in the
preceding sentence multiplied by 100/85. Exceptions and relief from Dutch dividend withholding tax may apply as set forth in
the preceding paragraph.
Taxes on Income and Capital Gains
Residents of the Netherlands
The description of certain Dutch tax consequences in this paragraph is only intended for the following shareholders or
holders of Warrants:
i.
individuals who are resident or deemed to be resident in the Netherlands for Dutch income tax purposes (“Dutch
Individuals”); and
ii.
entities or enterprises that are subject to the CITA and are resident or deemed to be resident in the Netherlands for
corporate income tax purposes (“Dutch Corporate Entities”)
Dutch individuals engaged or deemed to be engaged in an enterprise or in miscellaneous activities
Dutch Individuals engaged or deemed to be engaged in an enterprise or who derive income from miscellaneous activities
(resultaat uit overige werkzaamheden) are generally subject to income tax at statutory progressive rates with a maximum of
49.5% on any benefits derived or deemed to be derived from the Class A Shares or Warrants, including any capital gains
realized on the disposal thereof or on the exercise of Warrants, that are either attributable to:
i.
an enterprise from which a Dutch Individual derives profits, whether as an entrepreneur (ondernemer) or pursuant to a
co-entitlement (medegerechtigde) to the net worth of such enterprise other than as an entrepreneur or a shareholder; or
ii.
the benefits of which are attributable to miscellaneous activities, including, without limitation, activities which are
beyond the scope of active portfolio investment activities (meer dan normal vermogensbeheer).
Dutch individuals not engaged or deemed to be engaged in an enterprise or in miscellaneous activities
Generally, the Class A Shares or Warrants held by a Dutch Individual who is not engaged or deemed to be engaged in an
enterprise or miscellaneous activities, or who is so engaged or deemed to be engaged but the Class A Shares or Warrants are not
attributable to that enterprise or miscellaneous activities, will be subject to annual income tax imposed on a fictitious yield on
the Class A Shares or Warrants under the regime for savings and investments (inkomen uit sparen en beleggen). Irrespective of
the actual income and capital gains realized , including the Class A Shares received upon the exercise of a Warrant, the annual
taxable benefit of all the assets and liabilities of a Dutch Individual that are taxed under this regime, including the Class A
Shares and Warrants, is set at a percentage of the positive balance of the fair market value of these assets, including the Class A
Shares and Warrants and the fair market value of these liabilities. The percentage, which is annually indexed, increases:
i.
from 1.898% over the first €50,000;
ii.
to 4.501% over €50,001 up to and including €950,000; and
iii. to a maximum of 5.69% over €950,001 or higher.
No taxation occurs if this positive balance does not exceed a certain threshold (heffingvrij vermogen), which is €50,000 in
2021. The fair market value of assets, including the Class A Shares and Warrants, and liabilities that are taxed under this regime
is measured once in each calendar year on January 1. The tax rate under the regime for savings and investments is a flat rate of
31%.


128
Dutch Corporate Entities
Dutch Corporate Entities are generally subject to corporate income tax at statutory rates up to 25% on any benefits derived
or deemed to be derived from the Class A Shares or Warrants, including any capital gains realized on the disposal thereof or on
the exercise of Warrants. A reduced rate of 15% applies to the first €245,000 of taxable profits.
Non-residents of the Netherlands
The description of certain Dutch tax consequences in this paragraph is only intended for the following shareholders or
holders of Warrants:
●
individuals not resident and not deemed to be resident in the Netherlands for Dutch income tax purposes (“Non-Dutch
Individuals”); or
●
entities not resident and not deemed to be resident in the Netherlands for Dutch corporate income tax purposes (“Non-
Dutch Corporate Entities”).
A Non-Dutch Individual or a Non-Dutch Corporate Entity will not be subject to any Dutch taxes on income or capital gains
in respect of the acquisition, holding, redemption and disposal of Class A Shares and the acquisition, holding, exercise, and
disposal of Warrants, other than withholding tax as described above, except if:
i.
the Non-Dutch Individual or the Non-Dutch Corporate Entity derives profits from an enterprise, whether as
entrepreneur or pursuant to a co-entitlement to the net worth of such enterprise other than as an entrepreneur or a
shareholder, which enterprise is, in whole or in part, carried on through a permanent establishment (vaste inrichting) or
a permanent representative (vaste vertegenwoordiger) in the Netherlands, to which the Class A Shares or Warrants are
attributable;
ii.
the Non-Dutch Individual derives benefits from miscellaneous activities carried out in the Netherlands in respect of the
Class A Shares or Warrants, including (without limitation) activities which are beyond the scope of active portfolio
investment activities;
iii. the Non-Dutch Corporate Entity is entitled to a share in the profits of an enterprise or a co-entitlement to the net worth
of an enterprise, other than by way of securities, which enterprise is effectively managed in the Netherlands and to
which enterprise the Class A Shares or Warrants are attributable; or
iv.
the Non-Dutch Individual is entitled to a share in the profits of an enterprise, other than by way of securities, which
enterprise is effectively managed in the Netherlands and to which enterprise the Class A Shares or Warrants are
attributable.
Under certain specific circumstances, Dutch taxation rights may be restricted for Non-Dutch Individuals and Non-Dutch
Corporate Entities pursuant to treaties for the avoidance of double taxation.
Dutch Gift Tax or Inheritance Tax
No Dutch gift tax or inheritance tax is due in respect of any gift of the Class A Shares or Warrants by, or inheritance of the
Class A Shares or Warrants on the death of, a shareholder or holder of Warrants, except if:
●
at the time of the gift or death of the shareholder or holder of Warrants, the shareholder or holder of Warrants is
resident, or is deemed to be resident, in the Netherlands;
●
the shareholder or holder of Warrants passes away within 180 days after the date of the gift of the Class A Shares or
holder of Warrants and is not, or not deemed to be, at the time of the gift, but is, or deemed to be resident in the
Netherlands at the time of his death; or
●
the gift of the Class A Shares or holder of Warrants is made under a condition precedent and the shareholder or holder
of Warrants is resident, or is deemed to be resident, in the Netherlands at the time the condition is fulfilled.
For purposes of Dutch gift tax or inheritance tax, an individual who is of Dutch nationality will be deemed to be resident in
the Netherlands if such individual has been resident in the Netherlands at any time during the 10 years preceding the date of the
gift or his death. For purposes of Dutch gift tax, any individual, irrespective of his nationality, will be deemed to be resident in
the Netherlands if


129
such individual has been resident in the Netherlands at any time during the 12 months preceding the date of the gift. Applicable
tax treaties may override deemed residency.
Value added tax (VAT)
No Dutch VAT will be payable by a shareholder in respect of any purchase, ownership and disposal of the Class A Shares or
any purchase, ownership and disposal of the Warrants.
Other Taxes and Duties
No other Dutch taxes, including taxes of a documentary nature, such as capital tax, stamp or registration tax or duty, are
payable by or on behalf of the shareholder or holder of Warrants by reason only of the purchase, ownership and disposal of the
Class A Shares or the purchase, ownership, exercise and disposal of the Warrants.
Residency
A shareholder or holder of Warrants will not become resident, or deemed resident, in the Netherlands for tax purposes by
reason only of holding the Class A Shares or Warrants.
Material German Tax Considerations
The following section is a description of the material German tax considerations that become relevant when acquiring,
owning and/or disposing of Lilium’s Class A Shares and Private Warrants as from the date of this prospectus. It is based on the
German tax law applicable as of the date of this prospectus without prejudice to any amendments introduced at a later date and
implemented with or without retroactive effect.
This section is intended as general information only and does not purport to be a comprehensive or complete description of
all potential German tax effects of the acquisition, ownership or disposal of Class A Shares or Private Warrants and does not set
forth all German tax considerations that may be relevant to a particular person’s decision to acquire Class A Shares or Private
Warrants.
This section does not describe any German tax considerations or consequences that may be relevant to the acquisition,
ownership or disposal of Class A Shares or Private Warrants by a shareholder (i) for whom or for a direct or indirect shareholder
or beneficiary of whom the income or capital gains derived from the Class A Shares or Private Warrants are attributable to
employment activities, the income from which is taxable in Germany, or (ii) who exchanges, or has exchanged, other German
taxable assets for Class A Shares or Private Warrants (or vice versa) under a German tax deferral transaction of the German
reorganization tax act (Umwandlungssteuergesetz).
This section does not constitute particular German tax advice and potential purchasers of Lilium’s Class A Shares or Private
Warrants are urged to consult their own tax advisors regarding the tax consequences of the acquisition, ownership and/or
disposal of Class A Shares or Private Warrants in light of their particular circumstances with regard to the application of German
tax law to their particular situations, in particular with respect to the procedure to be complied with to obtain a relief of
withholding tax on dividends and on capital gains (Kapitalertragsteuer) and with respect to the influence of provisions of any
applicable income tax treaty on the mitigation of double taxation (each a “tax treaty”), as well as any tax consequences arising
under the laws of any state, local or other non-German jurisdiction. A shareholder or holder of Private Warrants may include an
individual who or an entity that does not have the legal title to the Class A Shares or Warrants, but to whom nevertheless the
Class A Shares or Private Warrants are attributed for German tax purposes, based either on such individual or entity owning a
beneficial interest in the Class A Shares or Private Warrants or based on specific statutory provisions.
All of the following is subject to change as from the date of this prospectus. Such changes could apply retroactively and
could affect the consequences set forth below. This section does neither refer to any German filing, notification or other German
tax compliance aspects nor to foreign account tax compliance act (“FATCA”) aspects.
Lilium’s tax residency status
We have our statutory seat in the Netherlands and our sole place of management in Germany and are therefore tax resident
in Germany as from the date of this prospectus (both under German domestic law and for purposes of the German-Dutch tax
treaty). Thus, we qualify as a corporation subject to German unlimited liability for corporate income tax purposes and are
treated as a resident of Germany under the Dutch-German tax treaty. However, because our tax residency depends on future
facts regarding our place of


130
management the German unlimited liability for corporate income tax purposes may change in the future. We assume for all
purposes herein that we shall be tax resident in Germany at all relevant points in time when taxable events may occur.
German taxation of holders of Class A Shares
Taxation of dividends
Withholding tax on dividend payments
Dividends distributed from Lilium to our shareholders are generally subject to German withholding tax, except for certain
scenarios in which a dividend is either excluded from the scope of German withholding tax or fully or partially withholding tax
exempt (for example, repayments of capital from the tax contribution account (steuerliches Einlagekonto)), as further described.
The withholding tax rate is 25% plus a 5.5% solidarity surcharge (Solidaritätszuschlag) thereon, totaling 26.375% of the gross
dividend amount and potentially church withholding tax for shareholder who are private individuals in certain cases (see below).
Withholding tax is to be withheld and passed on for the account of the shareholders, depending on the specific circumstances, by
a domestic branch of a domestic or foreign credit or financial services institution (Kredit- und Finanzdienstleistungsinstitut), by
the domestic securities trading company (inländisches Wertpapierhandelsunternehmen) or a domestic securities trading bank
(inländische Wertpapierhandelsbank) which keeps and administers the Class A Shares and disburses or credits the dividends or
disburses the dividends to a foreign agent, or by the securities custodian bank (Wertpapiersammelbank) to which the Class A
Shares were entrusted for custody if the dividends are distributed to a foreign agent by such securities custodian bank (each of
which is referred to as the “Dividend Paying Agent”). or, in case the Class A Shares are not held in deposit with a Dividend
Paying Agent, Lilium is responsible for withholding and remitting the tax to the competent tax office. Such withholding tax is
levied and withheld irrespective of whether and to what extent the dividend distribution is taxable at the level of the shareholder
and whether the shareholder is a person residing in Germany or in a foreign country.
In the case of dividends distributed to a company within the meaning of Art. 2 of the amended EU Directive 2011/96/EU of
the Council of November 30, 2011 (the “EU Parent Subsidiary Directive”) domiciled in another Member State of the European
Union, withholding tax is effectively reduced to zero. This also applies to dividends distributed to a permanent establishment
located in another Member State of the European Union of such a parent company or of a parent company tax resident in
Germany if the participation in Lilium is effectively connected with this permanent establishment. The key prerequisite for the
application of the EU Parent Subsidiary Directive is that the shareholder has held a direct participation in the share capital of
Lilium of at least 10% for an uninterrupted period of at least one year. The foreign resident shareholder must be eligible for
purposes of the EU Parent Subsidiary Directive (as set out above) to invoke the reduction and, in addition, no German anti-
directive/treaty shopping provision of Section 50d paragraph 3 of the German Income Tax Act (Einkommensteuergesetz) must
be applicable.
The withholding tax on dividends distributed to other foreign resident shareholders is reduced in accordance with an
applicable double tax treaty (to 15%, 5% or 0% depending on certain prerequisites) if Germany has concluded such double tax
treaty with the country of residence of the shareholder and if the shareholder does not hold his Class A Shares either as part of
the assets of a permanent establishment or a fixed place of business in Germany or as business assets for which a permanent
representative has been appointed in Germany. The foreign resident shareholder must be eligible for tax treaty purposes, no
limitation of benefits provision in a double tax treaty and no German anti-directive/treaty shopping provision of Section 50d
paragraph 3 of the German Income Tax Act (Einkommensteuergesetz) must be applicable.
However, even in case of application of a reduction under the EU Parent Subsidiary Directive or a tax treaty, the deduction
of German withholding taxes will generally have to occur unless the relevant shareholder has been granted an exemption from
the German Federal Central Tax Office (Bundeszentralamt für Steuern) upon formal application by the shareholder (Freistellung
im Steuerabzugsverfahren). In case of deducted withholding taxes, the reduction of the withholding tax pursuant to both the EU
Parent Subsidiary Directive and an applicable double tax treaty is procedurally granted in such a manner that the difference
between the total amount withheld, including the solidarity surcharge, and the tax liability determined on the basis of the EU
Parent Subsidiary Directive (0%) or on the basis of the tax rate set forth in the applicable double tax treaty (15% unless further
qualifications are met) is upon request refunded by the German Federal Central Tax Office.
In the case of dividends received by corporations who are not tax resident in Germany, two-fifths of the withholding tax
deducted and remitted are refunded without the need to fulfill all prerequisites required for such refund under the EU Parent
Subsidiary Directive or under a double tax treaty or if no double tax treaty has been concluded between the state of residence of
the shareholder, however, likewise subject to the conditions of the aforementioned German anti-directive/treaty shopping
provision.
In order to receive a refund pursuant to a tax treaty or the aforementioned option for a foreign corporation, the shareholder
has to submit a completed form for refund (available at the website of the Federal Central Tax Office (http://www.bzst.de) as
well as at the


131
German embassies and consulates) together with a withholding tax certificate (Kapitalertragsteuerbescheinigung) issued by the
institution that deducted the respective withholding tax.
The aforementioned reductions of (or exemptions from) withholding tax under an applicable tax treaty are further restricted
if (i) the applicable tax treaty provides for a tax reduction resulting in an applicable tax rate of less than 15% and (ii) the
shareholder (aa) is not a corporation that directly holds at least 10% in the equity capital of Lilium and (bb) is subject to income
tax in its state of residence without being exempt from such taxation. In this case, the reduction of (or exemption from)
withholding tax is subject to the following three cumulative prerequisites: (i) the shareholder must qualify as beneficial owner of
the shares in a company for a minimum holding period of 45 consecutive days occurring within a period of 45 days prior and 45
days after the due date of the dividends, (ii) the shareholder has to bear at least 70% of the change in value risk related to the
shares in a company during the minimum holding period without being directly or indirectly hedged, and (iii) the shareholder
must not be required to fully or largely compensate directly or indirectly the dividends to third parties. However, these special
restrictions do not apply to a shareholder who has been the beneficial owner of the shares in a company for at least one
uninterrupted year upon receipt of the dividends.
In the absence of the fulfillment of all of the three prerequisites, three fifths of the withholding tax imposed on the
dividends must not be credited against the shareholder’s (corporate) income tax liability, but may, upon application, be deducted
from the shareholder’s tax base for the relevant assessment period. Furthermore, a shareholder that has received gross dividends
without any deduction of withholding tax due to a tax exemption without qualifying for such a full tax credit has (i) to notify the
competent local tax office accordingly, (ii) to declare according to the officially prescribed form and (iii) has to make a payment
in the amount of the omitted withholding tax deduction.
However, these special rules on the restriction of withholding tax credit do not apply to a shareholder whose overall
dividend earnings within an assessment period do not exceed €20,000 or that has been the beneficial owner of the shares in a
company for at least one uninterrupted year upon receipt of the dividends.
For individual or corporate shareholders tax resident outside Germany not holding the Class A Shares through a permanent
establishment (Betriebsstätte) in Germany or as business assets (Betriebsvermögen) for which a permanent representative
(ständiger Vertreter) has been appointed in Germany, the remaining and paid withholding tax (if any) is then final (i.e., not
refundable) and settles the shareholder’s limited tax liability in Germany. For individual or corporate shareholders tax resident
in Germany (for example, those shareholders whose residence, domicile, registered office or place of management is located in
Germany) holding their Class A Shares as business assets, as well as for shareholders tax resident outside of Germany holding
their Class A Shares through a permanent establishment in Germany or as business assets for which a permanent representative
has been appointed in Germany, the withholding tax withheld (including solidarity surcharge) can be credited against the
shareholder’s personal income tax or corporate income tax liability in Germany. Any withholding tax (including solidarity
surcharge) in excess of such tax liability is refunded. For individual shareholders tax resident in Germany holding Lilium’s
Class A Shares as private assets, the withholding tax is a final tax (Abgeltungsteuer), subject to the exceptions described in the
following section.
Taxation of dividend income of shareholders tax resident in Germany holding Lilium Class A Shares as private assets (private
individuals)
For individual shareholders (individuals) resident in Germany holding Lilium Class A Shares as private assets, dividends
are subject to a flat rate tax which is satisfied by the withholding tax actually withheld (Abgeltungsteuer). Accordingly, dividend
income will be taxed at a flat tax rate of 25% plus 5.5% solidarity surcharge thereon totaling 26.375% and church tax
(Kirchensteuer) in case the shareholder is subject to church tax because of his personal circumstances. An automatic procedure
for deduction of church tax by way of withholding will apply to shareholders being subject to church tax unless the shareholder
has filed a blocking notice (Sperrvermerk) with the German Federal Tax Office (details related to the computation of the
specific tax rate including church tax are to be discussed with the individual tax advisor of the relevant shareholder). Except for
an annual lump sum savings allowance (Sparer-Pauschbetrag) of up to €801 (for individual filers) or up to €1,602 (for married
couples and for partners in accordance with the registered partnership law (Gesetz über die Eingetragene Lebenspartnerschaft)
filing jointly), private individual shareholders will not be entitled to deduct expenses incurred in connection with the capital
investment from their dividend income.
The income tax owed for the dividend income is satisfied by the withholding tax withheld by the Dividend Paying Agent or
Lilium. However, if the flat tax results in a higher tax burden as opposed to the private individual shareholder’s personal income
tax rate, the private individual shareholder can opt for taxation at his personal income tax rate. In that case, the final withholding
tax will be credited against the income tax. The option can be exercised only for all capital income from capital investments
received in the relevant assessment period uniformly and married couples as well as partners in accordance with the registered
partnership law filing jointly may only jointly exercise the option.


132
Exceptions from the flat rate tax (satisfied by withholding the tax at source, Abgeltungswirkung) may apply — that is, only
upon application — for shareholders who have a shareholding of at least 25% in Lilium and for shareholders who have a
shareholding of at least 1% in Lilium and work for the Company in a professional capacity. In such a case, the same rules apply
as for sole proprietors holding the Class A Shares as business assets (see below “Taxation of dividend income of shareholders
tax resident in Germany holding the Company’s Class A Shares as business assets — Sole proprietors”). Further, the flat rate tax
does not apply if and to the extent dividends reduced Lilium taxable income.
Taxation of dividend income of shareholders tax resident in Germany holding Lilium Class A Shares as business assets
If a shareholder holds the Lilium Class A Shares as business assets, the taxation of the dividend income depends on whether
the respective shareholder is a corporation, a sole proprietor or a partnership.
Corporations
Dividend income of corporate shareholders is exempt from corporate income tax, provided that the corporation holds a
direct participation of at least 10% in the share capital of a company at the beginning of the calendar year in which the dividends
are paid (participation exemption). The acquisition of a participation of at least 10% in the course of a calendar year (in one
instance) is deemed to have occurred at the beginning of such calendar year. Participations in the share capital of the Company
which a corporate shareholder holds through a partnership, including co-entrepreneurships (Mitunternehmerschaften), are
attributable to such corporate shareholder only on a pro rata basis at the ratio of the interest share of the corporate shareholder in
the assets of the relevant partnership. However, 5% of the tax-exempt dividends are deemed to be non-deductible business
expenses for tax purposes and therefore are effectively subject to corporate income tax (plus solidarity surcharge) and trade tax;
i.e. tax exemption of 95%. Business expenses incurred in connection with the dividends received are entirely tax deductible. The
participation exemption does not apply if and to the extent dividends reduced Lilium taxable income.
For trade tax purposes the entire dividend income is subject to trade tax (i.e. the tax-exempt dividends must be added back
when determining the trade taxable income), unless the corporation shareholder holds at least 15% of the Company’s registered
share capital at the beginning of the relevant tax assessment period (Erhebungszeitraum). In case of an indirect participation via
a partnership please refer to the section “Partnerships” below.
If the shareholding is below 10% in the share capital, dividends are taxable at the applicable corporate income tax rate of
15% plus 5.5% solidarity surcharge thereon and trade tax (the rate of which depends on the applicably municipality levy rate
determined by the municipality the corporate shareholder has its place of management and permanent establishments
respectively).
Special regulations apply which abolish the 95% tax exemption, if the Company’s Class A Shares (i) are held as trading
portfolio assets in the meaning of Section 340e of the German Commercial Code (Handelsgesetzbuch) by a credit institution
(Kreditinstitut) or a financial service institution (Finanzdienstleistungsinstitut), (ii) had to be recorded as current assets
(Umlaufvermögen) at the time of their acquisition by a financial enterprise (Finanzunternehmen) within the meaning of the
German Banking Act (Kreditwesengesetz), in case more than 50% of the shares of such financial enterprise are held directly or
indirectly by a credit institution or a financial service institution, or (iii) are held by a life insurance company, a health insurance
company or a pension fund in case the shares are attributable to the capital investments, resulting in fully taxable income (any
shareholder falling under (i), (ii) or (iii), a “Non-Exempt Corporation”).
Sole proprietors
For sole proprietors (individuals) resident in Germany holding Class A Shares as business assets dividends are subject to the
partial income rule (Teileinkünfteverfahren). Accordingly, only (i) 60% of the dividend income will be taxed at his/her personal
income tax rate plus 5.5% solidarity surcharge thereon and church tax (if applicable) and (ii) 60% of the business expenses
related to the dividend income are deductible for tax purposes. In addition, the dividend income is entirely subject to trade tax if
the Class A Shares are held as business assets of a permanent establishment in Germany within the meaning of the German
Trade Tax Act (Gewerbesteuergesetz), unless the shareholder holds at least 15% of the Company’s registered share capital at the
beginning of the relevant assessment period. The trade tax levied will be eligible for credit against the shareholder’s personal
income tax liability based on the applicable municipal trade tax rate and the individual tax situation of the shareholder limited to
currently up to 4.0 times the trade tax measurement amount (Gewerbesteuer-Messbetrag). As from 2021 onwards the solidarity
surcharge has been abolished in case a certain income threshold is not exceeded.


133
Partnerships
In case Class A Shares are held by a partnership, the partnership itself is not subject to corporate income tax or personal
income tax. In this regard, corporate income tax or personal income tax (and church tax, if applicable) as well as solidarity
surcharge are levied only at the level of the partner with respect to their relevant part of the partnership’s taxable income and
depending on their individual circumstances:
●
if the partner is a corporation, the dividend income will be subject to corporate income tax plus solidarity surcharge
(see above “Corporations”);
●
if the partner is a sole proprietor, the dividend income will be subject to the partial income rule (see above “Sole
proprietors”);
●
if the partner is a private individual, the dividend income will be subject to the flat tax rate (see above “private
individuals”).
In case the partnership is a (operative or deemed) commercial partnership with its place of management in Germany the
dividend income is subject to German trade tax at the level of the partnership, unless the partnership holds at least 15% of a
company’s registered share capital at the beginning of the relevant assessment period, in which case the dividend income is
exempt from trade tax. Any trade tax levied on the level of the partnership will be eligible for credit against an individual
shareholder's personal income tax liability based on the applicable municipal trade tax rate, depending on the individual tax
situation of the shareholder and further circumstances and limited to currently up to 4.0 times the partial trade tax measurement
amount allocable to such individual shareholder.
Taxation of dividend income of shareholders tax resident outside of Germany
For foreign individual or corporate shareholders tax resident outside of Germany not holding the Class A Shares through a
permanent establishment in Germany or as business assets for which a permanent representative has been appointed in
Germany, the deducted withholding tax (possibly reduced by way of a tax relief under a tax treaty or domestic tax law, such as
in connection with the EU Parent Subsidiary Directive) is final (that is, not refundable) and settles the shareholder’s limited tax
liability in Germany, unless the shareholder is entitled to apply for a withholding tax refund or exemption.
In contrast, individual or corporate shareholders tax resident outside of Germany holding the Company’s Class A Shares
through a permanent establishment in Germany or as business assets for which a permanent representative has been appointed in
Germany are subject to the same rules as applicable (and described above) to shareholders resident in Germany holding the
Class A Shares as business assets. The withholding tax withheld (including solidarity surcharge) is credited against the
shareholder’s personal income tax or corporate income tax liability in Germany.
Taxation of capital gains
Withholding tax on capital gains
Capital gains realized on the disposal of Class A Shares are only subject to withholding tax if (i) a permanent establishment
in Germany of a German or foreign credit or financial institution, (ii) a German securities trading company or (iii) a German
securities trading bank stores or administrates or carries out the disposal of the Class A Shares and pays or credits the capital
gains. In those cases, the institution (and not the Company) is required to deduct the withholding tax at the time of payment for
the account of the shareholder and has to pay the withholding tax to the competent tax authority.
In case the Class A Shares in the Company are held (i) as business assets by a sole proprietor, a partnership or a corporation
and such shares are attributable to a German business or (ii) in case of a corporation being subject to unlimited corporate income
tax liability in Germany, the capital gains are not subject to withholding tax. In case of the aforementioned exemption under
(i) the withholding tax exemption is subject to the condition that the paying agent has been notified by the beneficiary
(Gläubiger) that the capital gains are not subject to withholding tax. The respective notification has to be filed by using the
officially prescribed form.
Taxation of capital gains realized by shareholders tax resident in Germany holding Lilium Class A Shares as private assets
(private individuals)
For individual shareholders (individuals) resident in Germany holding Class A Shares as private assets, capital gains
realized on the disposal of Class A Shares are subject to final (withholding) tax (Abgeltungsteuer). Accordingly, capital gains
will be taxed at a


134
flat tax rate of 25% plus 5.5% solidarity surcharge thereon totaling 26.375% and church tax, in case the shareholder is subject to
church tax because of his personal circumstances. An automatic procedure for deduction of church tax by way of withholding
will apply to shareholders being subject to church tax unless the shareholder has filed a blocking notice (Sperrvermerk) with the
German Federal Central Tax Office (details related to the computation of the specific tax rate including church tax are to be
discussed with the personal tax advisor of the relevant shareholder). The taxable capital gain is calculated by deducting the
acquisition costs of the Class A Shares and the expenses directly and materially related to the disposal from the proceeds of the
disposal. Apart from that, except for an annual lump sum savings allowance (Sparer- Pauschbetrag) of up to €801 (for
individual filers) or up to €1,602 (for married couples and for partners in accordance with the registered partnership law (Gesetz
über die Eingetragene Lebenspartnerschaft) filing jointly), private individual shareholders will not be entitled to deduct
expenses incurred in connection with the capital investment from their capital gain.
In case the flat tax results in a higher tax burden as opposed to the private individual shareholder’s personal income tax rate
the private individual shareholder can opt for taxation at his personal income tax rate. In that case, the withholding tax
(including solidarity surcharge) withheld will be credited against the income tax. The option can be exercised only for all capital
income from capital investments received in the relevant assessment period uniformly and married couples as well as partners in
accordance with the registered partnership law filing jointly may only jointly exercise the option.
Capital losses arising from the disposal of the Class A Shares can only be offset against other capital gains resulting from
the disposition of the Class A Shares or shares in other stock corporations during the same calendar year. Offsetting of overall
losses with other income (such as business or rental income) and other capital income is not possible. Such losses are to be
carried forward and to be offset against positive capital gains deriving from the disposal of Class A Shares in stock corporations
in future years.
The final (withholding) tax (Abgeltungsteuer) will not apply if the seller of the Class A Shares or in case of gratuitous
transfer, its legal predecessor has held, directly or indirectly, at least 1% of the Company’s registered share capital at any time
during the five years prior to the disposal. In that case capital gains are subject to the partial income
rule (Teileinkünfteverfahren). Accordingly, only (i) 60% of the capital gains will be taxed at his / her personal income tax rate
plus 5.5% solidarity surcharge thereon and church tax (if applicable) and (ii) 60% of the business expenses related to the capital
gains are deductible for tax purposes. The withholding tax withheld (including solidarity surcharge) will be credited against the
shareholder’s personal income tax liability in Germany.
Taxation of capital gains realized by shareholders tax resident in Germany holding Lilium Class A Shares as business assets
If a shareholder holds Class A Shares as business assets, the taxation of capital gains realized on the disposal of such shares
depends on whether the respective shareholder is a corporation, a sole proprietor or a partnership:
Corporations
Capital gains realized on the disposal of Class A Shares by a corporate shareholder are generally exempt from corporate
income tax and trade tax. However, 5% of the tax-exempt capital gains are deemed to be non-deductible business expenses for
tax purposes and therefore are effectively subject to corporate income tax (plus solidarity surcharge) and trade tax; i.e. tax
exemption of 95%. Business expenses incurred in connection with the capital gains are entirely tax deductible.
Capital losses incurred upon the disposal of Class A Shares or other impairments of the share value are not tax deductible. A
reduction of profit is also defined as any losses incurred in connection with a loan or security in the event the loan or the
security is granted by a shareholder or by a related party thereto or by a third person with the right of recourse against the before
mentioned persons and the shareholder holds directly or indirectly more than 25% of the Company’s registered share capital.
Special regulations apply, which may exclude aforementioned tax exemptions if the Company’s Class A Shares are held by
a Non-Exempt Corporation.
Sole proprietors
If the Class A Shares are held by a sole proprietor, capital gains realized on the disposal of the Class A Shares are subject to
the partial income rule (Teileinkünfteverfahren). Accordingly, only (i) 60% of the capital gains will be taxed at his /her personal
income tax rate plus 5.5% solidarity surcharge thereon and church tax (if applicable) and (ii) 60% of the business expenses
related to the dividend income are deductible for tax purposes. In addition, 60% of the capital gains are subject to trade tax if the
Class A Shares are held as business assets of a permanent establishment in Germany within the meaning of the German Trade
Tax Act (Gewerbesteuergesetz). The trade tax levied will be eligible for credit against the shareholder's personal income tax
liability based on the applicable municipal trade tax rate and the individual tax situation of the shareholder limited to currently
up to 4.0 times the trade tax measurement amount. As from 2021 onwards the solidarity surcharge has been abolished in case a
certain income threshold is not exceeded.


135
Partnerships
In case the Class A Shares are held by a partnership, the partnership itself is not subject to corporate income tax or personal
income tax as well as solidarity surcharge (and church tax) since partnerships qualify as transparent for German income tax
purposes. In this regard, corporate income tax or personal income tax as well as solidarity surcharge (and church tax, if
applicable) are levied only at the level of the partner with respect to their relevant part of the partnership’s taxable income and
depending on their individual circumstances:
●
If the partner is a corporation, the capital gains will be subject to corporate income tax plus solidarity surcharge (see
above “Corporations”). Trade tax will be levied additionally at the level of the partner insofar as the relevant profit of
the partnership is not subject to trade tax at the level of the partnership. However, with respect to both corporate
income and trade tax, the 95%-exemption rule as described above applies. With regard to corporate partners, special
regulations apply if they are held by a Non-Exempt Corporation, as described above.
●
If the partner is a sole proprietor (individual), the capital gains are subject to the partial income rule (see above “Sole
proprietors”).
In addition, if the partnership is liable to German trade tax, 60% of the capital gains are subject to trade tax at the level of
the partnership, to the extent the partners are individuals, and 5% of the capital gains are subject to trade tax, to the extent the
partners are corporations. Any trade tax levied on the level of the partnership will be eligible for credit against an individual
shareholder’s personal income tax liability based on the applicable municipal trade tax rate, depending on the individual tax
situation of the shareholder and further circumstances and limited to currently up to 4.0 times the partial trade tax measurement
amount allocable to such individual holder.
Taxation of capital gains realized by shareholders tax resident outside of Germany
Capital gains realized on the disposal of the Class A Shares by a shareholder tax resident outside of Germany are subject to
German taxation provided that (i) the Company’s Class A Shares are held as business assets of a permanent establishment or as
business assets for which a permanent representative has been appointed in Germany, or (ii) the shareholder or, in case of a
gratuitous transfer, its legal predecessor has held, directly or indirectly at least 1% of the Company’s shares capital at any time
during a five years period prior to the disposal. In these cases, capital gains are generally subject to the same rules as described
above for shareholders resident in Germany. However, except for the cases referred to in (i) above, most tax treaties concluded
by Germany provide for a full exemption from German taxation except if the Company is considered a real estate holding entity
for treaty purposes. Further, in case of a non-German corporation which is not a Non-Exempt Corporation, aforementioned tax
exemption for the sale of shares in another corporation may apply in full, resulting in a tax exemption of 100% of the gain (i.e.,
no increase of German taxable income for such investor at 5% of the gain by deemed non-tax-deductible business expenses); in
case of a Non-Exempt Corporation, such exemption will not apply (but an exemption under an applicable tax treaty may apply.
German taxation of holders of Private Warrants
General
Holders of Private Warrants are likely to be taxed in particular upon certain forms of the exercise (but likely not in the case
of receiving Class A Shares due to the exercise), sale or disposal of Private Warrants (taxation of capital gains) and the
gratuitous transfer of Private Warrants (inheritance and gift tax).
Taxation of holders of Private Warrants not tax resident in Germany
The capital gains from the disposition of the Private Warrants realized by a non-German tax resident holder of the Private
Warrants would not be treated as German source income and not be subject to German income tax provided that (i) such non-
German resident holder does not maintain a permanent establishment or other taxable presence in Germany which the Private
Warrants form part of, and (ii) the income does not otherwise constitute German-source income (such as income from the letting
and leasing of certain German-situs property or income from certain capital investments directly or indirectly secured by
German-situs real estate). If either requirement (i) or (ii) above is not met, a non-German tax resident holder will be subject to
“Limited German Taxation” on aforementioned income.
Non-German resident holders of the Private Warrants are, in general, exempt from German withholding tax on capital gains
where the income is subject to Limited German Taxation and if capital gains derived from the Private Warrants are paid out or
credited to the holder of the Private Warrants by a German credit institution, a financial services institution, a securities trading
enterprise or a securities trading bank (each as defined in the German Banking Act (Kreditwesengesetz) and, in each case
including a


136
German branch of a foreign enterprise, but excluding a foreign branch of a German enterprise) (“German Disbursing Agent”),
withholding tax may be levied under certain circumstances both in the case of business and non-business holders of Private
Warrants. The withholding tax may be refunded based on an assessment to tax or under an applicable tax treaty, depending on
the individual circumstances of the holder.
Subject to the above, in cases of Limited German Taxation, a tax regime similar to that described under “—Taxation of
holders of Private Warrants tax resident in Germany” below will apply, subject to certain differences.
Taxation of holders of Warrants tax resident in Germany
Withholding tax on capital gains
The capital gains from the disposition (i.e., the difference between the proceeds from the disposal, redemption, repayment
or assignment after deduction of expenses directly related to the disposal, redemption, repayment or assignment and the cost of
acquisition) or a cash-settlement (i.e., the cash amount received minus directly related costs and expenses, e.g. the acquisition
costs) of the Private Warrants received by a German resident holder of Private Warrants holding the Private Warrants as private
assets will be subject to German withholding tax if the Private Warrants are kept or administered in a custodial account with a
German Disbursing Agent. The tax rate is 25% (plus a 5.5% solidarity surcharge thereon, resulting in an aggregate rate of
26.375%; plus church tax, if applicable). For individual holders who are subject to church tax, the church tax generally has to be
withheld by the German Disbursing Agent based on an automatic data access procedure, unless the shareholder has filed a
blocking notice (Sperrvermerk) with the Federal Central Tax Office.
Please note that both the tax rate and the assessment basis may differ from the above in case the Private Warrants have not
been kept or administered in a custodial account with the same German Disbursing Agent since the time of their acquisition,
unless the current German Disbursing Agent has been notified of the actual acquisition costs of the Private Warrants by the
previous German Disbursing Agent or by a statement of a bank or financial services institution from another member state of the
European Union or the European Economic Area or from certain other countries (e.g., Switzerland or Andorra). In such a case
the withholding tax will amount to 30% of the (disposal) proceeds (so called “Lump Sum Substitute Basis”).
In the event of delivery of Class A Shares upon exercise of the Private Warrants, the acquisition costs of the Private
Warrants plus any additional sum paid upon exercise should generally be regarded as acquisition costs of the underlying assets
received upon physical settlement. Subject to the following, no capital gain and no resulting withholding tax will apply from
such exercise for delivery of Class A Shares. Withholding tax may only apply to any gain resulting later from the subsequent
disposal, redemption or assignment of the Class A Shares received under certain circumstances. Note that the German tax
authorities have not confirmed the above treatment for the exercise of U.S. warrants, but only for the exercise of convertible
bonds (Wandelschuldverschreibungen, Optionsscheine), wherefore, a residual uncertainty remains regarding its application on
the exercise of the Private Warrants.
Deviating from the above, there is a relevant risk that a so called cashless exercise as per the warrant agreement underlying
the Private Warrants will constitute a taxable event and may attract withholding tax in case a German Disbursing Agent is
involved as per the above). German tax authorities may argue that due to a cashless exercise, capital gains accrue in the amount
of the product of (A) the spread between (i) the fair market value of the Class A Shares at the time of the cashless exercise and
(ii) the Warrant Price plus the acquisition costs of the Private Warrant, (or some substitute value for (i) minus (ii) determined in
aforementioned warrant agreement) and (B) the number of Private Warrants for which no Class A Shares are granted but which
are set off to settle the Warrant Price.
In computing any German tax to be withheld, the German Disbursing Agent generally deducts from the basis of the
withholding tax, subject to certain limitations, negative investment income realized by a non-business holder of the Private
Warrants via the German Disbursing Agent (e.g., losses from the sale of other securities with the exception of shares). The
German Disbursing Agent also deducts accrued interest on other securities (if any) paid separately upon the acquisition of the
respective security by a non-business holder of Private Warrants via the German Disbursing Agent. In addition, subject to
certain requirements and restrictions the German Disbursing Agent may credit foreign withholding taxes levied on investment
income in a given year regarding securities held by a non-business holder of Private Warrants in the custodial account with the
German Disbursing Agent.
Non-business holders of the Private Warrants are entitled to an annual saver’s allowance of €801 for an individual or €1,602
for a married couple and a registered civil union filing taxes jointly for all investment income received in a given year. Upon the
non-business holder of the Private Warrants filing an exemption certificate (Freistellungsauftrag) with the Disbursing Agent, the
Disbursing Agent will take the allowance into account when computing the amount of tax to be withheld.
No withholding tax will be deducted if the holder of the Private Warrants has submitted to the Disbursing Agent a
certificate of non-assessment (Nichtveranlagungs-Bescheinigung) issued by the competent local tax office. The deduction of
expenses related to the


137
investment income (including gains with respect to the Private Warrants) is generally not possible for private investors.
German withholding tax should not apply to gains from the disposal, redemption, repayment or assignment of Private
Warrants held by a German tax resident corporation. The same may apply where the Private Warrants form part of a trade or
business or are related to income from letting and leasing of property, subject to further requirements being met. Note that for
corporations, sole-proprietors or partnerships which or who are not tax resident in Germany but subject to Limited German
Taxation, i.e., withholding tax may be triggered in these cases under further circumstances.
Taxation of capital gains
Individuals as the holders of the Private Warrants
The personal income tax liability of a holder of the Private Warrants holding the Private Warrants as private assets deriving
income from capital investments under the Private Warrants is, in principle, settled by the tax withheld (unless for example the
income from Private Warrants qualifies as income from the letting and leasing of property). To the extent withholding tax has
not been levied, such as in the case of Private Warrants kept in custody abroad or if no German Disbursing Agent is involved in
the payment process, the non-business holder of Private Warrants must report his or her income and capital gains derived from
the Private Warrants (through disposition or cash settlement) on his or her tax return and then will also be taxed at a rate of 25%
(plus solidarity surcharge of 5.5% thereon, resulting in an aggregate rate of 26.375%; and church tax, if applicable). As for
withholding tax, in the event of delivery of Class A Shares upon exercise of the Private Warrants, the acquisition costs of the
Private Warrants plus any additional sum paid upon exercise are generally regarded as acquisition costs of the underlying assets
received upon physical settlement. Subject to the following, no capital gains tax will apply from such exercise for delivery of
Class A Shares. Note that there is a relevant risk that a so called cashless 0065ercise as per the warrant agreement underlying the
Private Warrants constitutes a taxable event (as described above) which would have to be reported on the tax return as well if
not settled by withholding tax. If the withholding tax has been calculated on the basis of a Lump Sum Substitute Basis, a non-
business holder of the Private Warrants may and in case the actual gain is higher than 30% of the proceeds must also apply for
an assessment on the basis of his or her actual acquisition costs. Further, a non-business holder may request that all investment
income of a given year is taxed at his or her lower individual tax rate based upon an assessment to tax with any amounts over
withheld being refunded. In each case, the deduction of expenses (other than transaction costs) on an itemized basis is not
permitted.
With regard to non-business holders of Private Warrants, there is a relevant risk that such losses may only be applied
against profits from income from capital investments derived in the same or, subject to certain limitations, in subsequent years.
For assessment periods beginning after December 31, 2020, such losses incurred by non-business holders of the Private
Warrants may only be applied against income from other forward/​
future or option transactions derived in the same or, subject to
certain limitations, in subsequent years and the deductibility of such losses is limited to €20.000 per year.
In addition, losses of non-business holders arising from a bad debt loss (Forderungsausfall), a waiver of a receivable
(Forderungsverzicht) or a transfer of an impaired receivable to a third party or from any other default can only be offset against
other income from capital investments and only up to an amount of €20,000 per year. The same rules should apply if the Private
Warrants expire worthless or lapse.
Corporations, sole proprietors and Partnerships
Where Private Warrants form part of a trade or business the withholding tax, if any, will not settle the personal or corporate
income tax liability. The respective holder of Private Warrants (or the partner of the partnership holding the Private Warrants)
will have to report income and related (business) expenses resulting from the disposition or cash settlement of the Private
Warrants or potentially from a cashless exercise on the tax return and the balance will be taxed at the holder’s (or the partner of
the partnership holding the Private Warrants) applicable tax rate. Withholding tax levied, if any, will be credited against the
personal or corporate income tax of the holder (or the partner of the partnership holding the Private Warrants). Where Private
Warrants form part of a German trade or business gains from the disposal, redemption, repayment, assignment, cash settlement
or cashless exercise of the Private Warrants may also be subject to German trade tax. A corporate income tax or trade tax
exemption should not be applicable.
With regard to business holders of Private Warrants, losses may generally only be applied against profits from other
forward/future or option transactions derived in the same or, subject to certain restrictions, the previous year. Otherwise these
losses can be carried forward indefinitely and, within certain limitations, applied against profits from forward/future or option
transactions in subsequent years. Further special rules apply to credit institutions, financial services institutions and finance
companies within the meaning of the German Banking Act.
In the case of physical settlement of the Private Warrants please see above sections on disposal of Class A Shares for
German taxation of the disposal or other transaction involving a resulting Class A Share.


138
Inheritance and gift tax
The transfer of Lilium Class A Shares or Private Warrants to another person by way of succession or donation is subject to
German inheritance and gift tax (Erbschaft- und Schenkungsteuer) if at the time of transfer:
i.
the decedent, the donor, the heir, the donee or any other beneficiary has his /her /its residence, domicile, registered
office or place of management in Germany, or is a German citizen who has not stayed abroad for more than five
consecutive years without having a residence in Germany; or
ii.
(irrespective of the personal circumstances) the Class A Shares or Private Warrants are held by the decedent or donor as
business assets for which a permanent establishment in Germany is maintained or a permanent representative is
appointed in Germany; or
iii. (irrespective of the personal circumstances) at least 10% of the registered share capital of Lilium is held directly or
indirectly by the decedent or person making the gift, himself or together with a related party in terms of Section 1(2)
German Foreign Tax Act (Außensteuergesetz).
Special regulations apply to German citizens who maintain neither a residence nor their domicile in Germany but are in a
service relationship with a German public legal person and receive their remuneration from a German public treasury (or are
German citizens relative to such a person) and to certain individuals who no longer maintain a residence or their domicile in
Germany but maintain a residence or domicile in a low tax jurisdiction, also resulting in inheritance and gift tax. A limited
number of double tax treaties on inheritance and gift tax which Germany has entered into may limit the German right to
inheritance and gift tax to the case described under (i) above.
Value added tax (VAT)
No German value added tax (Umsatzsteuer) will arise in respect of any acquisition, ownership and/or disposal of the
Class A Shares or Private Warrants unless in certain cases where a waiver of an applicable VAT exemption occurs. Any
such waiver would require a supply of shares from one person taxable for VAT purposes to the enterprise of another
taxable person.
Transfer taxes
No German capital transfer tax (Kapitalverkehrsteuer) or stamp duty (Stempelgebühr) or similar taxes are levied when
acquiring, owning or disposing the Company’s Class A Shares or Private Warrants. Net wealth tax (Vermögensteuer) is currently
not levied in Germany. German real estate transfer tax (Grunderwerbsteuer) may only be attracted by the acquisition (including
by way of exercise of warrants) or sale of Class A Shares or certain comparable transactions under very specific circumstances if
Lilium, or a subsidiary entity to Lilium own German situs real estate at such time, with “ownership” and “real estate” both
having an extended meaning under the German real estate transfer act insofar.
On January 22, 2013, the Council of the European Union approved the resolution of the ministers of finance from eleven
EU member states (including Germany) to introduce a financial transaction tax (“FTT”) within the framework of enhanced
cooperation. On February 14, 2013, the European Commission accepted the proposal for a Council Directive implementing
enhanced cooperation in the area of FTT. The plan focuses on levying a financial tax of 0.1% (0.01% for derivates) on the
purchase and sale of financial instruments.
A joint statement issued by ten of the eleven participating EU Member States in October 2016 reaffirmed the intention to
introduce a FTT. However, at the moment not many details are available. Thus, it is not known to what extent the elements of
the European Commission’s proposal outlined in the preceding paragraph will be followed in relation to the taxation of shares.
The FTT proposal remains subject to negotiation between the participating EU Member States and is subject to political
discussion. It may therefore be altered prior to the implementation, the timing of which remains unclear. Additional EU Member
States may decide to participate. If an EU-wide FTT (see above) fails, representatives of the If the (Institute for the World
Economy) intend to advocate the introduction of a comprehensive version of the tax in Germany after the COVID-19 pandemic.
Prospective holders of the Class A Shares are advised to seek their own professional advice in relation to FTT.


139
PLAN OF DISTRIBUTION
We are registering the issuance by us of up to 52,142,954 of our Class A Shares, which consist of up to (i) 24,413,065 Class
A Shares issuable upon conversion of our outstanding Class B Shares, (ii) 7,060,000 Class A Shares issuable upon the exercise
of 7,060,000 Private Warrants, (iii) 12,650,000 Class A Shares issuable upon the exercise of 12,650,000 Public Warrants, (iv)
1,800,000 Class A Shares issuable upon exercise of the Azul Warrants and (v) up to 6,219,889 Class A Shares that are issuable
upon the exercise of the Specified Options.
We are also registering the possible resale from time to time by the selling securityholders of (a) up to 210,665,118 Class A
Shares, which consist of up to (i) 129,292,473 Class A Shares issued in the Business Combination, (ii) 45,000,000 Class A
Shares issued to the PIPE Investors concurrently with the closing of the Business Combination, (iii) 24,413,065 Class A Shares
issuable upon conversion of outstanding Class B Shares, (iv) 7,060,000 Class A Shares issuable upon exercise of the Private
Warrants, (v) 1,800,000 Class A Shares issuable upon exercise of the Azul Warrants, (vi) 879,691 Class A Shares issued in
connection with certain equity compensation arrangements and (vii) 2,219,889 Class A Shares issuable upon the exercise of
certain of the Specified Options and (b) up to 7,060,000 Private Warrants. All of the Class A Shares and Private Warrants offered
by the selling securityholders pursuant to this prospectus will be sold by the selling securityholders for their respective accounts.
We will not receive any of the proceeds from such sales. We will receive proceeds from the exercise of the Warrants and
Specified Options in the event that such Warrants and Specified Options are exercised for cash.
The selling securityholders will pay any underwriting discounts and commissions and expenses incurred by the selling
securityholders for brokerage, accounting, tax or legal services or any other expenses incurred by the selling securityholders in
disposing of the securities. We will bear all other costs, fees and expenses incurred in effecting the registration of the securities
covered by this prospectus, including, without limitation, all registration and filing fees, Nasdaq listing fees and fees and
expenses of our counsel and our independent registered public accountants.
The securities beneficially owned by the selling securityholders covered by this prospectus may be offered and sold from
time to time by the selling securityholders. The term “selling securityholders” includes donees, pledgees, transferees or other
successors in interest selling securities received after the date of this prospectus from a selling securityholder as a gift, pledge,
partnership distribution or other transfer. The selling securityholders will act independently of us in making decisions with
respect to the timing, manner and size of each sale. Such sales may be made on one or more exchanges or in the over-the-
counter market or otherwise, at prices and under terms then prevailing or at prices related to our then current market price or in
negotiated transactions. Each selling securityholder reserves the right to accept and, together with its respective agents, to reject,
any proposed purchase of securities to be made directly or through agents. The selling securityholders and any of their permitted
transferees may sell their securities offered by this prospectus on any stock exchange, market or trading facility on which the
securities are traded or in private transactions. If underwriters are used in the sale, such underwriters will acquire the shares for
their own account. These sales may be at a fixed price or varying prices, which may be changed, or at market prices prevailing
at the time of sale, at prices relating to prevailing market prices or at negotiated prices. The securities may be offered to the
public through underwriting syndicates represented by managing underwriters or by underwriters without a syndicate. The
obligations of the underwriters to purchase the securities will be subject to certain conditions. The underwriters will be obligated
to purchase all the securities offered if any of the securities are purchased.
Subject to the limitations set forth in any applicable registration rights agreement, the selling securityholders may use any
one or more of the following methods when selling the securities offered by this prospectus:
●
purchases by a broker-dealer as principal and resale by such broker-dealer for its own account pursuant to this
prospectus;
●
ordinary brokerage transactions and transactions in which the broker solicits purchasers;
●
block trades in which the broker-dealer so engaged will attempt to sell the securities as agent but may position and
resell a portion of the block as principal to facilitate the transaction;
●
an over-the-counter distribution in accordance with the rules of Nasdaq;
●
through trading plans entered into by a selling securityholder pursuant to Rule 10b5-1 under the Exchange Act that are
in place at the time of an offering pursuant to this prospectus and any applicable prospectus supplement hereto that
provide for periodic sales of their securities on the basis of parameters described in such trading plans;
●
short sales;


140
●
distribution to employees, members, limited partners or stockholders of the selling securityholders;
●
through the writing or settlement of options or other hedging transaction, whether through an options exchange or
otherwise;
●
by pledge to secured debt and other obligations;
●
delayed delivery arrangement;
●
to or through underwriters or broker-dealers;
●
in “at the market” offerings, as defined in Rule 415 under the Securities Act, at negotiated prices;
●
at prices prevailing at the time of sale or at prices related to such prevailing market prices, including sales made
directly on a national securities exchange or sales made through a market maker other than on an exchange or other
similar offerings through sales agents;
●
directly to purchasers, including through a specific bidding, auction or other process or in privately negotiated
transactions;
●
in options transactions;
●
through a combination of any of the above methods of sale; or
●
any other method permitted pursuant to applicable law.
In addition, a selling securityholder that is an entity may elect to make a pro rata in-kind distribution of securities to its
members, partners or shareholders pursuant to the registration statement of which this prospectus is a part by delivering a
prospectus with a plan of distribution. Such members, partners or shareholders would thereby receive freely tradeable securities
pursuant to the distribution through a registration statement. To the extent a distributee is an affiliate of ours (or to the extent
otherwise required by law), we may file a prospectus supplement in order to permit the distributees to use the prospectus to
resell the securities acquired in the distribution.
There can be no assurance that the selling securityholders will sell all or any of the securities offered by this prospectus. In
addition, the selling securityholders may also sell securities under Rule 144 under the Securities Act, if available, or in other
transactions exempt from registration, rather than under this prospectus. The selling securityholders have the sole and absolute
discretion not to accept any purchase offer or make any sale of securities if they deem the purchase price to be unsatisfactory at
any particular time.
The selling securityholders also may transfer the securities in other circumstances, in which case the transferees, pledgees
or other successors-in-interest will be the selling beneficial owners for purposes of this prospectus. Upon being notified by a
selling securityholder that a donee, pledgee, transferee, other successor-in-interest intends to sell our securities, we will, to the
extent required, promptly file a supplement to this prospectus to name specifically such person as a selling securityholder.
With respect to a particular offering of the securities held by the selling securityholders, to the extent required, an
accompanying prospectus supplement or, if appropriate, a post-effective amendment to the registration statement of which this
prospectus is part, will be prepared and will set forth the following information:
●
the specific securities to be offered and sold;
●
the names of the selling securityholders;
●
the respective purchase prices and public offering prices, the proceeds to be received from the sale, if any, and other
material terms of the offering;
●
settlement of short sales entered into after the date of this prospectus;
●
the names of any participating agents, broker-dealers or underwriters; and


141
●
any applicable commissions, discounts, concessions and other items constituting compensation from the selling
securityholders.
In connection with distributions of the securities or otherwise, the selling securityholders may enter into hedging
transactions with broker-dealers or other financial institutions. In connection with such transactions, broker-dealers or other
financial institutions may engage in short sales of the securities in the course of hedging the positions they assume with selling
securityholders. The selling securityholders may also sell the securities short and redeliver the securities to close out such short
positions. The selling securityholders may also enter into option or other transactions with broker-dealers or other financial
institutions which require the delivery to such broker-dealer or other financial institution of securities offered by this prospectus,
which securities such broker-dealer or other financial institution may resell pursuant to this prospectus (as supplemented or
amended to reflect such transaction). The selling securityholders may also pledge securities to a broker-dealer or other financial
institution, and, upon a default, such broker-dealer or other financial institution, may effect sales of the pledged securities
pursuant to this prospectus (as supplemented or amended to reflect such transaction).
In order to facilitate the offering of the securities, any underwriters or agents, as the case may be, involved in the offering of
such securities may engage in transactions that stabilize, maintain or otherwise affect the price of our securities. Specifically, the
underwriters or agents, as the case may be, may overallot in connection with the offering, creating a short position in our
securities for their own account. In addition, to cover overallotments or to stabilize the price of our securities, the underwriters
or agents, as the case may be, may bid for, and purchase, such securities in the open market. Finally, in any offering of securities
through a syndicate of underwriters, the underwriting syndicate may reclaim selling concessions allotted to an underwriter or a
broker-dealer for distributing such securities in the offering if the syndicate repurchases previously distributed securities in
transactions to cover syndicate short positions, in stabilization transactions or otherwise. Any of these activities may stabilize or
maintain the market price of the securities above independent market levels. The underwriters or agents, as the case may be, are
not required to engage in these activities, and may end any of these activities at any time.
The selling securityholders may solicit offers to purchase the securities directly from, and they may sell such securities
directly to, institutional investors or others. In this case, no underwriters or agents would be involved. The terms of any of those
sales, including the terms of any bidding or auction process, if utilized, will be described in the applicable prospectus
supplement.
It is possible that one or more underwriters may make a market in our securities, but such underwriters will not be obligated
to do so and may discontinue any market making at any time without notice. We cannot give any assurance as to the liquidity of
the trading market for our securities. Our Class A Shares and Public Warrants are listed on Nasdaq under the symbols “LILM”
and “LILMW,” respectively.
The selling securityholders may authorize underwriters, broker-dealers or agents to solicit offers by certain purchasers to
purchase the securities at the public offering price set forth in the prospectus supplement pursuant to delayed delivery contracts
providing for payment and delivery on a specified date in the future. The contracts will be subject only to those conditions set
forth in the prospectus supplement, and the prospectus supplement will set forth any commissions we or the selling
securityholders pay for solicitation of these contracts.
A selling securityholder may enter into derivative transactions with third parties, or sell securities not covered by this
prospectus to third parties in privately negotiated transactions. If the applicable prospectus supplement indicates, in connection
with those derivatives, the third parties may sell securities covered by this prospectus and the applicable prospectus supplement,
including in short sale transactions. If so, the third party may use securities pledged by any selling securityholder or borrowed
from any selling securityholder or others to settle those sales or to close out any related open borrowings of stock, and may use
securities received from any selling securityholder in settlement of those derivatives to close out any related open borrowings of
stock. The third party in such sale transactions will be an underwriter and will be identified in the applicable prospectus
supplement (or a post-effective amendment). In addition, any selling securityholder may otherwise loan or pledge securities to a
financial institution or other third party that in turn may sell the securities short using this prospectus. Such financial institution
or other third party may transfer its economic short position to investors in our securities or in connection with a concurrent
offering of other securities.
In effecting sales, broker-dealers or agents engaged by the selling securityholders may arrange for other broker-dealers to
participate. Broker-dealers or agents may receive commissions, discounts or concessions from the selling securityholders in
amounts to be negotiated immediately prior to the sale.
To our knowledge, there are currently no plans, arrangements or understandings between the selling securityholders and any
broker-dealer or agent regarding the sale of the securities by the selling securityholders. Upon our notification by a selling
securityholder that any material arrangement has been entered into with an underwriter or broker-dealer for the sale of securities
through a block trade, special offering, exchange distribution, secondary distribution or a purchase by an underwriter or broker-
dealer,


142
we will file, if required by applicable law or regulation, a supplement to this prospectus pursuant to Rule 424(b) under the
Securities Act disclosing certain material information relating to such underwriter or broker-dealer and such offering.
In compliance with the guidelines of the Financial Industry Regulatory Authority (“FINRA”), the aggregate maximum
discount, commission, fees or other items constituting underwriting compensation to be received by any FINRA member or
independent broker-dealer will not exceed 8% of the gross proceeds of any offering pursuant to this prospectus and any
applicable prospectus supplement.
If at the time of any offering made under this prospectus a member of FINRA participating in the offering has a “conflict of
interest” as defined in FINRA Rule 5121 (“Rule 5121”), that offering will be conducted in accordance with the relevant
provisions of Rule 5121.
Certain of our stockholders have entered into lock-up agreements. See “Shares Eligible For Future Sale — Lock-Up
Arrangements.”
We have agreed to indemnify certain of the selling securityholders against certain liabilities, including certain liabilities
under the Securities Act, the Exchange Act or other federal or state law.
We have agreed with certain selling securityholders pursuant to the Registration Rights Agreement to use our commercially
reasonable efforts to keep the registration statement of which this prospectus constitutes a part effective until such time as the
securities of such selling securityholders covered by this prospectus no longer constitute “Registrable Securities” under and as
defined in the Registration Rights Agreement.
We have agreed with certain selling securityholders pursuant to the Subscription Agreements to use commercially
reasonable efforts to keep the registration statement of which this prospectus constitutes a part effective until the earlier of the
following: (i) the selling securityholder ceases to hold any securities covered by this prospectus or (ii) the date all securities
covered by this prospectus held by selling securityholder may be sold without restriction under Rule 144, including without
limitation, any volume and manner of sale restrictions which may be applicable to affiliates under Rule 144 and without the
requirement for the Company to be in compliance with the current public information required under Rule 144(c)(1) or
Rule 144(i)(2), as applicable, and (iii) three years from the effective date of this prospectus. See also “Description of Securities
— Registration Rights and Lock-Up Arrangements.”
Notice to prospective investors in the European Economic Area
In relation to each Member State of the European Economic Area (each, a “Relevant State”), no shares have been offered or
will be offered pursuant to the offering to the public in that Relevant State, except that offers of shares may be made to the
public in that Relevant State at any time under the following exemptions under the Prospectus Regulation (Regulation (EU)
2017/1129):
i.
to any legal entity which is a qualified investor as defined in the Prospectus Regulation;
ii.
to fewer than 150 natural or legal persons (other than qualified investors as defined in the Prospectus Regulation),
subject to obtaining the prior consent of the underwriters for any such offer; or
iii. in any other circumstances falling within Article 1(4) of the Prospectus Regulation,
provided that no such offer of shares shall require us or the representatives to publish a prospectus pursuant to Article 3 of
the Prospectus Regulation or supplement a prospectus pursuant to Article 23 of the Prospectus Regulation.
Each person in a Relevant State who initially acquires any shares or to whom any offer is made will be deemed to have
represented, acknowledged and agreed that it is a “qualified investor” within the meaning of Article 2(e) of the Prospectus
Regulation. In the case of any shares being offered to a financial intermediary as that term is used in Article 5(1) of the
Prospectus Regulation, each such financial intermediary will be deemed to have represented, acknowledged and agreed that the
shares acquired by it in the offer have not been acquired on a non-discretionary basis on behalf of, nor have they been acquired
with a view to their offer or resale to, persons in circumstances which may give rise to an offer of any shares to the public other
than their offer or resale in a Relevant State to qualified investors as so defined or in circumstances in which the prior consent of
the representatives has been obtained to each such proposed offer or resale.
We, the representatives and each of our and the representatives’ affiliates will rely upon the truth and accuracy of the
foregoing representations, acknowledgements and agreements.


143
This prospectus has been prepared on the basis that any offer of shares in any Relevant State will be made pursuant to an
exemption under the Prospectus Regulation from the requirement to publish a prospectus for offers of shares. Accordingly, any
person making or intending to make an offer in that Relevant State of shares which are the subject of the offering contemplated
in this prospectus may only do so in circumstances in which no obligation arises for the Company or any of the underwriters to
publish a prospectus pursuant to Article 3 of the Prospectus Regulation in relation to such offer. Neither we nor the underwriters
have authorized, nor do they authorize, the making of any offer of shares in circumstances in which an obligation arises for the
Company or the underwriters to publish a prospectus for such offer.
For the purpose of the above provisions, the expression “an offer to the public” in relation to any shares in any Relevant
State means the communication in any form and by any means of sufficient information on the terms of the offer and the shares
to be offered so as to enable an investor to decide to purchase or subscribe for any shares.
MiFID II Product Governance
Any person offering, selling or recommending the shares (a “distributor”) should take into consideration the manufacturers’
target market assessment; however, a distributor subject to MiFID II (Directive 2014/65/EU) is responsible for undertaking its
own target market assessment in respect of the shares (by either adopting or refining the manufacturers’ target market
assessment) and determining appropriate distribution channels.
Specific Dutch selling restriction for exempt offers: Each distributor will be required to represent and agree that it will not
make an offer of securities which are the subject of the offering contemplated by this prospectus to the public in the Netherlands
in reliance on Article 1(4) of the Prospectus Regulation, unless:
i.
such offer is made exclusively to legal entities which are qualified investors in the Netherlands; or
ii.
standard exemption logo and wording are disclosed as required by article 5:4(2) of the Dutch Financial Markets
Supervision Act (Wet op het financieel toezicht); or
iii. such offer is otherwise made in circumstances in which article 5:4(2) of the Dutch Financial Markets Supervision Act
is not applicable,
provided that no such offer of securities shall require us or any distributor to publish a prospectus pursuant to Article 3 of
the Prospectus Regulation or supplement a prospectus pursuant to Article 23 of the Prospectus Regulation.
SHARES ELIGIBLE FOR FUTURE SALE
We have 1,498,386,411 Class A Shares authorized and 259,696,994 Class A Shares issued and outstanding and 24,413,065
Class B Shares authorized and 24,413,065 Class B Shares issued and outstanding as of September 14, 2021, immediately after
giving effect to the Business Combination. Additionally, we have 12,650,000 Public Warrants and 7,060,000 Private Warrants
issued and outstanding, each of which entitle the holder to purchase one Class A Share per SPAC Warrant at an exercise price of
$11.50 per share and that become exercisable on October 14, 2021. The Public Warrants and Private Warrants expire five years
after September 14, 2021 (the closing date of the Business Combination) or earlier upon redemption or liquidation in
accordance with their terms. We have also issued the Azul Warrants, which entitle the holder to purchase 1,800,000 Class A
Shares at an exercise price of €0.12 per Class A Share. The holder is entitled to the exercise of the Azul Warrants at any time on
or prior to October 22, 2026.
All of the Class A Shares and Public Warrants that were issued in connection with the Business Combination are freely
transferable without restriction or further registration under the Securities Act, other than any Class A Shares or Public Warrants
issued to our “affiliates.” The PIPE Shares, the Private Warrants and the Azul Warrants were not registered under the Securities
Act, in reliance upon the exemption provided in Section 4(a)(2) of the Securities Act and/or Regulation D or Regulation S
promulgated thereunder, and are not freely transferable. The Class A Shares and SPAC Warrants issued to our “affiliates” and
the PIPE Shares and Azul Warrant are “restricted securities” as that term is defined in Rule 144 under the Securities Act and
may be sold publicly in the United States only if they are subject to an effective registration statement under the Securities Act
or pursuant to an exemption from the registration requirement, such as those provided by Rule 144 and Rule 701 promulgated
under the Securities Act (see description below).
The registration statement of which this prospectus forms a part has been filed in part to satisfy our obligations to register
the offer and sale of Class A Shares and Private Warrants by the Sponsor, our affiliates and PIPE Investors pursuant to the
Registration Rights Agreement and the Subscription Agreements. We cannot make any prediction as to the effect, if any, that
sales of our shares or


144
the availability of our shares for sale will have on the market price of our Class A Shares. Sales of substantial amounts of our
Class A Shares in the public market could adversely affect prevailing market price of our Class A Shares.
Rule 144
Pursuant to Rule 144 of the Securities Act (“Rule 144”), a person who has beneficially owned restricted Class A Shares or
Warrants for at least six months would be entitled to sell their securities, provided that (i) such person is not deemed to have
been one of our affiliates at the time of, or at any time during the three months preceding, a sale and (ii) we are subject to the
Exchange Act periodic reporting requirements for at least three months before the sale and have filed all required reports under
Section 13 or 15(d) of the Exchange Act during the 12 months (or such shorter period as we were required to file reports)
preceding the sale. Persons who have beneficially owned restricted Class A Shares or Warrants for at least six months but who
are our affiliates at the time of, or at any time during the three months preceding, a sale, would be subject to additional
restrictions, by which such person would be entitled to sell within any three-month period only a number of securities that does
not exceed the greater of: 1% of the total number of Class A Shares then issued and outstanding; or the average weekly reported
trading volume of the Class A Shares during the four calendar weeks preceding the filing of a notice on Form 144 with respect
to the sale. Sales by our affiliates under Rule 144 are also limited by manner of sale provisions and notice requirements and to
the availability of current public information about us.
Restrictions on the Use of Rule 144 by Shell Companies or Former Shell Companies
Rule 144 is not available for the resale of securities initially issued by shell companies (other than business combination
related shell companies) or issuers that have been at any time previously a shell company. However, Rule 144 also includes an
important exception to this prohibition if the following conditions are met: the issuer of the securities that was formerly a shell
company has ceased to be a shell company; the issuer of the securities is subject to the reporting requirements of Section 13 or
15(d) of the Exchange Act; the issuer of the securities has filed all Exchange Act reports and material required to be filed, as
applicable, during the preceding 12 months (or such shorter period that the issuer was required to file such reports and
materials), other than Current Reports; and at least one year has elapsed from the time that the issuer filed current Form 10 type
information with the SEC reflecting its status as an entity that is not a shell company. We were formed as a shell company in
March 2020. Upon the consummation of the Business Combination, on September 14, 2021, we ceased to be a shell company
and so, once the conditions set forth in the exceptions listed above are satisfied, Rule 144 will become available for the resale of
restricted securities and securities held by affiliates.
Regulation S
Regulation S under the Securities Act provides an exemption from registration requirements in the United States for offers
and sales of securities that occur outside the United States. Rule 903 of Regulation S provides the conditions to the exemption
for a sale by an issuer, a distributor, their respective affiliates or anyone acting on their behalf, while Rule 904 of Regulation S
provides the conditions to the exemption for a resale by persons other than those covered by Rule 903. In each case, any sale
must be completed in an offshore transaction, as that term is defined in Regulation S, and no directed selling efforts, as that term
is defined in Regulation S, may be made in the United States. We are a foreign issuer as defined in Regulation S. As a foreign
issuer, securities that we sell outside the United States pursuant to Regulation S are not considered to be restricted securities
under the Securities Act, and, subject to the offering restrictions imposed by Rule 903, are freely tradable without registration or
restrictions under the Securities Act, unless the securities are held by our affiliates. Generally, subject to certain limitations,
holders of our restricted shares who are not affiliates of the Company or who are affiliates of the Company by virtue of their
status as an officer or director may, under Regulation S, resell their restricted shares in an “offshore transaction” if none of the
seller, its affiliate nor any person acting on their behalf engages in directed selling efforts in the United States and, in the case of
a sale of our restricted shares by an officer or director who is an affiliate of ours solely by virtue of holding such position, no
selling commission, fee or other remuneration is paid in connection with the offer or sale other than the usual and customary
broker’s commission that would be received by a person executing such transaction as agent. Additional restrictions are
applicable to a holder of our restricted shares who will be an affiliate of the Company other than by virtue of his or her status as
an officer or director of the Company.
Rule 701
In general, under Rule 701 of the Securities Act as currently in effect, each of our employees, consultants or advisors who
purchases equity shares from us in connection with a compensatory stock plan or other written agreement that was executed
prior to the completion of the Business Combination is eligible to resell those equity shares in reliance on Rule 144, but without
compliance with some of the restrictions, including the holding period, contained in Rule 144. However, the Rule 701 shares
would remain subject to lock-up arrangements and would only become eligible for sale when the lock-up period expires.


145
Lock-up Arrangements
Pursuant to the Registration Rights Agreement, the Sponsor and the Lilium Holders have agreed to be bound by certain
restrictions on transfer of the Lock-Up Shares, other than to certain permitted transferees. The Sponsor and the Lilium Holders
have agreed, for the duration of the applicable Lock-Up Period, with respect to any such persons, not to (a) sell or assign, offer
to sell, contract or agree to sell, hypothecate, pledge, grant any option to purchase or otherwise dispose of agree to dispose of,
directly or indirectly, or establish or increase a put equivalent position or liquidation with respect to or decrease a call equivalent
position within the meaning of Section 16 of the Exchange Act with respect to, any Lock-Up Shares, (b) enter into any swap or
other arrangement that transfers to another, in whole or in part, any of the economic consequences of ownership of any Lock-Up
Shares, whether settled by delivery of such Lock-Up Shares, in cash or otherwise, or (c) publicly announce any intention to
effect any transaction described in clause (a) or (b) above. The Lock-Up Period begins on the Final Closing Date and ends
(i) with respect to the Lilium Holders, 180 days after the Final Closing Date and (ii) with respect to the Sponsor, the earlier of
(A) 360 days after the Final Closing Date and (B) (x) the first date on which the closing price of the Class A Shares equals or
exceeds $12.00 per share (as adjusted for share sub-divisions, share capitalizations, reorganizations, recapitalizations and the
like) for any 20 trading days within any 30-trading day period commencing at least 150 days after the Final Closing Date and
(y) the date on which Lilium consummates a liquidation, merger, share exchange, reorganization or other similar transaction
which results in all of our shareholders having the right to exchange their Lilium Shares for cash, securities or other property.
Registration Rights
In connection with the closing of the Business Combination Agreement, the Registration Rights Holders entered into the
Registration Rights Agreement. Pursuant to the Registration Rights Agreement, we agreed that, within 30 calendar days after the
consummation of the Business Combination, we would file with the SEC (at our sole cost and expense) the Resale Registration
Statement, and would use our commercially reasonable efforts to have the Resale Registration Statement declared effective as
soon as reasonably practicable after the filing thereof. In certain circumstances, the Registration Rights Holders can demand up
to two underwritten offerings in any six month period (and we are not required to effect more than four underwritten offerings in
any 12 month period), and the Registration Rights Holders will be entitled to customary piggyback registration rights. The
Registration Rights Agreement does not provide for the payment of any cash penalties by Lilium if we fail to satisfy any of our
obligations under the Registration Rights Agreement. In addition, we expect to enter into a registration rights agreement
granting customary registration rights to Azul in respect of the Class A Shares issuable upon the exercise of the Azul Warrants.
EXPENSES RELATED TO THE OFFERING
Set forth below is an itemization of the total expenses which are expected to be incurred by us in connection with the
securities being registered hereby and the offer and sale of our Class A Shares and Warrants by our selling securityholders. With
the exception of the SEC registration fee, all amounts are estimates.
Amount
SEC Registration Fee
    $
264,738 
Legal fees and expenses
 
* 
Accounting fees and expenses
 
* 
Miscellaneous expenses
 
* 
Total
$
* 
*
These fees are calculated based on the securities offered and the number of issuances and accordingly cannot be
defined at this time.
LEGAL MATTERS
Van Doorne N.V. has advised us on certain legal matters as to Dutch law including the issuance of the Class A Shares
offered by this prospectus. We have been advised on U.S. securities matters by Orrick, Herrington & Sutcliffe LLP.
EXPERTS
The financial statements of Lilium GmbH as of December 31, 2020, December 31, 2019 and January 1, 2019, and for
the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, included in this prospectus have been so included in reliance on the report (which
contains an explanatory paragraph relating to Lilium GmbH’s ability to continue as a going concern as described in Note 4 to
the financial statements) of PricewaterhouseCoopers GmbH Wirtschaftsprüfungsgesellschaft, an independent registered public
accounting firm, given on the authority of said firm as experts in auditing and accounting.


146
The financial statements of Qell Acquisition Corp. as of December 31, 2020, and for the period from August 7, 2020
(inception) through December 31, 2020, appearing in this prospectus have been audited by WithumSmith+Brown, PC,
independent registered public accounting firm, as set forth in their report thereon, appearing elsewhere in this prospectus, and
are included in reliance upon such report given on the authority of such firm as experts in accounting and auditing.
WHERE YOU CAN FIND MORE INFORMATION
We have filed with the SEC a registration statement (including amendments and exhibits to the registration statement) on
Form F-1 under the Securities Act. For purposes of this section, the term registration statement means the original registration
statement and any and all amendments including the schedules and exhibits to the original registration statement or any
amendment. This prospectus, which is part of the registration statement, does not contain all of the information set forth in the
registration statement and the exhibits and schedules to the registration statement. For further information, we refer you to the
registration statement and the exhibits and schedules filed as part of the registration statement. If a document has been filed as
an exhibit to the registration statement, we refer you to the copy of the document that has been filed. Each statement in this
prospectus relating to a document filed as an exhibit is qualified in all respects by the filed exhibit. We are subject to the
informational requirements of the Exchange Act that are applicable to foreign private issuers. Accordingly, we are required to
file or furnish reports and other information with the SEC, including annual reports on Form 20-F and reports on Form 6-K. The
SEC maintains an Internet website that contains reports and other information regarding issuers that file electronically with the
SEC. Our filings with the SEC are available to the public through the SEC’s website at http://www.sec.gov. As a foreign private
issuer, we are exempt under the Exchange Act from, among other things, the rules prescribing the furnishing and content of
proxy statements, and our executive officers, directors and principal and selling shareholders are exempt from the reporting and
short-swing profit recovery provisions contained in Section 16 of the Exchange Act. In addition, we will not be required under
the Exchange Act to file periodic reports and financial statements with the SEC as frequently or as promptly as U.S. companies
whose securities are registered under the Exchange Act. We maintain a corporate website at www.lilium.com. Information
contained on, or that can be accessed through, our website does not constitute a part of this prospectus. We have included our
website address in this prospectus solely for informational purposes.


F-1
INDEX TO FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
Page No.
Audited Consolidated Financial Statements of Lilium GmbH
Report of Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm
F-2
Consolidated Statements of Operations and Other Comprehensive Income (Loss) for the years ended December 31,
2020 and 2019
F-3
Consolidated Statement of Financial Position as of December 31, 2020, 2019 and January 1, 2019
F-4
Consolidated Statement of Changes in Equity for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
F-5
Consolidated Statement of Cash Flows for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
F-6
Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements
F-7
Unaudited Condensed Interim Financial Statements of Lilium GmbH
Unaudited Interim Condensed Consolidated Statements of Operations and Other Comprehensive Income (Loss) for
the six months ended June 30, 2021 and June 30, 2020
F-40
Unaudited Interim Condensed Consolidated Statement of Financial Position as of June 30, 2021 and December 31,
2020
F-41
Unaudited Interim Condensed Consolidated Statement of Changes in Shareholders’ Equity for the six months ended
June 30, 2021 and June 30, 2020
F-42
Unaudited Interim Condensed Consolidated Statement of Cash Flows for the six months ended June 30, 2021 and
June 30, 2020
F-43
Notes to Unaudited Interim Condensed Consolidated Financial Statements
F-44
Audited Financial Statements of Qell Acquisition Corp.:
Report of Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm
F-44
Balance Sheet as of December 31, 2020 (As Restated)
F-45
Statement of Operations for the period from August 7, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020 (As Restated)
F-46
Statement of Changes in Shareholders’ Equity for the period from August 7, 2020 (inception) through December 31,
2020 (As Restated)
F-47
Statement of Cash Flows for the period from August 7, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020 (As Restated)
F-48
Notes to Financial Statements (As Restated)
F-49
Unaudited Condensed Interim Financial Statements of Qell Acquisition Corp.
Condensed Balance Sheets as of June 30, 2021 (unaudited) and December 31, 2020
F-64
Unaudited Condensed Statement of Operations for the three and six months ended June 30, 2021
F-65
Unaudited Condensed Statement of Changes in Shareholders’ Equity for the three and six months ended June 30,
2021
F-66
Unaudited Condensed Statement of Cash Flows for the six months ended June 30, 2021
F-67
Notes to Unaudited Condensed Financial Statements
F-68


F-2
Report of Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm
To the Management Board and Shareholders of Lilium GmbH
Opinion on the Financial Statements
We have audited the accompanying consolidated statements of financial position of Lilium GmbH and its subsidiaries (the
“Company”) as of December 31, 2020, December 31, 2019 and January 1, 2019, and the related consolidated statements of
operations and other comprehensive income (loss), of changes in equity and of cash flows for the years ended December 31,
2020 and 2019, including the related notes (collectively referred to as the “consolidated financial statements”). In our opinion,
the consolidated financial statements present fairly, in all material respects, the financial position of the Company as of
December 31, 2020, December 31, 2019 and January 1, 2019, and the results of its operations and its cash flows for the years
ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 in conformity with International Financial Reporting Standards as issued by the
International Accounting Standards Board.
Substantial Doubt about the Company’s Ability to Continue as a Going Concern
The accompanying consolidated financial statements have been prepared assuming that the Company will continue as a
going concern. As discussed in Note 4 to the consolidated financial statements, the Company has incurred recurring losses from
operations since its inception and expects to continue to generate operating losses that raise substantial doubt about its ability to
continue as a going concern. Management’s plans in regard to these matters are also described in Note 4. The consolidated
financial statements do not include any adjustments that might result from the outcome of this uncertainty.
Basis for Opinion
These consolidated financial statements are the responsibility of the Company’s management. Our responsibility is to
express an opinion on the Company’s consolidated financial statements based on our audits. We are a public accounting firm
registered with the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board (United States) (PCAOB) and are required to be independent
with respect to the Company in accordance with the U.S. federal securities laws and the applicable rules and regulations of the
Securities and Exchange Commission and the PCAOB.
We conducted our audits of these consolidated financial statements in accordance with the standards of the PCAOB. Those
standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain reasonable assurance about whether the consolidated financial
statements are free of material misstatement, whether due to error or fraud.
Our audits included performing procedures to assess the risks of material misstatement of the consolidated financial
statements, whether due to error or fraud, and performing procedures that respond to those risks. Such procedures included
examining, on a test basis, evidence regarding the amounts and disclosures in the consolidated financial statements. Our audits
also included evaluating the accounting principles used and significant estimates made by management, as well as evaluating
the overall presentation of the consolidated financial statements. We believe that our audits provide a reasonable basis for our
opinion.
Munich, Germany
May 5, 2021
PricewaterhouseCoopers GmbH
Wirtschaftsprüfungsgesellschaft
/s/ Katharina Deni
/s/ Alexander Fiedler
Wirtschaftsprüfer
Wirtschaftsprüfer
(German Public Auditor)
(German Public Auditor)
We have served as the Company’s auditor since 2019.


F-3
Lilium Group
Consolidated Statements of Operations and Other Comprehensive Income (Loss)
for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
in € thousand
    
Note
    
2020
    
2019
Revenue
 
[5]
 
97  
—
Cost of sales
 
[5]
 
(10) 
—
Gross profit
 
87  
—
Research and development expenses
 
[6]
 
(90,345) 
(38,136)
General and administrative expenses
 
[7]
 
(35,406) 
(15,437)
Selling Expenses
 
[8]
 
(15,272) 
(4,645)
Other income
 
[9]
 
2,346  
76
Other expenses
 
[10]
 
(130) 
(58)
Operating loss
 
(138,720) 
(58,200)
Finance income
 
[11]
 
80  
518
Finance expenses
 
[11]
 
(49,741) 
(5,736)
Financial result
 
[11]
 
(49,661) 
(5,218)
Loss before income tax
 
(188,381) 
(63,418)
Income tax expense
 
[12]
 
(46) 
(61)
Net loss for the period
 
(188,427) 
(63,479)
Other comprehensive income (loss)
in € thousand
    
Note
    
2020
    
2019
Other comprehensive income that may be reclassified to profit or loss
 
36  
3
Exchange differences on translation of foreign business units
 
36  
3
Income taxes
 
—  
—
Items that will not be subsequently reclassified to profit or loss
 
(44) 
(114)
Remeasurement of defined pension benefit obligation
 
[23]
 
(44) 
(114)
Income taxes
 
—  
—
Other comprehensive income (loss)
 
(8) 
(111)
Total consolidated comprehensive loss for the reporting period
 
(188,435) 
(63,590)
Loss per share (basic and diluted) in €
[13]
 
(2,771) 
(1,072)
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these consolidated financial statements (IFRS).


F-4
Lilium Group
Consolidated Statement of Financial Position
as of December 31, 2020, 2019 and January 1, 2019
ASSETS
in € thousand
    
Note
     12/31/2020      12/31/2019      01/01/2019
Intangible assets
 
[14]
 
1,372  
842  
585
Property, plant and equipment
 
[15, 16]  
22,715  
14,700  
9,908
Financial assets
 
[17]
 
2,112  
918  
200
Non-financial assets
 
[18]
 
153  
96  
68
Non-current assets
 
26,352  
16,556  
10,761
Other financial assets
 
[17]
 
50,676  
4  
20
Non-financial assets
 
[18]
 
5,774  
1,722  
1,820
Cash and cash equivalents
 
102,144  
59,571  
47,139
Current assets
 
158,594  
61,297  
48,979
Total Assets
 
184,946  
77,853  
59,740
EQUITY AND LIABILITIES
 
  
 
   
   
  
Subscribed capital
 
[19]
 
69  
54  
54
Share premium
 
[19]
 
253,815  
89,660  
89,660
Other capital reserves
 
[19]
 
110,055  
3,981  
—
Treasury shares
 
[19]
 
0  
—  
—
Accumulated loss
 
[19]
 
(306,098) 
(117,672) 
(54,192)
Accumulated other comprehensive income (loss)
 
[19]
 
(119) 
(111) 
—
Equity
 
57,722  
(24,088) 
35,522
Other financial liabilities
 
[21]
 
27  
0  
—
Lease liabilities
 
[16]
 
9,505  
7,629  
6,331
Share-based payment liability
 
[20]
 
—  
21,083  
13,203
Provisions
 
[22, 23]  
411  
289  
85
Non-current liabilities
 
9,943  
29,001  
19,619
Other financial liabilities
 
[21]
 
21  
25  
37
Lease liabilities
 
[16]
 
1,613  
1,086  
705
Provisions
 
[22]
 
80  
—  
—
Income tax payable
 
[12]
 
43  
86  
29
Convertible loans
 
[21]
 
99,235  
66,353  
—
Trade and other payables
 
[24]
 
11,092  
2,795  
2,651
Other non-financial liabilities
 
[25]
 
5,197  
2,595  
1,177
Current liabilities
 
117,281  
72,940  
4,599
Total Equity and Liabilities
 
184,946  
77,853  
59,740
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these consolidated financial statements (IFRS).


F-5
Lilium Group
Consolidated Statement of Changes in Equity
for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
Accumulated other comprehensive income
Income
taxes
Remeasurement
 
relating
of defined
 
Other
Currency
to other
pension
Subscribed
Share
capital
Treasury
Accumulated
translation
components
benefit
Total
in € thousand
Note
capital
premium*
reserves
shares
loss
reserve
 
of equity
obligation
Equity
January 1, 2019
    
    
54     
89,660     
—     
—     
(54,192)    
—     
—     
—     
35,522
Profit (Loss) for the
period
 
—  
—  
—  
—  
(63,479) 
—  
—  
—  
(63,479)
Other
comprehensive
income and
expenses
 
—  
—  
—  
—  
—  
3  
—  
(114) 
(111)
Total
comprehensive
income (loss)
 
—  
—  
—  
—  
(63,479) 
3  
—  
(114) 
(63,590)
Convertible loans
 
[19]  
—  
—  
3,981  
—  
—  
—  
—  
—  
3,981
Share capital
increase
 
[19]  
0  
—  
—  
—  
—  
—  
—  
—  
0
December 31, 2019  
54  
89,660  
3,981  
—  
(117,671) 
3  
—  
(114) 
(24,087)
Profit (Loss) for the
period
 
—  
—  
—  
—  
(188,427) 
—  
—  
—  
(188,427)
Other
comprehensive
income and
expenses
 
—  
—  
—  
—  
—  
36  
—  
(44) 
(8)
Total
comprehensive
income (loss)
 
—  
—  
—  
—  
(188,427) 
36  
—  
(44) 
(188,435)
Share-based
payments
 
[20]  
—  
—  
71,990  
—  
—  
—  
—  
—  
71,990
Convertible loans
 
[19]  
7  
68,116  
34,084  
—  
—  
—  
—  
—  
102,207
Share buy-back
 
[19]  
—  
(763) 
—  
(0) 
—  
—  
—  
—  
(763)
Share capital
increase and
capital
contributions*
 
[19]  
8  
96,802  
—  
—  
—  
—  
—  
—  
96,810
December 31, 2020  
69  
253,815  
110,055  
(0) 
(306,098) 
39  
—  
(158) 
57,722
*
Net of transaction cost. Refer to note 19.
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these consolidated financial statements (IFRS).


F-6
Lilium Group
Consolidated Statement of Cash Flows
for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
in € thousand
    
2020
    
2019
Net loss for the period
 
(188,427) 
(63,479)
Adjustments to reconcile consolidated net profit (loss) to net cash flows
 
   
  
Income tax expense
 
46  
61
Net interest
 
34,498  
5,734
Depreciation and amortisation
 
4,159  
2,334
Expenses for share-based payments
 
50,907  
7,880
Net gains/losses from the disposal of intangibles and PP&E
 
74  
—
Fair value changes of convertible loans and promissory note
 
15,164  
(516)
Income tax paid
 
(89) 
(5)
Change in provisions
 
116  
40
Working capital adjustments:
 
   
  
Changes in trade and other payables
 
8,358  
131
Change in other assets and liabilities
 
(2,689) 
773
Cash flow from operating activities
 
(77,883) 
(47,047)
Purchases of intangible assets, property, plant and equipment
 
(8,865) 
(4,797)
Payments for fixed term deposit
 
(50,000) 
—
Payments for promissory notes
 
(630) 
—
Interest received
 
23  
0
Cash flow from investing activities
 
(59,472) 
(4,797)
Proceeds from convertible loans
 
85,900  
65,500
Payments for share buy-back
 
(763) 
—
Proceeds from share capital increase and capital contribution
 
97,320  
0
Payment of transaction cost for capital contribution
 
(503) 
—
Principal elements of lease payments
 
(1,439) 
(854)
Interest paid
 
(560) 
(385)
Cash flow from financing activities
 
179,955  
64,261
Cash-based changes in cash and cash equivalents
 
42,600  
12,417
Effect of foreign exchange rate changes on cash and cash equivalents
 
(27) 
15
Net (decrease) increase in cash and cash equivalents
 
42,573  
12,432
Cash and cash equivalents at the beginning of the period
 
59,571  
47,139
Cash and cash equivalents at the end of the period
 
102,144  
59,571
Please refer to note 26.3.
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these consolidated financial statements (IFRS).


F-7
LILIUM GROUP
IFRS CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
1.
Corporate Information
Lilium GmbH was founded in 2015 as a start-up in the field of urban air mobility and intends to make regional air mobility
a reality. Since their founding Lilium GmbH has primarily engaged in research and development of a self-developed electric
Vertical Takeoff and Landing (eVTOL) jet (the “Lilium Jet”) for production and operation of a regional air mobility service as
well as related services.
Lilium GmbH is a German limited-liability company and is registered in the commercial register at the Bavaria District
Court Munich Germany under the number 216921. The registered headquarter is Claude-Dornier Str. 1, Geb. 335, 82234
Wessling Germany.
The consolidated financial statements of Lilium GmbH and its subsidiaries, collectively referred to as “the Company”, “the
Group” or the “Lilium Group”, for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 were authorized for issue by the Management
Board on May 5, 2021.
2.
Basis of Preparation
The Group’s consolidated financial statements are prepared in accordance with International Financial Reporting Standards
(“IFRS”), issued by the International Accounting Standards Board (“IASB”) and related interpretations issued by the IFRS
Interpretations Committee.
The consolidated financial statements have been prepared on a going concern basis, applying a historical cost convention,
unless otherwise indicated. They are prepared and reported in thousands of Euro (“€ thousand”) except where otherwise stated.
Due to rounding, numbers presented may not add up precisely to the totals provided and percentages may not precisely reflect
the absolute figures.
Group information
Lilium GmbH is the ultimate parent of the Lilium Group; its subsidiaries are as follows:
    
    
    
% equity interest owned by 
 
Lilium GmbH
 
Country of 
Date of 
 
Name
    
incorporation
    
incorporation
     12/31/2020      12/31/2019    
01/01/2019  
Lilium Aviation Inc.
  United States
July 1, 2020
 
100.0 %  
   
  
Lilium Schweiz GmbH
  Switzerland
December 8, 2017
 
100.0 %  
100.0 %  
100.0 %
Lilium Aviation UK Ltd.
  United Kingdom
December 20, 2017  
100.0 %  
100.0 %  
100.0 %
Lilium eAircraft GmbH
  Germany
August 17, 2020
 
100.0 %  
   
  
Principles of consolidation
The consolidated financial statements incorporate the financial positions and the results of operations of the Group. Control
is achieved when the Group is exposed, or has rights, to variable returns from its involvement with the investee and has the
ability to affect those returns through its power over the investee. The financial statements of the subsidiaries are prepared for
the same reporting period as Lilium GmbH, using consistent accounting policies. Intercompany transactions, balances and
unrealized gains on transactions between Group companies are eliminated.
Segment
The Group operates its business as a single operating segment, which is also its reporting segment. An operating segment is
defined as a component of an entity for which discrete financial information is available and whose results of operations are
regularly reviewed by the chief operating decision maker. The Group’s chief operating decision maker is the Chief Executive
Officer, who reviews results of operations to make decisions about allocating resources and assessing performance based on
consolidated financial information.


F-8
Foreign currency
The Group’s consolidated financial statements are presented using the Euro, which is the Company’s functional currency.
All of the Group’s foreign subsidiaries’ functional currency is the local currency. Lilium translates the financial statements of
these subsidiaries to Euro using year-end exchange rates for assets and liabilities, and average exchange rates for income and
expenses. Adjustments resulting from translating foreign functional currency financial statements into Euro are recorded as a
separate component on the consolidated statements of comprehensive income.
Monetary assets and liabilities that are denominated in currencies other than the respective functional currencies are
remeasured at the foreign currency rates as of the reporting date. Foreign currency transaction gains and losses from the
remeasurement are included in other income and other expenses, as appropriate, in the consolidated statements of operations for
the period.
3.
Significant Accounting Policies
Intangible assets
Research and development costs
In developing this novel eVTOL technology the Group is incurring significant research and development costs.
The costs for internally generated research and development are expensed when incurred. A portion of costs for internally
generated development is capitalized if:
●
the product or process is technically feasible;
●
adequate resources are available to successfully complete the development;
●
the benefits from the assets are demonstrated;
●
the costs attributable to the projects are reliably measured;
●
the Group intends to produce and market or use the developed product or process and can demonstrate its market
relevance.
Management recognizes an interest for an air mobility service, especially within heavily populated urban areas however,
there is not yet an established market for this new industry. The self-developed eVTOL technology going into the Lilium Jet
development is highly innovative and there are uncertainties related to successful completion of the development. Consequently,
the Group has not yet capitalized development costs. These costs are reflected in the statement of operations in the period in
which the expenditure is incurred.
Purchased intangibles
Intangible assets acquired separately are measured on initial recognition at cost. Following initial recognition, intangible
assets are carried at cost less any accumulated amortization and accumulated impairment losses.
    
Useful life
Software
 
2 – 15 years
Purchased concessions, rights and other intangible assets
  10 – 20 years
Impairment tests
At the end of each reporting period, the Group assesses whether there is an indication that an asset may be impaired. If any
indication exists, or when annual impairment testing for an asset is required, the Group estimates the asset’s recoverable
amount. The recoverable amount is determined for an individual asset, unless the asset does not generate cash inflows that are
largely independent of those from other assets or groups of assets. An asset’s recoverable amount is the higher of an asset’s or
cash generating unit (“CGU”)’s fair value less costs of disposal and its value in use. When the carrying amount of an asset or
CGU exceeds its recoverable amount, the asset is considered impaired and is written down to its recoverable amount.


F-9
In assessing value in use, the estimated future cash flows are discounted to their present value using a pre-tax discount rate
that reflects current market assessments of the time value of money and the risks specific to the asset. In determining fair value
less costs of disposal, recent market transactions are taken into account. If no such transactions can be identified, an appropriate
valuation model is used.
Property, Plant and Equipment
Property, plant and equipment are measured at cost, net of accumulated depreciation and any accumulated impairment
losses. Costs of construction recognized include all attributable direct costs including material and production overheads, and,
where applicable, an initial estimate of the cost of dismantling and removing the item and restoring the site on which it is
located.
Borrowing costs are capitalized as part of the underlying asset under construction if there is a qualifying asset.
Subsequent expenditures on assets are capitalized only when it is probable that future economic benefits associated with the
expenditure will flow to the Group. Repairs and maintenance are expensed in profit or loss in the period the costs are incurred.
If items of property, plant and equipment are sold or disposed off, the gain or loss arising from the disposal is recognized as
other operating income or expense in the consolidated statement of operations and comprehensive income.
Depreciation is calculated on a straight-line basis based on the following useful lives:
    
Useful life
Rights to land and buildings including leasehold improvements
 
2 – 9 years
Technical equipment and machinery
  3 – 25 years
Office and other equipment
  3 – 13 years
Vehicles
  5 – 11 years
Assets qualifying as low value assets with a value of €1 thousand are aggregated into groups and depreciated over a useful
life of 5 years.
Leasehold improvements are amortized over the unexpired portion of the lease term, or the estimated useful life of the
improvements, whichever is shorter. The residual values, useful lives and methods of depreciation of property, plant and
equipment are reviewed at each financial year end and adjusted prospectively, if appropriate.
Leases
The Group’s lease obligations primarily relate to rights to buildings mainly for its office and research and development
premises. As lease contracts are negotiated on an individual basis, lease terms contain a range of different terms and conditions.
Lease contracts are typically entered for a period of 2-9 years and regularly include renewal and termination options, which
provide operational flexibility to Lilium.
As a lessee, at the inception of a contract, the Group assesses whether the contract is, or contains, a lease. A contract is, or
contains, a lease if the contract conveys the right to control the use of an identified asset for a period in exchange for
consideration.
The Group recognises right of use assets which represent a right to use the underlying leased assets and corresponding lease
liabilities which represent the present value of future lease payments, excluding short-term leases (lease term of 12 months or
less from commencement date and do not contain a purchase options) and leases of low value assets acquisition costs less than
€5 thousand), in the consolidated statement of financial position at the date at which the leased asset is available for use.
Liabilities arising from a lease are initially measured at present value of lease payments discounted using interest rate
implicit in the lease or incremental borrowing rate in case interest rate implicit in the lease is not readily determinable.
Main components of the lease payments included in the measurement of the lease liability comprise the following:
●
fixed lease payments;
●
variable lease payments that are linked to an index (consumer price index);


F-10
●
lease payments in an optional renewal period if the Group is reasonably certain to exercise an extension option.
Lease payments contain principal elements and interest. Interest is presented as part of finance costs in the consolidated
statements of operations and other comprehensive income using the effective interest method. Principal and interest portion of
lease payments have been presented within financing activities in the statement of cash flow. The carrying amount of lease
liabilities is remeasured if there is change in the future lease payments due to change in index or rate.
Right of use assets at the lease commencement date are measured at cost less any accumulated depreciation and impairment
losses and adjusted for any remeasurement of lease liabilities recognised. Cost of right of use assets includes lease liabilities,
initial direct costs, prepayments made on or before the commencement date and less any lease incentives received. Right of use
assets are depreciated on straight line basis from the commencement date to the earlier of the end of the useful life of the right-
of-use asset and the end of the lease term. The estimated useful lives of right of use assets are determined on the same basis as
those of leased property and equipment. The right of use asset is periodically assessed for impairment. The Group has presented
right of use assets within “Property, plant and equipment”.
Assets related to retirement obligations for leased buildings are included in the cost of right of use assets for the respective
underlying building lease.
Group does not have any contracts as a lessor on the date of statement of financial position.
Non-financial Assets
Insurance recoveries are recognized for expected reimbursements for damaged assets. They have been measuredd based on
a ratio of total tangible assets to insurance coverage. The tangible asset values were derived from replacement costs adjusted to
exclude tools still available, premiums paid on materials and costs of related salaries or wages. Other non-financial assets are
recognized at their nominal amounts.
Cash and Cash Equivalents
Cash and cash equivalents in the statement of financial position and statement of cash flows comprise cash at banks and on
hand and short-term highly liquid deposits with a maturity of three months or less, that are readily convertible to a known
amount of cash and subject to an insignificant risk of changes in value.
Financial Instruments
Financial instruments are contracts that give rise to a financial asset for one entity and to a financial liability or equity
instrument for another entity. Purchases or sales of financial assets that require delivery of assets within a time frame established
by regulation or convention in the marketplace (regular way trades) are recognised on the settlement date.
Financial assets and financial liabilities are offset and the net amount is reported in the consolidated statement of financial
position if there is a currently enforceable legal right to offset the recognised amounts and there is an intention to settle on a net
basis, to realise the assets and settle the liabilities simultaneously. The Company has no such assets and liabilities.
Financial assets
The Group’s financial assets include cash and cash equivalents, financial assets and other financial assets. Other financial
assets consist of security deposits for leases, fixed-term deposits and promissory notes.
Financial assets are initially measured at fair value plus, in the case of a financial asset not measured at fair value through
profit or loss, transaction costs. As an exception of this general rule, trade receivables are measured at their transaction price.
Financial assets are classified at initial recognition as either measured at amortized cost (“AC”), fair value through other
comprehensive income (“FVOCI”), or fair value through profit or loss (“FVTPL”) depending on the contractual cash flows and
the Group’s business model for managing them. For all financial assets the Group has the objective to hold financial assets in
order to collect the contractual cash flows. If the contractual terms of the financial assets give rise on specified dates to cash
flows that are solely payments of principal and interest on the principal outstanding amount, the Group will measure these
financial assets at amortized cost under consideration of impairment (see following section). Currently all financial assets are
measured at amortized cost, with the exception of the promissory notes which are required to be measured at fair value through
profit or loss, because their


F-11
cash flows are not solely payments of principal and interest on the principal outstanding amount. Effects resulting from
impairment of financial assets that are not classified as FVTPL are presented in other expense, while changes in fair values are
presented in finance income / expense.
A financial asset is derecognized (i.e., removed from the Group’s consolidated statement of financial position) when the
rights to receive cash flows from the asset have expired or have been transferred in terms of fulfilling the derecognition criteria.
Impairment of financial assets — expected credit losses (“ECLs”)
All financial assets measured at amortized cost are required to be impaired at initial recognition in the amount of their
expected credit loss (“ECL”). ECLs are based on the difference between the contractual cash flows due in accordance with the
contract and all the cash flows that the Group expects to receive. Lilium recognizes an allowance for ECLs for cash and cash
equivalents and other financial assets according to the “general approach”. This means that ECLs are recognized in three stages.
For credit exposures at initial recognition, ECLs are provided for credit losses that result from default events which may be
possible within the next 12-months (Stage 1: a 12-month ECL). For credit exposures for which there has been a significant
increase in credit risk since initial recognition (which is deemed to have occurred if a payment is more than 30 days past due), a
loss allowance is required for credit losses expected over the remaining life of the exposure, irrespective of the timing of the
default (Stage 2: a lifetime ECL). The same applies if objective indications exist that a default event will occur (Stage 3: an
incurred loss). In this case, any interest income is measured on the basis of the net carrying amount, while for stage 1 and 2 the
basis is the gross carrying amount. Examples of objective evidence are significant financial difficulties experienced by the
debtor, payment default or delays, a lowering of the credit rating, insolvency or, respectively, where measures are taken to
secure a debtor’s financial situation, or if other observable data indicates that expected cash flows deriving from financial assets
may be appreciably reduced.
For cash and cash equivalents as well as other financial assets, advantage is taken of the simplification available for
financial instruments with a low credit risk (“low credit risk exemption”) as of the reporting date. Factors that can contribute to
a low credit risk assessment are debtor-specific rating information and related outlooks. The requirement for classification with
a low credit risk is regarded to be fulfilled for counterparties that have at least an investment grade rating; in this case there is no
need to monitor credit risks for financial instruments with a low credit risk.
The default probabilities applied to determine the expected credit losses for cash and cash equivalents and other financial
assets are based on credit default swap spreads that are quoted on markets, which take future-oriented macroeconomic data into
account.
In general, Lilium defines a default event as a situation in which the debt is no longer recoverable. If the financial
instrument is perceived to be unrecoverable, then the expectation is that future contractual cash flows will not occur. At this
point in time, the balance is written off after giving consideration to any possible security that is available.
Impairment losses (including reversals of impairment losses on financial assets) are not presented as a separate item in
accordance with IAS 1.82(ba) as they are considered immaterial. Impairment losses or income from the reversal of impairment
losses on financial assets are reported net under other expenses.
Financial liabilities
The Group’s financial liabilities include trade and other payables, lease liabilities (see note 16), convertible loans (including
embedded derivatives) and other financial liabilities.
Financial liabilities are classified as measured at amortized cost or fair value through profit or loss (“FVTPL”). All financial
liabilities are recognized initially at fair value less, in the case of a financial liability not at fair value through profit or loss,
directly attributable transaction costs.
Financial liabilities at FVTPL are measured at fair value and gains and losses are recognized in finance income / expense.
Currently, the Group only accounts for separated embedded derivatives of convertible loans as a financial liability at FVTPL.
All other financial liabilities are subsequently measured at amortized cost using the effective interest rate (“EIR”) method. When
applying the effective interest rate method, the Group generally amortises any fees, points paid or received, transaction costs and
other premiums or discounts that are included in the calculation of the effective interest rate over the expected life of the
financial instrument. Gains and losses are recognized in interest expense when the liabilities are derecognized as well as through
the EIR amortization process.
An embedded derivative in a hybrid contract, with a financial liability or non-financial host, is separated from the host and
accounted for as a separate derivative if: the economic characteristics and risks are not closely related to the host; a separate


F-12
instrument with the same terms as the embedded derivative would meet the definition of a derivative; and the hybrid contract is
not measured at fair value through profit or loss. The assessment whether to separate an embedded derivative is done only once
at initial recognition of the hybrid contract. Reassessment only occurs if there is a change in the terms of the contract that
significantly modifies the cash flows. Embedded derivatives are measured at fair value with changes in fair value recognized in
profit or loss.
A financial liability is derecognized when the obligation under the liability is discharged or cancelled or expires. When an
existing financial liability is replaced by another from the same lender on substantially different terms, or the terms of an
existing liability are substantially modified, such an exchange or modification is treated as the derecognition of the original
liability and the recognition of a new liability. The resulting gain or loss is recognized in the consolidated comprehensive
income statement.
Convertible Loans
IFRS requires that a convertible loan shall be bifurcated into a debt component and a conversion right if the latter is an
equity instrument. The conversion right of a convertible loan is not an equity instrument, but a liability if some conversion
features of the loan lead to a conversion into a variable number of shares. In this case it has to be assessed if embedded
derivatives need to be separated from the host contract (see section above). If this is the case, the remaining host contract is
measured at amortized cost and the separated embedded derivative is measured at fair value through profit or loss until the loan
is converted into equity or becomes due for repayment.
The conversion features and other repayment options provided for in the contract are identified as a combined embedded
derivative if they share the same risk exposure and are interdependent.
Income Taxes
Current income taxes
Current income tax assets and liabilities are measured at the amount expected to be recovered from or paid to the taxation
authorities. The tax rates and tax laws used to compute the amount are those that are enacted or substantively enacted at the
reporting date in the countries where the Group operates and generates taxable income.
Management periodically evaluates positions taken in the tax returns with respect to situations in which applicable tax
regulations are subject to interpretation and establishes provisions where appropriate.
Deferred taxes
The Group uses the liability method of accounting for income taxes. Deferred income tax assets and liabilities represent
temporary differences between the carrying amounts of assets and liabilities in the consolidated financial statements and their
corresponding tax basis used in the computation of taxable income. Deferred tax however is not recognized on the initial
recognition of goodwill, or the initial recognition of an asset or liability (other than in a business combination) in a transaction
that affects neither tax nor accounting income.
Deferred tax assets are recognized for all deductible temporary differences, carry forward of unused tax credits and any
unused tax losses to the extent it is probable that taxable profit will be available against which the deductible temporary
differences, the carry forward of unused tax credits and the unused tax losses can be utilized.
Deferred tax liabilities are recognized for all taxable temporary differences associated with investments in subsidiaries and
associates, except where the Group is able to control the reversal of the temporary differences and it is probable that the
temporary difference will not reverse in the foreseeable future.
Deferred tax assets and liabilities are measured at the tax rates that are expected to apply in the year in which the asset is
realized, or the liability is settled, based on tax rates (and tax laws) that have been enacted or substantively enacted at the
reporting date.
Deferred tax liabilities and assets are offset when there is a legally enforceable right to offset current tax assets against
current tax liabilities and when they relate to income taxes levied by the same taxation authority and the Group intends to settle
its current tax assets and liabilities on a net basis.
Current and deferred tax items are recognized similar to the underlying transaction either in profit or loss, other
comprehensive income or directly in equity. Changes in deferred tax assets or liabilities are recognized as a component of tax
expense (benefit) in the


F-13
consolidated statement of operations, except where they relate to items that are recognized in other comprehensive income or
directly in equity, in which case the related deferred tax is also recognized in other comprehensive income or equity,
respectively. Where deferred tax arises from the initial accounting for a business combination, the tax effect is included in the
accounting for the business combination.
Deferred tax assets and deferred tax liabilities are not discounted.
Deferred taxes are always classified as non-current.
Provisions
Provisions are recognized when the Group has a present obligation (legal or constructive) as a result of a past event, it is
probable that an outflow of resources embodying economic benefits will be required to settle the obligation and a reliable
estimate can be made of the amount of the obligation.
Fair Values of Assets and Liabilities
Fair value is a market-based measurement. For some assets and liabilities, observable market transactions or market
information is available. For other assets and liabilities, observable market transactions or market information might not be
available. When a price for an identical asset or liability is not observable, another valuation technique is used. To increase
consistency and comparability in fair value measurements, there are three levels of the fair value hierarchy:
●
Level 1: contains the use of unadjusted quoted prices in active markets for identical assets or liabilities
●
Level 2: inputs are other than quoted prices included within Level 1 that are observable for the asset or liability either
directly or indirectly
●
Level 3: inputs are based on unobservable market data
Further information about the assumptions made in measuring fair values is included in note 26.1.
If the inputs used to measure the fair value of an asset or a liability fall into different levels of the fair value hierarchy, then
the fair value measurement is categorized in its entirety in the same level of the fair value hierarchy as the lowest level input that
is significant to the entire measurement.
The Group recognizes transfers between levels of the fair value hierarchy at the end of the reporting period during which
the change has occurred.
In cases where a gain or loss arises on initial recognition of a financial asset or a financial liability because the fair value
deviates from the transaction price and is neither evidenced by a quoted price in an active market for an identical asset (i.e., a
Level 1 input) nor based on a valuation technique that uses only data from observable markets (i.e., a Level 2 input), this gain or
loss remains unrecognized until all market inputs become observable. In case such gain or loss results from a transaction with
shareholders, this amount is to be considered as capital contribution to the Group and is therefore to be recognized in equity.
Share-based Payments
Share-based payments in the form of equity-based awards granted pursuant to an Employee Stock Option Program
(“ESOP”) have been issued to the Group’s employees and advisors in exchange for their service.
These payments qualify either as cash- or equity-settled transactions depending on the terms of settlement. When the ESOP
provides for different ways of settlement (i.e. cash versus shares) depending on the occurrence of an exit event, the award is
accounted for based on the manner of settlement which is most probable. A change in the expected manner of settlement may
result in a change of classification.
For cash-settled awards a liability is recognised for the fair value. The fair value is measured initially and at each reporting
date up to and including the settlement date, with changes in fair value recognized in profit or loss for the period.


F-14
An equity-settled award is measured based on the fair value determined at the grant date, or the modification date for
employees and advisors who accepted the modified contract, and the number of awards expected to vest. The fair value remains
unchanged after grant date.
The expenses for services received as the participant renders services are recognized over the applicable vesting period (i.e.
for the first 12 months on a cliff vesting basis and for the subsequent 36 months on a graded vesting basis) with an
corresponding increase of either the liability or equity, depending on the classification of the awards. The related share-based
payment expense is recorded in the functional cost category to which the award recipient’s costs are classified.
Refer to note 20 for the measurement approach of the fair value of options.
Pension Benefits
The Group operates a defined benefit pension plan in Switzerland which requires contributions to be made to a separately
administered fund. The cost of providing benefits under the defined benefit plan is determined using the projected unit credit
method. The defined benefit obligation is recognized within non-current provisions.
Remeasurements, comprising of actuarial gains and losses, the effect of the asset ceiling, excluding amounts included in net
interest on the net defined benefit liability and the return on plan assets (excluding amounts included in net interest on the net
defined benefit liability), are recognised immediately in the statement of financial position with a corresponding debit or credit
to retained earnings through OCI in the period in which they occur. Remeasurements are not reclassified to profit or loss in
subsequent periods.
Past service costs are recognised in profit or loss on the earlier of:
●
The date of the plan amendment or curtailment, and
●
The date that the Group recognises related restructuring costs
Net interest is calculated by applying the discount rate to the net defined benefit liability or asset. The Group recognises the
following changes in the net defined benefit obligation under, ‘Research and development’, ‘General and administrative’, and
‘Selling’ expenses’ in the consolidated statement of profit or loss (by function):
●
Service costs comprising current service costs, past-service costs, gains and losses on curtailments,
●
Non-routine settlements, and
●
Net interest expense or income
Non-financial Liabilities
Non-financial liabilities are recognized at their nominal amounts.
Revenue Recognition
Revenues from contracts are recognized when the customer gains the ability to direct the use of and obtain substantially all
the remaining benefits from the services performed. The consideration which the Group expects to receive is allocated to each
of the performance obligations, using the relative stand-along selling price method.
Government Grants
Grants from governments are recognized at their fair value, where there is a reasonable assurance that the grant will be
received, and the Group will comply with all attached conditions. Government grants relating to costs are deferred and
recognized gross in other operating income over the period necessary to match them with the cost that they are intended to
compensate.


F-15
New Standards and Interpretations not yet adopted by the Group
A number of new standards and amendments to standards and interpretations are effective for annual periods beginning on
or after January 1, 2021 and have not been applied in preparing these consolidated financial statements. None of these standards
is expected to have a significant effect on the consolidated financial statements of the Group.
4.
Significant Accounting Judgments, Estimates and Assumptions
The preparation of the Group’s consolidated financial statements requires the management to make judgements, estimates
and assumptions that affect the reported amounts in the consolidated financial statements. In preparing these consolidated
financial statements, management exercises its best judgement based upon its experience and the circumstances prevailing at
that time. The estimates and assumptions are based on available information and conditions at the end of the financial period
presented and are reviewed on an ongoing basis. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions and
conditions and may materially affect the financial results or the financial position reported in future periods.
Key estimates and judgements that have a significant influence on the amounts recognized in the Group’s consolidated
financial statements are mentioned below:
Share-based Payments
Significant judgments include the valuation of equity shares and determination of the fair value of awards. Determining the
fair value of share-based payment transactions requires use of an appropriate valuation model. An option pricing method was
used to determine the fair value of award prior to the amendment of the plan in 2020. Subsequent to modification, a hybrid
model between option pricing method and probability-weighted expected return method was used. This estimate also requires
the determination of the most appropriate inputs to the valuation model when calculating the fair value of the share option, such
as the volatility of stock price, the discount for lack of marketability, and the probability and timing of an exit event. For cash-
settled share-based payment transactions, the liability is remeasured at the end of each reporting period until the date of
settlement, with any changes in fair value recognized in profit or loss. This requires a reassessment of the estimates used at the
end of each reporting period.
Convertible Loans
The initial fair value of the convertible loans (before bifurcation of the embedded derivatives) as well as the subsequent
measurement of the embedded derivatives is calculated using an internal valuation model and many of the input parameters are
not observable. Therefore, this valuation is considered highly judgemental. For detailed information on the convertible loans and
its embedded derivatives, especially a description of the valuation model, the input parameters as well as a sensitivity analysis,
see notes 21 and 26.1.
COVID-19
Since January 2020, the Corona Virus (COVID-19) is spreading worldwide. The strict measures to stop the spread of
COVID-19 adopted in several countries where the Group operates have resulted in the majority of the Company’s workforce
working from home with a small number of teams with special purposes for development of the Lilium Jet remaining onsite.
Modern forms of communication enabled contact to be maintained between various members of staff and deadlines defined
before the period during which employees were working from home have been complied with. We continue to take actions as
may be required or recommended by government authorities or in the best interests of our employees and business partners but
COVID-19 could also affect the operations of our suppliers and business partners which may result in delays or disruptions in
the supply chain of our components and delay the development and rollout of a vertiport network and commercial operations.
The potential delay did not trigger an impairment of assets. Additional costs were incurred related to health, safety and
transportation of employees which remained onsite, however, the impact of these did not materially impact these consolidated
financial statements.
The current uncertainty regarding the consequences and duration of COVID-19 has negatively impacted the ability to
develop a precise forecast for product development. Based on COVID-19 developments throughout 2020 and the latest
developments, the Group is expecting that business operation can be continued.
Going Concern
Management assessed the Group’s ability to continue as a going concern and evaluated whether there are certain conditions
and events, considered in the aggregate, that raise substantial doubt about the Group’s ability to continue as a going concern
using all information available about the future, focusing on the twelve-month period after the issuance date of the financial
statements.


F-16
Historically, the Group has funded its operations primarily through capital raises and with loans from shareholders. Since
the inception the Group has incurred recurring losses and negative cash flows from operations including net losses of
€188,427 thousand for the year 2020 and €63,479 thousand for the year 2019. At the end of the reporting period as of
December 31, 2020 the Group expects to continue to generate operating losses through 2022. Securing the financing of
development activities and operations represents an ongoing challenge for the Group.
Based on the business plan the Group depends on additional financing for additional development activities and operations.
Management plans to finance these investments and costs with the contemplated US public listing via a merger with a Special
Purpose Acquisition Company (“SPAC”) expected to be completed in the first half of 2021. The timely realization of the
transaction is crucial for the Group’s ability to continue as a going concern.
In case that the planned transaction does not reach the required level of financing, the Group would need to seek additional
funding through new investors or shareholders or other means. There is no certainty that the Group will be successful in
obtaining sufficient funding on terms acceptable to the Group to fund continuing operations.
Based on its recurring losses from operations since inception, expectation of continuing operating losses through 2022 and
the need to raise additional capital to finance its future operations, the Group has concluded that there is substantial doubt about
its ability to continue as a going concern. The financial statements do not include any adjustments that might result from the
outcome of this uncertainty. Accordingly, the financial statements have been prepared on a basis that assumes the Group will
continue as a going concern and which contemplates the realization of assets and satisfaction of liabilities and commitments in
the ordinary course of business.
Leases — Lease Term
The Group has lease agreements for rental properties with material renewal options. The Group applies judgement in
evaluating whether it is reasonably certain to exercise the option to extend or terminate the lease term. The Group considers all
relevant factors that create an economic incentive for it to exercise the respective extension option. After the commencement
date, the Group reassesses the lease term if there is a significant event or change in circumstances that is within its control and
affects whether the Group is reasonably certain to exercise or not to exercise the option to extend or terminate the lease term
(e.g., more than insignificant penalty, construction of significant leasehold improvements or significant customization to the
leased asset).
Leases — Incremental Borrowing Rate
The Group cannot readily determine the interest rate implicit in the majority of leases, therefore, it uses its incremental
borrowing rate (“IBR”) to measure lease liabilities. The IBR is the rate of interest that the Group would have to pay to borrow
over a similar term, and with a similar security, the funds necessary to obtain an asset of a similar value to the right-of-use asset
in a similar economic environment. The IBRs used by the Group are calculated based on the risk-free rate, individual country
risk premiums of underlying country and credit spread. The weighted average IBR in FY2020 is 4.05% (December 31, 2019 is
4.12% and January 1, 2019 is 4.51%).
5.
Revenue from Contracts with Customers and Cost of Sales
Lilium is currently not generating revenues from mobility services. In rolling-out the business Lilium is engaged in
infrastructure and mobility consultancy services provided to airport authorities with which future collaborations are planned;
revenue amounting to €97 thousand has been recognized from one customer at a point in time upon receipt of acceptance in
2020 (2019: €0 thousand). The geographic region which recognized revenues was Germany based on the Group location which
bills the customer.
Related costs are captured in costs of sales and comprise personnel expenses.


F-17
6.
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development expenses consist of the following:
In € thousand
    
2020
    
2019
Personnel expenses
 
66,726  
26,712
Professional services
 
8,448  
2,472
Materials
 
8,253  
5,012
Depreciation/amortization
 
2,829  
1,404
Other research and development expenses
 
4,089  
2,536
Total research and development expenses
 
90,345  
38,136
Materials include various components used in development of the Lilium Jet. Personnel expenses mainly include salary,
salary-related expenses and share-based payments recognized from the Group’s ESOP (note 20).
7.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses consist of the following:
In € thousand
    
2020
    
2019
Personnel expenses
 
21,339  
8,844
Professional services
 
8,483  
2,615
Software cost
 
1,897  
1,250
Depreciation/amortization
 
1,289  
896
Other administrative expenses
 
2,398  
1,832
Total administrative expenses
 
35,406  
15,437
Personnel expenses mainly include salary, salary-related expenses and share-based payments recognized from the Group’s
ESOP (note 20).
8.
Selling Expenses
Selling expenses consist of the following:
In € thousand
    
2020
    
2019
Personnel expenses
 
13,270  
3,358
Professional services
 
1,196  
327
Depreciation/amortization
 
41  
34
Other selling expenses
 
765  
926
Total selling expenses
 
15,272  
4,645
In preparation for providing air mobility services the Group has incurred expenses to allow them to operate as an airline, to
prepare infrastructure for vertiports, marketing and external communications. These have been classified as selling expenses.
Personnel expenses mainly include salary and salary-related expenses and share-based payments recognized from the Group’s
ESOP (note 20).
9.
Other Income
Other income consists of the following:
In € thousand
    
2020
    
2019
Insurance recoveries
 
1,906  
—
Grants received from the German government
 
307  
53
Income from other grants
 
42  
—
Other miscellaneous income
 
91  
23
Total other income
 
2,346  
76
Insurance recoveries are for damage which occurred as a result of an accident during maintenance work of which
€1,000 thousand was received during 2020 and €906 thousand is presented within non-financial assets (refer to note 18).


F-18
Lilium has been granted government funds for conducting research on future mobility infrastructure and technology,
especially assessing existing infrastructure for building vertiports and vertistops.
10. Other Expenses
Other expenses consist of the following:
In € thousand
    
2020
    
2019
Foreign currency losses
 
107  
56
Miscellaneous other items
 
23  
2
Total other expenses
 
130  
58
11. Financial Result
Financial result is comprised of the following:
In € thousand
    
2020
    
2019
Finance income
 
80  
518
thereof: fair value changes
 
58  
516
Finance expenses
 
(49,741) 
(5,736)
thereof: interest portion of lease payments
 
(450) 
(341)
thereof: fair value changes
 
(15,222) 
—
thereof: interest on convertible loans
 
(33,960) 
(5,350)
Financial result
 
(49,661) 
(5,218)
Fair value changes result from the embedded derivatives of the convertible loans (2020: €15,222 thousand in finance
expense; 2019: €516 thousand in finance income) as well as from the promissory notes (2020: €58 thousand in finance income).
12. Income Taxes
Income Tax Expense
During the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 the Group recorded consolidated income tax expense of €46 thousand
and €61 thousand, respectively. These income tax expenses mainly relate to foreign subsidiaries.
At German companies, a corporation tax rate of 15% was used for the calculation of deferred taxes. In addition, a solidarity
surcharge of 5.5% on corporation tax and a trade tax rate of 11.73% were taken into account. This resulted in an overall tax rate
of 27.55% for German companies, which is also the group tax rate. At international group companies, the respective country-
specific tax rates were used for the calculation of current and deferred taxes.
Tax Rate Reconciliation
The following table presents the reconciliation of expected tax expense and reported tax expense. Expected tax expense is
determined by multiplying consolidated profit before tax from continuing operations by the total group tax rate of 27.55%:
In € thousand
    
2020
    
2019
 
Profit (Loss) before income tax
(188,381)
(63,418)  
Income tax rate
27.55 %  
27.55 %
Expected income taxes on this
51,899
17,472  
Effects deriving from differences to the expected tax rate
 
54  
(3)
Other non-deductible expenses and taxes
 
(238) 
(312)
Changes in the realization of deferred tax assets
 
(22,371) 
(18,978)
Other
 
(29,390) 
1,760
Income tax as per statement of operations
 
(46) 
(61)
Effective tax rate in %
0.0 %  
(0.1)%
The other effects in 2020 mainly relate to equity settled share-based payments (€71,990 thousand, resulting in a
reconciliation effect of €19,883 thousand), the recognition of the day one effect of the convertible loan in equity
(€34,084 thousand, resulting in a


F-19
reconciliation effect of €9,390 thousand) and transaction cost deducted from equity (€503 thousand, resulting in a reconciliation
effect €139 thousand). The other effects in 2019 mainly relate to the embedded derivative of the convertible loans
(€3,981 thousand, resulting in a reconciliation effect of €1,097 thousand). Refer to notes 19 and 20.
Deferred Taxes
Deferred taxes related to the following:
Deferred tax assets
Deferred tax liabilities
In € thousand
     12/31/2020      12/31/2019      01/01/2019      12/31/2020      12/31/2019      01/01/2019
Non-current assets
 
206  
338  
—  
191  
2  
5
Intangible assets
 
203  
336  
—  
—  
—  
1
Property, plant and equipment
 
—  
—  
—  
3  
2  
4
Financial assets
 
3  
2  
—  
188  
—  
—
Current assets
 
1  
23  
1  
—  
—  
12
Inventories
 
1  
2  
1  
—  
—  
—
Receivables and other assets
 
—  
21  
—  
—  
—  
12
Non-current liabilities
 
1  
144  
16  
9  
—  
—
Provisions
 
—  
1  
—  
9  
—  
—
Liabilities
 
1  
143  
16  
—  
—  
—
Current liabilities
 
55  
4  
—  
63  
507  
—
Provisions
 
0  
—  
—  
62  
—  
—
Liabilities
 
55  
4  
—  
1  
507  
—
Gross value
 
263  
509  
17  
263  
509  
17
Netting
 
(263) 
(509) 
(17) 
(263) 
(509) 
(17)
Recognition in the statement of financial position
 
—  
—  
—  
—  
—  
—
As of December 31, 2019, and 2020, there were the following tax attributes (gross):
In € thousand
     12/31/2020      12/31/2019      01/01/2019
Corporation tax loss carryforwards
 
129,704  
42,056  
41,343
Trade tax loss carryforwards
 
128,889  
41,657  
41,197
Interest carryforwards
 
14,879  
9,555  
—
The reported tax loss and interest carryforwards mainly relate to the German Lilium entities and can be carried forward
indefinitely (German minimum taxation rules and interest stripping rules apply). These tax attributes may be subject to
restrictions of the German change in ownership rules (Sec. 8c KStG) going forward.
These tax attributes relate to entities that have a history of losses which have been accumulated in the previous years. The
respective entities neither have any taxable temporary difference exceeding the deductible temporary differences nor any tax
planning opportunities and documentation available that could partly support the recognition of these tax attributes as deferred
tax assets. On this basis, the Group has determined that it cannot recognize deferred tax assets on the tax attributes carried
forward.
For the following deductible temporary differences and tax loss and interest carryforwards, no deferred tax assets were
recognized in the financial statements:
Deferred tax assets on
Temporary 
Interest carry 
In € thousand
     differences      Tax losses     
forward
    
Total
Unrecognized deferred tax assets as of January 1, 2019
3,834
11,373
—
15,207
Addition
 
16,479  
167  
2,352  
18,998
Unrecognized deferred tax assets as of December 31, 2019
 
20,313  
11,540  
2,352  
34,205
Addition
 
—  
24,099  
1,311  
25,410
Deductions
 
(3,037) 
—  
—  
(3,037)
Unrecognized deferred tax assets as of December 31, 2020
 
17,276  
35,639  
3,663  
56,578


F-20
13. Earnings per Share
Basic earnings per share (EPS) is calculated by dividing the loss for the year attributable to ordinary equity holders of the
parent by the weighted average number of ordinary shares outstanding during the year.
Diluted EPS is calculated by dividing the loss attributable to ordinary equity holders of the parent by the weighted average
number of ordinary shares outstanding during the year plus the weighted average number of ordinary shares that would be
issued on conversion of all the dilutive potential ordinary shares into ordinary shares.
The following table reflects the income and share data used in the basic and diluted EPS calculations:
    
2020
    
2019
Loss attributed to equity shareholders (in € thousand)
 
(188,427) 
(63,479)
Weighted average number of ordinary shares outstanding
 
67,992  
59,231
Basic and diluted EPS (in €)
 
(2,771) 
(1,072)
There have been no other transactions involving ordinary shares or potential ordinary shares between the reporting date and
the date of authorization of these consolidated financial statements, other than a new convertible loan convertible to equity of
€1,850 thousand. The ordinary shares to be issued upon conversion of the mandatorily convertible loans taken in 2019 and 2020
are included in the basic earnings per share from the date of the respective loan agreements. Stock options were not included in
the calculation of diluted EPS because the IPO event has not occured as at the reporting date. Therefore, the diluted earnings per
share equals basic earnings per share.
14. Intangible Assets
Intangible assets comprise the following:
    
     Purchased concessions,      
rights and other 
 
In € thousand
Software
intangible assets
Total
Costs of acquisition
 
   
   
  
January 1, 2020
 
1,241  
89  
1,330
Additions
 
1,188  
24  
1,212
Disposals
 
(28) 
(5) 
(33)
December 31, 2020
 
2,401  
108  
2,509
Accumulated amortization/write downs
 
   
   
  
January 1, 2020
 
481  
7  
488
Amortization
 
642  
6  
648
Impairment
 
18  
0  
18
Disposals
 
(16) 
(1) 
(17)
December 31, 2020
 
1,125  
12  
1,137
Carrying amount:
 
   
   
  
January 1, 2020
 
760  
82  
842
December 31, 2020
 
1,276  
96  
1,372


F-21
    
     Purchased concessions,      
rights and other 
 
In € thousand
Software
intangible assets
Total
Costs of acquisition
 
   
   
  
January 1, 2019
 
738  
58  
796
Additions
 
503  
31  
534
December 31, 2019
 
1,241  
89  
1,330
Accumulated amortization/write downs
 
   
   
  
January 1, 2019
 
206  
5  
211
Amortization
 
275  
2  
277
December 31, 2019
 
481  
7  
488
Carrying amount:
 
   
   
  
January 1, 2019
 
532  
53  
585
December 31, 2019
 
760  
82  
842
An item of software was impaired in 2020 as the value in use is nil due to obsolescence. There were no further indicators of
impairment which would have required intangible assets to be tested for impairment in the fiscal years ended December 31,
2020 and December 31, 2019 or as of January 1, 2019.
15. Property, Plant and Equipment
Property, plant and equipment is comprised of the following:
     Rights to land      
    
    
    
    
and buildings 
Technical 
Office and 
Assets 
 
and leasehold 
equipment 
other 
under 
 
In € thousand
improvements
Vehicles
and machinery
equipment
construction
Total
Costs of acquisition or construction:
 
   
   
   
   
   
  
January 1, 2020
 
10,272  
109  
2,626  
3,736  
634  
17,377
Additions
 
4,795  
51  
1,268  
1,873  
3,479  
11,466
Disposals
 
—  
—  
(37) 
(43) 
—  
(80)
Transfers
 
607  
—  
2,338  
24  
(2,969) 
—
Indexation impact
 
100  
—  
—  
—  
—  
100
December 31, 2020
 
15,774  
160  
6,195  
5,590  
1,144  
28,863
Accumulated depreciation:
 
   
   
   
   
   
  
January 1, 2020
 
1,170  
6  
236  
1,265  
—  
2,677
Depreciation
 
1,887  
34  
408  
1,164  
—  
3,493
Disposals
 
—  
—  
(4) 
(18) 
—  
(22)
December 31, 2020
 
3,057  
40  
640  
2,411  
—  
6,148
Carrying amount:
 
   
   
   
   
   
  
January 1, 2020
 
9,102  
103  
2,390  
2,471  
634  
14,700
December 31, 2020
 
12,717  
120  
5,555  
3,179  
1,144  
22,715


F-22
     Rights to land      
    
    
    
    
and buildings 
Technical 
Office and 
Assets 
 
and leasehold 
equipment 
other 
under 
 
In € thousand
improvements
Vehicles
and machinery
equipment
construction
Total
Costs of acquisition or construction:
 
   
   
   
   
   
  
January 1, 2019
 
7,631  
18  
366  
2,162  
351  
10,528
Additions
 
2,667  
91  
969  
1,435  
1,687  
6,849
Disposals
 
—  
—  
—  
—  
—  
—
Transfers
 
(26) 
—  
1,291  
139  
(1,404) 
—
December 31, 2019
 
10,272  
109  
2,626  
3,736  
634  
17,377
Accumulated depreciation:
 
   
   
   
   
   
  
January 1, 2019
 
42  
1  
68  
509  
—  
620
Depreciation
 
1,128  
5  
168  
756  
—  
2,057
Disposals
 
—  
—  
—  
—  
—  
—
December 31, 2019
 
1,170  
6  
236  
1,265  
—  
2,677
Carrying amount:
 
   
   
   
   
   
  
January 1, 2019
 
7,589  
17  
298  
1,653  
351  
9,908
December 31, 2019
 
9,102  
103  
2,390  
2,471  
634  
14,700
Property, plant and equipment includes right-of-use assets for an amount of €10,941 thousand as of December 31, 2020
(December 31, 2019: €8,687 thousand; January 1, 2019: €7,101 thousand). For further information refer to note 16. The
transfers from assets under construction mainly relate to leasehold improvements and equipment which are required for
construction of the Lilium Jet prototype. There are no security pledges.
Property, plant and equipment is distributed among geographical areas as follows:
In € thousand
     12/31/2020      12/31/2019      01/01/2019
Germany
 
11,723  
6,004  
2,807
United Kingdom
 
38  
9  
—
United States
 
10  
—  
—
Switzerland
 
3  
—  
—
Total property, plant and equipment
 
11,774  
6,013  
2,807
No indicators of impairment existed which would have required items of property, plant and equipment to be tested for
impairment in the fiscal years ended December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019 or as of January 1, 2019.
16. Leases
The Group has lease contracts for facilities which contain variable lease payments and vehicles, equipments and other
assets which contain fixed-rate payment terms. The carrying amounts of right-of-use assets recognized and the movements
during the period were as follows:
    
    
    
Technical 
    
Office 
    
Rights to 
equipment 
and other 
 
In € thousand
buildings
Vehicles
and machinery
equipment
Total
January 1, 2019
 
7,076  
3  
—  
22  
7,101
Additions to right-of-use assets
 
1,961  
89  
503  
46  
2,599
Depreciation
 
(984) 
(4) 
(7) 
(18) 
(1,013)
December 31, 2019
 
8,053  
88  
496  
50  
8,687
Additions to right-of-use assets
 
3,757  
20  
—  
8  
3,785
Depreciation
 
(1,535) 
(31) 
(35) 
(30) 
(1,631)
Indexation impact
 
100  
—  
—  
—  
100
December 31, 2020
 
10,375  
77  
461  
28  
10,941


F-23
The carrying amounts of lease liabilities and the movements during the period were as follows:
In € thousand
     Lease Liability
January 1, 2019
 
7,036
Additions
 
2,533
Interest
 
341
Payments
 
(1,195)
December 31, 2019
 
8,715
Additions
 
3,742
Interest
 
450
Payments
 
(1,889)
Indexation impact
 
100
December 31, 2020
 
11,118
The consolidated statement of operations and comprehensive income included the following amounts of lease related
expense:
In € thousand
    
2020
    
2019
Depreciation of right of-use-assets
 
1,631  
1,013
Interest expense on lease liabilities
 
450  
341
Short-term lease expenses
 
108  
138
Lease expenses for low-value assets
 
80  
75
Total amount recognized in expense
 
2,269  
1,567
Variable lease payments result from indexed rental payments for facility leases and are included in lease liabilities. The
following table provides further information about the composition of the lease payments as included in the above movement
schedule of lease liabilities:
In € thousand
    
2020
    
2019
Fixed lease payments
 
154  
37
Variable lease payments
 
1,735  
1,158
Total amount of lease payments
 
1,889  
1,195
The below table provides information on the total cash outflow from all leases during the year:
In € thousand
    
2020
    
2019
Principal paid
 
1,439  
854
Interest paid
 
450  
341
Short term and low value leases
 
188  
213
Total amount paid
 
2,077  
1,408
17. Other Financial Assets
Other financials assets are as follows:
In € thousand
     12/31/2020      12/31/2019      01/01/2019
Security deposits
 
2,096  
906  
189
Miscellaneous other non-current financial assets
 
16  
12  
11
Total non-current financial assets
 
2,112  
918  
200
Fixed term deposit
 
50,000  
—  
—
Promissory notes
 
676  
—  
—
Miscellaneous other current financial assets
 
—  
4  
20
Total current other financial assets
 
50,676  
4  
20
On May 14, 2020 the Group entered into a fixed deposit with a term of nine months and fixed interest rate of 0.02%. The
deposit is not redeemable before maturity.
On July 31, 2020, the Group entered into a promissory note for a nominal amount of $500 thousand (€422 thousand)
convertible into a variable number of shares of equity of the issuer. On December 23, 2020, the Group entered into another
promissory note for a


F-24
nominal amount of $250 thousand (€205 thousand) with the same conditions. Both promissory notes bear 7% interest annually
and maturity is upon demand of Lilium GmbH after one year, however, can be converted earlier under certain conditions. Both
promissory notes are measured at fair value through profit or loss according to IFRS 9.
A deposit in the amount of €120 thousand (December 31, 2019: €0 thousand; January 1, 2019: €0 thousand) is pledged as
collateral for a furniture lease. Additional deposists in the amount of €1,976 thousand (December 31, 2019: €906 thousand;
January 1, 2019: €189 thousand) are pledged as collaterals for facility leases.
18. Non-Financial Assets
Non-financial assets are as follows:
In € thousand
     12/31/2020      12/31/2019      01/01/2019
Prepaid expenses
 
153  
96  
68
Total non-current non-financial assets
 
153  
96  
68
Value added tax claims
 
3,420  
741  
1,293
Prepaid expenses
 
1,284  
748  
468
Miscellaneous other current non-financial assets
 
1,070  
233  
59
Total current non-financial assets
 
5,774  
1,722  
1,820
Total non-financial assets
 
5,927  
1,818  
1,888
Non-current prepaid expenses contain prepayments for multi-year contracts. Miscellaneous other current non-financial
assets mainly include the insurance claim amounting to €906 thousand (December 31, 2019: €0 thousand, January 1, 2019:
€0 thousand) (refer to note 9).
19. Equity
Subscribed capital consists of common, seed, series A, B1 and B2 shares which have a nominal value of €1 each. Common
shares and preferred shares (Seed, Series A, B1 and B2) have voting rights and are fully paid in. Preferred shares have certain
additional rights in case of an exit or liquidity event, and 60% of the preferred share votes are required for certain fundamental
decisions. As of December 31, 2020, there were additional 15,716 shares authorized for issue. The amount of common and
preferred shares are as follows:
     Common      
Seed 
    
    
    
    
(in units)
shares
shares
Series A
Series B1
Series B2
Total
Issued and outstanding as of January 1, 2019
 
24,808  
4,412  
10,934  
13,729  
—  
53,883
Issued Series B1 shares
 
—  
—  
—  
373  
—  
373
Issued and outstanding as of December 31, 2019
 
24,808  
4,412  
10,934  
14,102  
—  
54,256
Treasury shares
 
(72) 
—  
—  
—  
—  
(72)
Issued Series B2 shares
 
—  
—  
—  
—  
14,847  
14,847
Outstanding as of December 31, 2020
 
24,736  
4,412  
10,934  
14,102  
14,847  
69,031
Issued as of December 31, 2020
 
24,808  
4,412  
10,934  
14,102  
14,847  
69,103
In March 2020, the 2019 convertible loans were converted into 6,705 preferred B2 shares (included in the 14,847 preferred
B2 shares issued during 2020).
Share premium represents additional consideration for shares above the nominal value of shares in issue less transaction
cost that incurred for the share issuance. During 2020, there was an increase in share premium of €97,305 thousand from the
issuance of 8,142 preferred B2 shares as a result of a capital increase. Transaction cost of €503 thousand have been deducted
from the share premium. Additionally, upon the conversion of the 2019 convertible loans 6,705 shares were issued which
resulted in an increase of €68,116 thousand in share premium. These increases were offset by a decrease of €763 thousand as a
result of the buyback of 72 shares during 2020. Prior to January 1, 2019 transaction cost relating to the issuance of series A and
B1 shares amounted to €993 thousand.
Other capital reserves consist of the impact of the conversion of convertible loans to equity and share-based payments
reserve. Convertible loans issued in May 2019 and October 2019 resulted in a capital contribution amounting to
€3,981 thousand as the conversion feature qualifies as an embedded equity derivative which was separated from the host
contract at initial recognition. Additionally, a new convertible loan issued in March 2020 resulted in a capital contribution
amounting to €34,084 thousand as the cash received exceeded the initial fair value of the convertible loan by this amount. Since
the lender of this convertible loan was also a


F-25
shareholder, this difference has been considered as a capital contribution. The share-based payments reserve is used to recognise
the value of equity-settled share-based payments provided to employees, including key management personnel, as part of their
remuneration. Refer to note 20 for further details of these plans.
Treasury shares represent the amount paid or payable for own shares held in treasury. During 2020, Lilium reacquired 72 of
its own shares from its co-founders through a share buy-back. This reduced subscribed capital by €72 and reduced share
premium by €763 thousand.
Accumulated loss contains the accumulation of results of operations from previous years.
20. Share-based Payments
Description of the ESOP
The Group maintains an Employee Stock Option Program (“ESOP”), originally established in 2017, which allows for the
issuance of options to purchase ordinary shares to its employees and certain advisors. Share options typically follow a vesting
schedule over a four-year period. 25% will vest after the one-year anniversary of the applicable vesting commencement data
(the “Cliff Period”) and then monthly thereafter on a graded vesting basis through the end of the vesting period. Individuals
must continue to provide services to a Group entity in order to vest. Upon termination, all unvested options are forfeited. There
is no contractual life for the share options provided in the contract.
Options allocated and earned will be settled by Lilium in cash or equity shares if an exit event occurs (e.g. share purchase,
asset purchase, initial public offering (“IPO”). In case of an exit event, the Company will notify the participants two weeks in
advance of the exit event informing them of the number of vested options held by the participant and the deadline to exercise
such vested options, which must be at least two weeks (the “exercise period”). The participants may only exercise the vested
portion of their options upon an exit event and within the exercise period specified in the notice. If a participant does not
exercise the vested portion of such participant´s options or if the exit notification is not duly submitted, the vested portion of the
participant´s options may be settled in cash. Furthermore, the Company has the choice to settle the award in cash even if the
participant timely exercises such options. Any options that are unvested as of the date of an exit event (“Accelerated Options”)
will cliff vest after a period of 24 months starting from the exit event, or upon an earlier termination of service initiated by the
Company without good cause. The Accelerated Options will be forefeited if, prior to vesting, the participant’s service is
terminated by the Company for good cause or due to person-related or conduct-related reasons according to German labour law.
The manner of settlement in the form of cash or shares under the original terms of the ESOP implemented in 2017 (the
“2017 ESOP”) was at the election of the holders and, accordingly, options granted under the 2017 ESOP were classified as cash-
settled. In November 2020, the Company modified certain terms and conditions of the 2017 ESOP (the “2020 ESOP”), which
included modifications to the manner of settlement and stipulated that the Company has the discretion to determine the form of
settlement of the options. Furthermore, the definition of an exit event was extended to include an indirect IPO, such as a merger
of the Company into a publicly-traded shell company, if certain additional conditions are met.
Letters were sent to all holders of options granted under the 2017 ESOP and each such holder was asked to provide
acceptance of the amendments before the end of December 2020. Options granted to participants who were U.S. resident
taxpayers at the time of grant were also revised to clarify that such awards would be functionally treated as restricted stock units
for U.S. tax purposes, and such options would be automatically settled to the extent vested upon an exit event that occurs within
eight years of the grant date, and would continue to be automatically settled on each vesting date. As of December 31, 2020,
89% of the holders of options granted under the 2017 ESOP accepted the terms of the modification, which triggered a change in
the accounting treatment from cash-settled to equity-settled. Consequently, these options were remeasured at the modification
date fair value and the liability was transferred to equity.
The remaining options continue to be classified as cash-settled awards. The settlement of these cash-settled awards is
dependent upon an exit event, which is not probable as of December 31, 2020. The liability amounting to €6,948 thousand has
been recognized as a contingent liability (refer to note 27). The carrying amount of the liability for the 2017 ESOP at
December 31, 2020 was €0 thousand (December 31, 2019: €21,083 thousand; January 1, 2019: €13,203 thousand). The intrinsic
value of the liability for options vested at December 31, 2020 was €0 thousand (December 31, 2019: €12,890 thousand;
January 1, 2019: €6,554 thousand).
The grant date fair value of the equity-settled options was estimated for those participants who received options under the
2020 ESOP or who signed the revised agreement as of the reporting date which resulted in a capital reserve of €71,399 thousand
as of December 31, 2020.


F-26
The expense recognized for participant services received during the year is shown in the following table:
In € thousand
    
2020
    
2019
Expense arising from equity-settled share-based payments
 
—  
—
Expense arising from cash-settled share-based payments
 
50,316  
7,880
The weighted average fair value of options granted during the year was €16,949 thousand (2019: €8,726 thousand). The
exercise price for all options is €1.
Movements during the year
The following table illustrates the number and weighted average exercise prices (“WAEP”) of, and movements in, share
options during the year:
Equity-settled options:
    
2020
    
    
2019
    
Number of
2020
Number of
2019
(in units)
options
WAEP
options
WAEP
Outstanding at January 1
 
—  
—  
—  
—
Granted during the year
 
—  
—  
—  
—
Forfeited during the year
 
—  
—  
—  
—
Transferred from cash-settled
 
4,887  
1  
—  
—
Outstanding at December 31
 
4,887  
1  
—  
—
Cash-settled options:
    
2020
    
    
2019
    
Number of
2020
Number of
2019
(in units)
options
WAEP
options
WAEP
Outstanding at January 1
 
5,108  
1  
3,772  
1
Granted during the year
 
980  
1  
1,467  
1
Forfeited during the year
 
(379) 
1  
(131) 
1
Transferred to Equity-settled
 
(4,887) 
1  
—  
—
Outstanding at December 31
 
822  
1  
5,108  
1
Total options vested during the year were 1,326 options (2019: 1,055 options). As of December 31, 2020, and 2019, and
January 1, 2019, none of the options granted under the ESOP are exercisable and/or eligible to be settled because an exit event
has not occurred.
Measurement of fair values
The following table lists the inputs to the models used for the ESOP for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019,
respectively:
     12/31/2020      12/31/2019      01/01/2019  
Discount for lack of marketability
 
5 %  
10 %  
10 %
Expected volatility (%)
 
154 %  
116 %  
101 %
Probability of direct IPO
 
0 %  
50 %  
60 %
Probability of indirect IPO
 
60 %  
0 %  
0 %
Probability of other scenarios
 
40 %  
50 %  
40 %
The expected volatility was based on an evaluation of the historical volatilities of comparable listed peer group companies.
It reflects the assumption that the historical volatility is indicative of future trends, which may not necessarily be the actual
outcome. Other common inputs to option pricing models such as discount rate, dividends expected and expected term are not
significant due to the low exercise price.
The fair value of the options at December 31, 2020 was derived from the estimated equity value of Lilium on that date
because the beneficiary is entitled to shares of Lilium for a nominal amount in the case of an exit event. The value of the
common shares was


F-27
derived by applying a market approach on the basis of external financing rounds and an expected financing round valuation.
With regards to the financing rounds, the liquidation preferences of the Seed shares, Series A, B1 and B2 shares (as described in
note 19, Equity) were taken into account. A hybrid model between option pricing method and probability-weighted expected
return method was used for the valuation. This led to a fair value of €17,297 per share at December 31, 2020.
The fair value of the options at December 31, 2019 was estimated based on the valuations underlying the financing rounds
as this was the best indicator of the fair value at that time. For this purpose, the capital structure of each financing round based
on the seniority level and the liquidation preferences of the shares was considered using an option pricing method by applying
the backsolve model. This led to a fair value of €5,949 per share at December 31, 2019.
The fair value of the options at January 1, 2019 was similar to the approach applied for 2019, with the exception that a
linear interpolation was performed for the equity value of the Company between two financing rounds. This led to a fair value
of €5,893 per share at January 1, 2019.
Performance-based equity award
The Group has granted a performance-based equity award to a certain key management personnel as a bonus for successful
fundraising which is accounted for as equity-settled. Upon successful financing, the recipient will receive a variable number of
shares equal to an agreed percentage of the fundraising capital based upon the post-round valuation, capped at specific
maximum funding amount. The compensation expense for awards with performance-based vesting conditions is recognized
over the remaining service period when management determines that achievement of the performance condition is probable. The
compensation cost of €591 thousand (2019: €­
0 thousand) is recorded in the general and administrative expenses.
21. Convertible Loans and Other Financial Liabilities
Convertible loans and other financial liabilities are as follows:
in € thousand
     12/31/2020      12/31/2019      01/01/2019
Other non-current financial liabilities
 
27  
—  
—
Other current financial liabilities
 
21  
25  
37
Convertible loans – host
 
84,287  
66,353  
n/a
Convertible loans – embedded derivative
 
14,948  
—  
n/a
Convertible loans
 
99,235  
66,353  
n/a
On May 16, 2019 the Group entered into a loan convertible to equity for an amount of €60,000 thousand. The loan bears
5% accruing interest and matures after fifteen months, or earlier upon the occurrence of certain conversion or termination
events.
On October 16, 2019 the Group entered into a loan convertible to equity for an amount of €5,500 thousand. The loan bears
5% interest and matures after fifteen months or earlier upon the occurrence of certain conversion or termination events. As the
loan was agreed with the same conditions for the new lenders as for the lenders of the first tranche in May 2019, but market
conditions changed in the meantime, a day one loss occurred that was considered as part of the carrying amount of the loan.
Both loans were converted into equity in March 2020 before maturity (see note 19).
On March 11, 2020 the Group entered into a new loan convertible to equity for an amount of €85,900 thousand. The loan
bears 2% accrued interest and matures on March 11, 2027, or earlier upon the occurrence of certain conversion or termination
events. At initial recognition, a day one gain for the Group in the amount of €34,084 thousand incurred, as the consideration
received exceeded the initial fair value of the convertible loan by this amount. As the lender is a shareholder at the same time,
this amount was considered as additional capital contribution to the Group and was therefore recognized in equity without
subsequent measurement.
The initial fair value of the convertible loans (including embedded derivatives) was determined by aggregating the
valuations for the various expected conversion and termination events. Since all conversion events would lead to a conversion
for a set fixed conversion price (however, for a variable number of shares), the value is derived as a forward contract embedded
in the loan contract. The primary inputs used in the model include the share price at valuation date, probability of occurrence as
well as expected timing of each possible conversion and termination event, borrower-specific credit spread and risk-free interest
rate. Credit risk is model-implied and adjusted for movement in a credit spread to consider the investor’s higher risk in
connection with a convertible instrument at each initial valuation date, and the risk-free interest rate is based on currency
specific time congruent IBOR and swap rates. As probability of occurrence and expected timing of each relevant event as well
as credit spreads were not observable in the market at


F-28
initial recognition, especially these input parameters were highly judgemental. The following tables show the effect of
reasonable changes of these input parameters on the initial fair value of the convertible loan (host contract) and the resulting
equity effect as of March 11, 2020 (for the convertible loans issued in 2019, the hypothetical initial fair values would not
significantly differ if unobservable input parameters were changed).
in € thousand
    
Fair value     
Effect on
March 11, 2020
host contract
capital contribution
Base
 
52,090  
  
Conversion 1 year later
 
43,678  
8,412
Conversion 1 year earlier
 
61,582  
(9,492)
in € thousand
    
Fair value     
Effect on
March 11, 2020
host contract
capital contribution
Base
 
52,090  
  
credit spread +10%
49,558  
2,532
credit spread -10%
54,819  
(2,730)
The Group assessed that the entire instrument is a liability and there is no component to be bifurcated as equity because
some conversion features of the loan lead to a conversion into a variable number of shares and are not under the control of the
Group. Instead, some of the embedded conversion and prepayment features were bifurcated and separately measured as one
combined derivative financial liability at fair value through profit or loss, since they share the same risk exposure and are
interdependent. The remaining debt component is measured as liability at amortized cost until it is converted into equity or
becomes due for repayment.
22. Provisions
Movement in provisions during the year is as follows:
    
  
    
  
     Unwinding     
  
of discount
and changes
in discount
In € thousand
12/31/2019
Additions
rate
12/31/2020
Provision for asset retirement obligations
 
124  
44  
7  
175
Record retention obligations
 
39  
4  
—  
43
Total non-current provisions
 
163  
48  
7  
218
Provisions for severance payment
 
—  
80  
—  
80
Total current provisions
 
—  
80  
—  
80
Asset retirement obligations originate from the Company’s lease contracts (refer to note 16) and they are expected to incur
in May 2027 at the lease contract end. Severance payments are expected to be paid to two former employees.
23. Post-Employment Benefits
Defined contribution plans
The Group participates in defined contribution plans in the UK and Germany and are funded through payments by
employees and by the Group to funds administered by third parties.
The Group’s expenses for these plans were €296 thousand (2019: €172 thousand). No assets or liabilities are recognised in
the Group’s balance sheet in respect of such plans, apart from regular prepayments and accruals of the contributions withheld
from employees’ wages and salaries and of the Group’s contributions. Contributions totalling €28 thousand (2019:
€18 thousand) were payable to the fund at the reporting date and are included in creditors.
Defined benefit plans
Corporate post-retirement benefits are provided by the Group in Switzerland in accordance with local law through defined
benefit plans. Current pension arrangements for employees in Switzerland are made through plans governed by the Swiss
Federal Occupational Old Age, Survivors and Disability Pension Act (‘BVG’). The Group’s pension plans are administered by
separate legal foundations, which are funded by regular employee and Company contributions. The final benefit is contribution
based with certain guarantees regarding the benefits provided. Due to these guarantees, such Swiss pension plans are treated as
defined benefit plans. In


F-29
case the pension foundation becomes underfunded the employer together with the employees can be obliged to refinance a plan
until the funding level has reached again 100%. Such measures might include increasing employee and Company contributions,
lowering the interest rate on retirement account balances, reducing prospective benefits and a suspension of the early withdrawal
facility. The Group in Switzerland is currently affiliated to a fully reinsured collective pension foundation which cannot become
underfunded as all risks are reinsured with a life insurance company. However, the company is exposed to certain refinancing
risk in the future as the current affiliation contract can be cancelled or amended by both contractual parties.
The present value of the defined benefit obligations and the fair value of the plan assets is as follows:
In € thousand
     12/31/2020      12/31/2019      01/01/2019
Present value of funded obligations
 
433  
304  
18
Fair value of plan assets
 
240  
178  
10
Total post-employment benefit obligations
 
193  
126  
8
Reconciliation of the net defined benefit liability:
In € thousand
    
2020
    
2019
Net defined liability at January 1
 
126  
8
Defined benefit cost recognized in consolidated statement of operations
 
48  
21
Defined benefit cost recognized in other comprehensive income
 
44  
114
Employer contributions
 
(25) 
(20)
Currency effects
 
—  
3
Net defined liability at December 31
 
193  
126
Reconciliation of the amount recognized in the consolidated statement of financial position:
In € thousand
    
2020
    
2019
Employee benefit obligations as of January 1
 
304  
18
Actuarial adjustments
 
44  
87
thereof: experience adjustments
 
28  
64
thereof: adjustments for financial assumptions
 
16  
23
Current service cost
 
45  
19
Interest expense
 
1  
1
Currency effects
 
0  
8
Employee contributions
 
25  
20
Benefits paid
 
14  
151
Employee benefit obligations recognized as of December 31
 
433  
304
Reconciliation of the plan assets:
In € thousand
    
2020
    
2019
Fair value of plan assets as of January 1
 
178  
10
Employer contributions
 
25  
20
Employee contributions
 
25  
20
Benefits paid
 
14  
151
Administration expenses
 
(3) 
(2)
Return on asset excl. interest income
 
(0)  
(27)
Interest income
 
1  
1
Currency effects
 
—  
5
Fair value of plan assets as of December 31
 
240  
178
The plan assets are primarily comprised of retirement savings accounts of participants. These retirement savings are 100%
funded with qualifying insurance policies as the foundation has reinsured all of its liabilities with a life insurer.


F-30
The expense recognized in the consolidated statements of operations and other comprehensive income is made up as
follows:
In € thousand
    
2020
    
2019
Actuarial gains (-) / losses (+) deriving from changes in financial assumptions  
16  
23
Actuarial gains (-) / losses (+) deriving from experience adjustments
 
28  
64
Return on plan assets exc, interest income
 
—  
27
Included in other comprehensive income
 
44  
114
Current service cost
 
45  
19
Interest income
 
(1) 
(1)
Administrative expenses (effective)
 
3  
2
Interest expense
 
1  
1
Included in the consolidated statements of operations
 
48  
21
Total included in the consolidated statements of operations and other
comprehensive income
 
92  
135
The current service cost is included as part of personnel costs within the respective functional area; interest cost relating to
the obligation is a component of the result from financing activities.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, the Group expects to make payment contributions of €46 thousand.
The following were the principal actuarial assumptions as of:
     12/31/2020    
12/31/2019    
01/01/2019 
Future salary increases
 
1.00 %  
1.00 %  
1.00 %
Inflation rate
 
0.20 %  
0.20 %  
0.20 %
Future pension increases
 
0.00 %  
0.00 %  
0.00 %
Discount rate
 
0.15 %  
0.35 %  
0.80 %
Sensitivity Analysis
The main actuarial assumptions that are used to calculate the provisions for post-employment benefits are the discount rate
and the trend for future increases in post-employment benefit obligations. A reasonably possible increase, or respectively
decrease, in the significant actuarial assumptions would have had the following impact on the present value of the post-
employment benefit obligations as of the respective reporting dates:
    
2020
    
2019
    
2020
    
2019
 
Discount rate
 
0.25 %  
0.25 %  
(0.25)%  
(0.25)%
Present value of the post-employment benefit obligations (in € thousand)
 
414  
290  
455  
319
Salary increase
 
0.25 %  
0.25 %  
(0.25)%  
(0.25)%
Present value of the post-employment benefit obligations (in € thousand)
 
434  
304  
433  
304
Pension increase
 
0.25 %  
0.25 %  
(0.25)%  
(0.25)%
Present value of the post-employment benefit obligations (in € thousand)
 
446  
313  
—  
—
Duration
The average duration of the obligations is 19 years (December 31, 2019: 19 years).
Expected Benefit Payments
December 31, 2020
Financial years
    
2021
    
2022-2025     
2026-2030
Expected benefit payments (in € thousand)
 
12  
69  
229
Total expected benefit payments (in € thousand)
 
12  
69  
229


F-31
December 31, 2019
Financial years
    
2020
    
2021-2024     
2025-2029
Expected benefit payments (in € thousand)
 
8  
38  
152
Total expected benefit payments (in € thousand)
 
8  
38  
152
24. Trade and other Payables
Trade and other payables are as followed:
In € thousand
    
12/31/2020     
12/31/2019     
01/01/2019
Trade payables
 
4,854  
2,579  
2,624
Accruals for outstanding invoices
 
6,238  
216  
27
Total trade and other payables
 
11,092  
2,795  
2,651
25. Other Non-Financial Liabilities
Other non-financial liabilities are as followed:
In € thousand
    
12/31/2020     
12/31/2019     
01/01/2019
Vacation accruals
 
1,680  
1,173  
602
Value added tax payables
 
1,477  
—  
—
Other tax liabilities
 
1,455  
1,021  
421
Miscellaneous other current non-financial liabilities
 
585  
401  
154
Total other non-financial liabilities
 
5,197  
2,595  
1,177
Other tax liabilities mainly comprise of personnel-related taxes. This also includes an uncertain tax position for personnel-
related taxes. Miscellaneous other non-financial liabilities mainly result from personnel-related liabilities.
26. Financial Instruments
26.1Carrying Amounts and Fair Value
The following tables disclose the carrying amounts of each class of financial instruments together with its corresponding
fair value and the aggregated carrying amount per category.
Financial instruments, analyzed by classes and categories
12/31/2020
    
    
Carrying
    
In € thousand
Category
amount
Fair value
Financial assets, by class
Cash and cash equivalents
 
AC  
102,144  
n/a
Fixed term deposit
 
AC  
50,000  
n/a
Promissory notes
 
FVTPL  
676  
676
Security deposits
 
AC  
2,096  
2,096
Other financial assets
 
AC  
16  
16
Total financial assets
 
154,932  
  
Financial liabilities, by class
 
  
Trade and other payables
 
AC  
11,092  
n/a
Convertible loans – host contract
 
AC  
84,287  
105,007
Convertible loans – embedded derivative
 
FVTPL  
14,948  
14,948
Other financial liabilities
 
AC  
48  
48
Total financial liabilities
 
110,375


F-32
    
Carrying
Thereof aggregated to categories according to IFRS 9
amount
Financial assets measured at amortised cost (AC)
 
154,256
Financial assets measured at FVTPL
 
676
Financial liabilities measured at FVTPL
 
14,948
Financial liabilities measured at amortised cost (AC)
 
95,427
Financial instruments, analyzed by classes and categories
12/31/2019
    
    
Carrying
    
In € thousand
Category
amount
Fair value
Financial assets, by class
Cash and cash equivalents
 
AC  
59,571  
n/a
Promissory notes
 
FVTPL  
n/a  
n/a
Security deposits
 
AC  
910  
910
Other financial assets
 
AC  
12  
12
Total financial assets
 
60,493
Financial liabilities, by class
Trade and other payables
 
AC  
2,795  
n/a
Convertible loans – host contract
 
AC  
66,353  
76,189
Convertible loans – embedded derivative
 
FVTPL  
n/a  
n/a
Other financial liabilities
 
AC  
25  
25
Total financial liabilities
 
69,173
    
Carrying
Thereof aggregated to categories according to IFRS 9
amount
Financial assets measured at amortised cost (AC)
 
60,493
Financial assets measured at FVTPL
 
n/a
Financial liabilities measured at FVTPL
 
n/a
Financial liabilities measured at amortised cost (AC)
 
69,173
Financial instruments, analyzed by classes and categories
01/01/2019
    
    
Carrying
    
In € thousand
Category
amount
Fair value
Financial assets, by class
 
   
   
  
Cash and cash equivalents
 
AC  
47,139  
n/a
Security deposits
 
AC  
189  
189
Other financial assets
 
AC  
31  
31
Total financial assets
 
47,359  
  
Financial liabilities, by class
 
   
   
  
Trade and other payables
 
AC  
2,651  
n/a
Convertible loans – host contract
 
AC  
n/a  
n/a
Convertible loans – embedded derivative
 
FVTPL  
n/a  
n/a
Other financial liabilities
 
AC  
37  
n/a
Total financial liabilities
 
2,688  
  
    
Carrying
Thereof aggregated to categories according to IFRS 9
amount
Financial assets measured at amortised cost (AC)
 
47,359
Financial assets measured at FVTPL
 
n/a
Financial liabilities measured at FVTPL
 
n/a
Financial liabilities measured at amortised cost (AC)
 
2,688
Except for the promissory notes and the convertible loans (both host contract and embedded derivative), which are
categorized in level 3 of the fair value hierarchy, all other financial instruments are categorized in level 2 of the fair value
hierarchy.


F-33
Fair Values in level 2 are expected cashflows discounted using market-based credit risk adjusted interest rate curves that are
applicable for the Group and specific for the residual term of each financial instrument.
The fair value of the promissory notes is calculated using a trinomial tree approach, set to optional conversion at an
expected date. The primary inputs used in the model include the borrower’s share price at valuation date, probability of
occurrence of each possible conversion and termination event, borrower-specific credit risk and risk-free interest rate. While the
risk-free interest rate is based on currency specific time congruent IBOR and swap rates, the credit risk and stock prices of the
borrower are not observable in a market and therefore highly judgemental. For a sensitivity of the fair value to reasonable
changes of the borrower’s share price, see note 26.2.
The fair value of the embedded derivatives that were bifurcated from the convertible loan issued in 2020 is determined by
aggregating the valuations for the various expected conversion and termination events. Since all events would lead to a
conversion for a set fixed conversion price (however, for a variable number of shares), the value is derived as a forward contract
embedded in the loan contract. The primary inputs used in the model include the own share price at valuation date, probability
of occurrence of each possible conversion and termination event, borrower-specific credit spread and risk-free interest rate.
Credit risk is model-implied and adjusted for movement in credit spreads to consider the investor’s higher risk in connection
with this convertible instrument at each valuation date, and the risk-free interest rate is based on currency specific time
congruent IBOR and swap rates. As credit spreads and stock prices are not observable in a market, especially these input
parameters are highly judgemental. The following tables show the effect of reasonable changes of the most significant input
parameters on the fair values of the embedded derivatives as of December 31, 2020.
Effect on
in € thousand
    
Value
     financial
December 31, 2020
     Share Price
derivative     
result
Base
 
0 %   14,948  
  
Up
 
10 %   18,815  
(3,867)
Down
 
(10)%   11,081  
3,867
    
Effect on
in € thousand
Value
financial
December 31, 2020
     Credit Spread
derivative      Result
Base
 
0 %   14,948  
  
Up
 
10 %   14,282  
666
Down
 
(10)%   15,646  
(698)
Financial instruments, changes in Fair Value of level 3 instruments
Convertible loan –
embedded
In € thousand
     Promissory Notes     
derivative
January 1, 2019
 
—  
—
Initial recognition
 
—  
516
Changes from fair value remeasurement
 
—  
(516)
December 31, 2019
 
—  
—
Initial recognition
 
622  
(274)
Changes from fair value remeasurement
 
58  
15,222
Foreign exchange effects
 
(4) 
—
December 31, 2020
 
676  
14,948


F-34
The net gains and losses for each of the financial instrument measurement categories were as follows:
Subsequent measurement
Foreign
Increase
Reversals 
2020
exchange
in loss
of loss
Total per
In € thousand
    
Interest
     conversion      Fair value      allowance      allowance      category
Financial assets measured at amortized cost
(83) 
—  
—  
—  
—  
(83)
Financial liabilities measured at amortized cost
(33,960) 
(98) 
—  
—  
—  
(34,058)
Financial assets and liabilities measured at fair value
through profit or loss
—  
(4) 
(15,164) 
—  
—  
(15,168)
Total
(34,043) 
(102) 
(15,164) 
—  
—  
(49,309)
Subsequent measurement
Foreign
Increase
Reversals
2019
exchange
in loss
of loss
Total per
In € thousand
    
Interest
     conversion      Fair value      allowance      allowance      category
Financial assets measured at amortized cost
 
(39) 
—  
—  
—  
—  
(39)
Financial liabilities measured at amortized cost
 
(5,350) 
(38) 
—  
—  
—  
(5,388)
Financial assets and liabilities measured at fair value
through profit or loss
 
—  
—  
516  
—  
—  
516
Total
 
(5,389) 
(38) 
516  
—  
—  
(4,911)
The total interest income for financial assets that are not measured at fair value through profit or loss is €18 thousand (2019:
€0 thousand), while the total interest expense for these financial assets is €101 thousand (2019: €40 thousand). The total interest
expense for financial liabilities that are not measured at fair value through profit or loss is €33,960 thousand (2019:
€5,350 thousand).
26.2Financial Instrument Risk Management Objectives and Policies
The Group is exposed especially to market risk (especially foreign exchange risk) and liquidity risk. The Group’s senior
management oversees the management of these risks. Credit risk and equity price risk is considered insignificant for the Group.
The CFO in combination with Treasury provides assurance to the Group’s senior management that the Group’s financial
risk activities are governed by appropriate procedures and that financial risks are identified, measured and managed in
accordance with the Group’s risk objectives. The Executive Board reviews and agrees procedures for managing each of these
risks, which are summarized below.
Management regularly reviews the Group’s risk management objectives to ensure that risks are identified and managed
appropriately. The Executive Board is made aware of and reviews management’s risk assessments prior to entering into
significant transactions.
Credit Risk
The following tables provide information about the exposures to credit risk for all financial assets that are not measured at
fair value through profit or loss and therefore are generally subject to the impairment regulations of IFRS 9. The most
significant part is cash or cash equivalents. Due to its short-term character, no significant credit risk arises, and therefore no
impairment has been recorded for 2020 and 2019 respectively.
Gross
Impairment
Equivalent to external
Weighted-average
carrying
loss
12/31/2020
in € thousand
    
credit rating S&P
    
loss rate
    
amount
    
allowance
     Credit-impaired
Grades 1-6: Low risk
 
BBB- to AAA
 
—  
154,256  
—  
No
Gross
Impairment
Equivalent to external
Weighted-average
carrying
loss
12/31/2019
in € thousand
    
credit rating S&P
    
loss rate
    
amount
    
allowance
     Credit-impaired
Grades 1-6: Low risk
 
BBB- to AAA
 
—  
60,493  
—  
No


F-35
Gross
Impairment
Equivalent to external
Weighted-average
carrying
loss
01/01/2019
in € thousand
    
credit rating S&P
    
loss rate
    
amount
    
allowance
     Credit-impaired
Grades 1-6: Low risk
BBB- to AAA
—
47,359
—
No
Equity Price Risk
The Group has invested into promissory notes in 2020 with a total nominal amount of €627 thousand ($750 thousand, for
details see note 17), whose fair value depends (among other variables) on the share price of the investee. A reasonably possible
increase (decrease) in the share price by 10%, with all other variables held constant, would lead to a gain (loss) before tax of
€73 thousand with a corresponding effect in the financial result.
While the fair value of the convertible loans is sensitive to a change in the Group’s own share price (see sensitivity analysis
in note 26.1), this is no economic risk for the Group as an increase or decline in the Group’s own share price will not lead to
additional cash outflows at the time of the conversion.
Foreign Currency Risk
The Group operates globally and is exposed to foreign exchange risk arising from exposure to various currencies in the
ordinary course of business. The Group’s exposures primarily consist of the British pound (“GBP”), Swiss Franc (“CHF”), US
Dollar (“USD”) and Euro (“EUR”). Foreign exchange risk mainly arises from commercial transactions that resulted in
recognized financial assets and liabilities denominated in a currency other than the local functional currency.
The following tables demonstrate the sensitivity to a reasonably possible change in foreign exchange rates (i.e. the currency
that is not the functional currency), with all other variables held constant. The impact on the Group’s profit or loss before tax is
due to changes in the carrying amount of monetary assets and liabilities.
The following table presents the sensitivity of a change in EUR for Lilium Aviation UK Ltd (functional currency: GBP):
    
    
Change on profit before tax
EUR per GBP
Change in EUR rate
(in € thousand)
2020
 
+10% = Rate: 1.2235  
33
Rate: 1.1123
 
-10% = Rate: 1.0011  
(40)
2019
 
+10% = Rate: 1.2929  
13
Rate: 1.1754
 
-10% = Rate: 1.0578  
(16)
The following tables present the sensitivity of a change in material foreign currencies for the Group entities where the
functional currency is EUR:
    
    
Change on profit before tax
USD per EUR
Change in USD rate
(in € thousand)
2020
 
+10% = Rate: 1.3498  
(47)
Rate: 1.2271
 
-10% = Rate: 1.1044  
58
2019
 
+10% = Rate: 1.2357  
4
Rate: 1.1234
 
-10% = Rate: 1.0111  
(5)
Liquidity Risk
Liquidity risk is the risk that the Group will encounter difficulty in meeting its obligations associated with its financial
liabilities as they fall due. The Group is expanding very rapidly which results in increasingly stringent requirements regarding
the corporate planning for budgeting and procuring of financial resources in such a way that the development program of the
Lilium Jet is not delayed. Consequently, the continuation of development is based on the Group’s ability to raise financing from
investors in the form of various financing rounds. The Group ensures that the supply of liquidity is always sufficient to settle
financial liabilities that are due for payment. Liquidity is evaluated and maintained using forecasts based on fixed planning
horizons covering several months and through the cash and cash equivalent balances that are available.


F-36
The following table provides details of the (undiscounted) cash outflows of financial liabilities (including interest
payments). Note that the Group expects the convertible loans to be settled in own equity instruments. Therefore, the probability
of an outflow of the below disclosed cash amount is remote.
    
  
    
  
    
  
    
12/31/2020
in € thousand
2021
2022
2023 to 2025
2026 and thereafter
Lease liabilities
 
2,006  
1,962  
5,767  
2,869
Convertible loans
 
88,013  
—  
—  
—
Trade and other payables
 
11,092  
—  
—  
—
Other financial liabilities
 
21  
27  
—  
—
    
  
    
  
    
  
    
12/31/2019
in € thousand
2020
2021
2022 to 2024
2025 and thereafter
Lease liabilities
 
1,417  
1,420  
4,088  
3,133
Convertible loans
 
138,970  
—  
—  
—
Trade and other payables
 
2,795  
—  
—  
—
Other financial liabilities
 
25  
—  
—  
—
Interest Rate Risk
Interest rate risk is the risk that the fair value or future cash flows of a financial instrument will fluctuate because of
changes in market interest rates. Interest rate risks from financial instruments can in general arise in connection with financial
liabilities, including borrowings under the Group’s existing working capital and equipment financing facilities. Fixed rate
securities may have their market value adversely impacted due to a rise in interest rates. Our cash equivalents and investment
portfolio can also be subject to market risk due to changes in interest rates. The Group is required to pay negative interest on
cash accounts if and to the extent certain thresholds are exceeded. Banks are adjusting the negative interest rate depending on
changes of the respective reference rates set by central banks, but not necessarily immediately after a reference rate has been
changed and not necessarily to the same extent. Considering existing thresholds, a hypothetical reasonable increase or decrease
of 10 basis points in interest rates would not have a significant effect on the Group’s financial statements.
Capital Management
For the purpose of the Group’s capital management, capital includes all share capital and other equity reserves attributable
to the equity holders. The primary objectives of capital management are to support operating activities and maximize the
shareholder value through investment in the development activities of the Group.
Based on the ongoing development of the Lilium Jet, the Company has to rely almost exclusively on equity funding by its
shareholders and debt financing until the Group can refinance itself in the future from marketable products as a result of
successful development projects. The Group’s finance department reviews the total amount of cash of the Group on a monthly
basis. As part of this review, management considers the total cash and cash equivalents, the cash outflow, currency translation
differences and funding activities. The Group monitors cash using a burn rate. The cash burn rate is defined as the
average monthly net cash flow from operating and investing activities during a financial year.
The Company is not subject to externally imposed capital requirements. The objectives of the Group’s capital management
were achieved in the reporting year. No changes were made in the objectives, policies or processes for managing cash during
the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019.


F-37
26.3Reconciliation of changes in liabilities arising from financing activities
     Convertible     
Lease
    
In € thousand
loans
liabilities
Total
Statement of Financial Position as of December 31, 2019
 
66,353  
8,715  
75,068
Proceeds from convertible loans
 
85,900  
—  
85,900
Principal elements of lease payments
 
—  
(1,439) 
(1,439)
Interest paid
 
—  
(450) 
(450)
Change in the cash flow from financing activities
 
85,900  
(1,889) 
84,011
Additions to lease liabilities due to new lease contracts
 
—  
3,842  
3,842
Fair value changes
 
15,222  
—  
15,222
Interest expenses
 
33,960  
450  
34,410
Capital contributions
 
(102,200) 
—  
(102,200)
Statement of Financial Position as of December 31, 2020
 
99,235  
11,118  
110,353
     Convertible     
Lease
    
In € thousand
loans
liabilities
Total
Statement of Financial Position as of January 1, 2019
 
—  
7,036  
7,036
Proceeds from convertible loans
 
65,500  
—  
65,500
Principal elements of lease payment
 
—  
(854) 
(854)
Interest paid
 
—  
(341) 
(341)
Change in the cash flow from financing activities
 
65,500  
(1,195) 
64,305
Additions to lease liabilities due to new lease contracts
 
—  
2,533  
2,533
Fair value changes
 
(516) 
 
(516)
Interest expenses
 
5,350  
341  
5,691
Capital contributions
 
(3,981) 
 
(3,981)
Statement of Financial Position as of December 31, 2019
 
66,353  
8,715  
75,068
27. Commitments and Contingencies
The Company has various lease contracts that have not yet commenced as at December 31, 2020. The future lease
payments for these non-cancellable lease contracts are €249 thousand within one year, €1,174 thousand between one and
five years and €848 thousand thereafter.
As mentioned in the note 20, 11% of the ESOP participants have not signed the 2020 ESOP as of December 31, 2020 and
are still classified as cash-settled options. Based on the contract terms, the liability for such options is settled upon occurrence of
an exit event. As of December 31, 2020, the exit event is not probable in the near future. Therefore, the liability is classified as
contingent depending upon the determination of an exit event in the future amounting to €6,948 thousand. The liability is
calculated based on the vesting schedule per contract terms and which will be assessed continually to determine whether
circumstances have changed, and the exit event becomes probable.
Further, the Company has commitments of €2.4 million to acquire items of property, plant & equipment and commitments
of €0.6 million to acquire items of intangible assets.
28. Related Party Disclosures
Transactions with Key Management
Key management personnel have been defined as the members of the Advisory Board and Senior Leadership Team of
Lilium. The Company had entered into a short-term consultancy contract with one of the key management personnel before his
appointment as an employee; total remuneration paid amounted to €66 thousand (2019: €0 thousand). During 2020, the
Company purchased 18 shares each from the four co-founders for a total consideration of EUR 763 thousand (2019:
€0 thousand). These shares were reacquired at fair value.


F-38
The annual remuneration and related compensation costs recognized as expense during the reporting period is comprised of
the following:
In € thousand
    
2020
    
2019
Short-term employee benefits
 
1,966  
1,219
Share-based payment remuneration (2020: 1,484 options; 2019: 1,400
options)
 
14,875  
1,835
Short-term benefits
Short-term benefits include salaries, bonus and other benefits such as medical, death and disability coverage, Company car
and other usual facilities as applicable.
Share-based payment remuneration
The share-based payment remuneration represents the compensation cost of ESOP and the performance-based equity
award. Refer to note 20.
Transactions with related parties
During the year ended December 31, 2019, certain related parties having significant influence over the Company
contributed to 271 Series B1 shares at par. Additionally, the Group entered into loans convertible to equity of €48,500 thousand
with related parties having significant influence over the Company. This resulted in an increase of capital reserve of
€50,515 thousand.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, the 2019 loans were converted into 4,972 Series B shares in March 2020. The
Group entered into another loan convertible to equity of €85,900 thousand with a related party having significant influence over
the Company; the entire loan is outstanding as of the reporting date. Additionally, certain related parties having significant
influence over the Company contributed 4,853 Series B2 shares. This resulted in an increase in capital reserve of
€57,998 thousand.
Balances held by entities with significant influence over the Company is as follows:
(In € thousand)
     12/31/2020      12/31/2019      01/01/2019
Share capital
 
35  
25  
25
Capital reserves
 
174,998  
66,479  
66,479
29. Events after the Reporting Period
In January 2021 the Group entered into a new convertible loan convertible to equity for an amount of €1,850 thousand.
On March 10, 2021 entered into a Share Purchase Agreement according to which the Lilium Group acquired 25.72% of the
shares of a development partner for a purchase price of €8,409 thousand ($10,000 thousand).
In March 2021 the Group granted another promissory note for a nominal amount of €1,048 thousand ($1,250 thousand)
with the similar conditions as for the other promissory notes.
On March 26, 2021 the convertible loan of €85,900 thousand and the accrued interest were converted into series B2 shares.
In order to facilitate the transaction the Company issued 7,187 series B2 shares.
On March 30, 2021 Lilium entered into a business combination agreement with Qell Acquisition Corp. (“Qell”), a non-
operating shell company, according to which Lilium and Qell will be merged.
Subsequent to year end, an additional 3.83% of employees signed Letters accepting the modifications to the terms of their
ESOP grants.
30. First-time Adoption of IFRS
These consolidated financial statements, for the year ended December 31, 2020, are the first consolidated financial
statements the Group has prepared in accordance with IFRS. Each legal entity prepared its financial statements in accordance
with local generally accepted accounting principles (“Local GAAP”). Accordingly, the Group has prepared consolidated
financial statements that comply


F-39
with IFRS applicable as of December 31, 2020, together with the comparative period data for the year ended December 31,
2019, as described in the summary of significant accounting policies. In preparing the consolidated financial statements, the
Group’s consolidated opening statement of financial position was prepared as of January 1, 2019, the Group’s date of transition
to IFRS. Historically, consolidated financial statements were not prepared under local GAAP, consequently, these are the first
consolidated financial statements prepared and a reconciliation from Local GAAP to IFRS is not possible.
Exemptions applied
All relevant mandatory exemptions have been applied. Additionally, IFRS 1 allows first-time adopters certain exemptions
from the retrospective application of certain requirements under IFRS.
The Group has applied the exemption to deem cumulative currency translation difference for all foreign operations to be
zero as of January 1, 2019.
The Group assessed all contracts existing at January 1, 2019 to determine whether a contract contains a lease based upon
the conditions in place at the date of transition. Lease liabilities were measured at the present value of the remaining lease
payments, discounted using the lessee’s incremental borrowing rate (“IBR”) and the right-of-use assets were measured at the
amount equal to the lease liabilities. At January 1, 2019, the impact of renewal options that are reasonably certain to be
exercised has been assessed as significant for the Group.
As a lessee, Lilium applied exemptions on a lease-by-lease basis at the date of transition to IFRS as follows:
●
a single discount rate was applied to a portfolio of leases with reasonably similar characteristics;
●
leases with a lease term ending within 12 months of the date of transition were accounted for as if they were short-
term leases;
●
for low value assets, the Group has recognized lease payments as an expense on a straight-line basis over the lease
term;
●
initial direct costs were excluded from the measurement of the right of use asset at the date of transition to IFRS; and
●
hindsight was applied in determining the lease term if the underlying lease contract contains options to extend or
terminate the lease.


F-40
INTERIM CONDENSED CONSOLIDATED STATEMENTS OF OPERATIONS AND OTHER
COMPREHENSIVE INCOME (LOSS)
for the six months ended June 30, 2021 and June 30, 2020
in € thousand
    
Note
    
H1 2021
    
H1 2020
Revenue
 
47  
97
Cost of sales
 
(11) 
(10)
Gross profit
 
36  
87
Research and development expenses
 
[6]
 
(58,762) 
(27,639)
General and administrative expenses
 
[7]
 
(38,718) 
(10,804)
Selling Expenses
 
[8]
 
(6,376) 
(3,487)
Other income
 
153  
2,034
Other expenses
 
(126) 
(51)
Operating loss
 
(103,793) 
(39,860)
Finance income
 
[9]
 
6,810  
—
Finance expenses
 
[9]
 
(13,094) 
(3,577)
Financial result
 
[9]
 
(6,284)  
(3,577)
Share of income / (loss) of an associate
 
[11]  
(201) 
—
Loss before income tax
 
(110,278) 
(43,437)
Income tax expense
 
[10]  
(199) 
(20)
Net loss for the period
 
(110,477) 
(43,457)
Other comprehensive income (loss)
in € thousand
    
Note
    
H1 2021
    
H1 2020
Other comprehensive income that may be reclassified to profit or loss
 
22  
29
Exchange differences on translation of foreign business units
 
22  
29
Items that will not be subsequently reclassified to profit or loss
 
(22) 
(13)
Remearurement of defined pension benefit obligation
 
(22) 
(13)
Other comprehensive income (loss)
 
—  
16
Total consolidated comprehensive loss for the period
 
(110,477) 
(43,441)
Loss per share (basic and diluted) in €
 
(1,508)
(660)
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these interim condensed consolidated financial statements (IFRS).


F-41
INTERIM CONDENSED CONSOLIDATED STATEMENT OF FINANCIAL POSITION
as of June 30, 2021 and December 31, 2020
in € thousand
    
Note
     06/30/2021      12/31/2020
Intangible assets
 
 
1,626
1,372
Property, plant and equipment
 
[12]  
26,918  
22,715
Financial assets
 
2,422  
2,112
Non-financial assets
 
301  
153
Investment in an associate
 
[11]  
8,301  
—
Non-current assets
 
39,568  
26,352
Other financial assets
 
[13]  
2,315  
50,676
Non-financial assets
 
7,890  
5,774
Trade receivables
 
47  
—
Cash and cash equivalents
 
62,736  
102,144
Current assets
 
72,988  
158,594
Total Assets
 
112,556  
184,946
Subscribed capital
 
[14]  
76  
69
Share premium
 
384,086  
253,815
Other capital reserves
 
[14]  
93,896  
110,055
Treasury shares
 
—  
—
Accumulated loss
 
(416,575) 
(306,098)
Accumulated other comprehensive income (loss)
 
(119) 
(119)
Shareholders’ equity
 
61,364  
57,722
Other financial liabilities
 
[16]  
25  
27
Lease liabilities
 
10,064  
9,505
Provisions
 
484  
411
Non-current liabilities
 
10,573  
9,943
Other financial liabilities
 
[16]  
9,391  
21
Lease liabilities
 
1,915  
1,613
Provisions
 
146  
80
Income tax payable
 
224  
43
Convertible loans
 
[16]  
1,986  
99,235
Trade and other payables
 
20,764  
11,092
Other non-financial liabilities
 
6,193  
5,197
Current liabilities
 
40,619  
117,281
Total Shareholders’ Equity and Liabilities
 
112,556  
184,946
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these interim condensed consolidated financial statements (IFRS).


F-42
INTERIM CONDENSED CONSOLIDATED STATEMENT OF CHANGES IN
SHAREHOLDERS’ EQUITY
for the six months ended June 30, 2021 and June 30, 2020
Accumulated other comprehensive income
Remeasurement    
Income taxes
of defined
 
Other 
Currency
relating to other
pension
 
Subscribed 
Share 
capital 
Treasury 
Accumulated 
translation
components of
benefit
 
in € thousand
    Note    
capital
    premium*     reserves      shares     
loss
     reserve     
equity
    
obligation
    Total Equity
January 1, 2020
 
54  
89,660  
3,981  
—  
(117,671) 
3  
—  
(114) 
(24,087)
Net loss for the
period
 
—  
—  
—  
—  
(43,457) 
—  
—  
—  
(43,457)
Other
comprehensive
income and
expenses
 
—  
—  
—  
—  
—  
29  
—  
(13) 
16
Total
comprehensive
income (loss)
 
—  
—  
—  
—  
(43,457) 
29  
—  
(13) 
(43,441)
Convertible loans
[15]  
7  
68,116  
34,084  
—  
—  
—  
—  
—  
102,207
Share capital
increase
 
8  
96,802  
—  
—  
—  
—  
—  
—  
96,810
June 30, 2020
 
69  
254,578  
38,065  
—  
(161,128) 
32  
—  
(127) 
131,489
January 1, 2021
 
69  
253,815  
110,055  
(0)  
(306,098) 
39  
—  
(158) 
57,722
Net loss for the
period
 
—  
—  
—  
—  
(110,477) 
—  
—  
—  
(110,477)
Other
comprehensive
income and
expenses
 
—  
—  
—  
—  
—  
22  
—  
(22) 
—
Total
comprehensive
income (loss)
 
—  
—  
—  
—  
(110,477) 
22  
—  
(22) 
(110,477)
Share-based
payments
[14]  
—  
—  
17,925  
—  
—  
—  
—  
—  
17,925
Convertible loans
[15]  
7  
130,271   (34,084)  
—  
—  
—  
—  
—  
96,194
June 30, 2021
 
76  
384,086  
93,896  
(0)  
(416,575) 
59  
—  
(178) 
61,364
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these interim condensed consolidated financial statements (IFRS).


F-43
INTERIM CONDENSED CONSOLIDATED STATEMENT OF CASH FLOWS
for the six months ended June 30, 2021 and June 30, 2020
in € thousand
    
H1 2021
    
H1 2020
Net loss for the period
 
(110,477) 
(43,457)
Adjustments to reconcile consolidated net profit (loss) to net cash flows
 
   
  
Income tax expense
 
199  
21
Net interest
 
3,649  
3,522
Depreciation and amortization
 
2,980  
1,784
Expenses for share-based payments
 
17,925  
6,995
Net gains/losses from the disposal of intangibles and PP&E
 
(8) 
73
Share of loss in an associate
 
201  
—
Fair value changes of financial instruments
 
2,634 
55
Income tax paid
 
(18) 
(6)
Change in provisions
 
92  
196
Working capital adjustments:
 
   
  
Changes in trade and other payables
 
8,933  
2,094
Change in other assets and liabilities
 
(1,022) 
(1,756)
Cash flow from operating activities
 
(74,912) 
(30,479)
Purchases of intangible assets, property, plant and equipment
 
(5,687) 
(2,497)
Payments for fixed term deposits
 
—  
(100,000)
Proceed from fixed term deposits
 
50,000  
—
Payments for promissory notes
 
(1,051) 
—
Payments for the acquisition of an associate
 
(8,502) 
—
Interest received
 
7  
—
Cash flow from investing activities
 
34,767  
(102,497)
Proceeds from convertible loans
 
1,850  
85,900
Proceeds from share capital increase and capital contribution
 
7  
65,081
Payment of transaction cost for capital contributions
 
—  
(504)
Principal elements of lease payments
 
(1,040) 
(899)
Interest paid
 
(65) 
(96)
Cash flow from financing activities
 
752  
149,482
Cash-based changes in cash and cash equivalents
 
(39,393) 
16,506
Effect of foreign exchange rate changes on cash and cash equivalents
 
(15) 
31
Net (decrease) increase in cash and cash equivalents
 
(39,408) 
16,537
Cash and cash equivalents at the beginning of the period
 
102,144  
59,570
Cash and cash equivalents at the end of the period
 
62,736  
76,107
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these interim condensed consolidated financial statements (IFRS).


F-44
LILIUM GROUP
IFRS INTERIM CONDENSED CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (UNAUDITED)
1.
Corporate Information
Lilium GmbH was founded in 2015 as a start-up in the field of urban air mobility and intends to make regional air mobility
a reality. Since its founding Lilium GmbH has primarily engaged in research and development of a self-developed electric
Vertical Takeoff and Landing (eVTOL) jet (the “Lilium Jet”) for production and operation of a regional air mobility service as
well as related services.
Lilium GmbH is a German limited-liability company and is registered in the commercial register at the Bavaria District
Court Munich Germany under the number 216921. The registered headquarter is Claude-Dornier Str. 1, Geb. 335, 82234
Wessling Germany. As described in note 19 Lilium entered closed its business combination on September 14, 2021 whereby the
shareholders of Lilium contributed their shares in Lilium in exchange for shares in Lilium N.V. whereby Lilium GmbH became
a 100% subsidiary of Lilium N.V.
The interim condensed consolidated financial statements of Lilium GmbH and its subsidiaries, collectively referred to as
“the Company”, “the Group” or the “Lilium Group”, for the six months ended June 30, 2021 were authorized for issue by the
Management Board on October 25, 2021.
Lilium GmbH is the ultimate parent of the Lilium Group; its subsidiaries are as follows:
% equity interest owned by   
Country of
Date of 
Lilium GmbH
 
Name
    
incorporation
incorporation
     06/30/ 2021     
12/31/ 2020  
Lilium Aviation US Inc.
United States
July 1, 2020
100.0 %  
100.0 %
Lilium Schweiz GmbH
  Switzerland
  December 8, 2017  
100.0 %  
100.0 %
Lilium Aviation UK Ltd.
  United Kingdom  December 20, 2017 
100.0 %  
100.0 %
Lilium eAircraft GmbH
  Germany
  August 17, 2020
 
100.0 %  
100.0 %
2.
Basis of Preparation and changes to the Group’s accounting policies
The Group’s interim condensed consolidated financial statements for the six months ended June 30, 2021 and 2020 are
prepared in accordance with IAS 34 Interim Financial Reporting.
The interim condensed consolidated financial statements have been prepared on a going concern basis, applying a historical
cost convention, unless otherwise indicated. They are prepared and reported in thousands of Euro (“€ thousand”) except where
otherwise stated. Due to rounding, numbers presented may not add up precisely to the totals provided and percentages may not
precisely reflect the absolute figures. The management has formed a judgement that there is a reasonable expectation that the
Group has adequate resources to continue in operational existence for the foreseeable future, and not less than 12 months from
the end of the reporting period.
The interim condensed consolidated financial statements do not include all the information and disclosures required in the
annual financial statements and should be read in conjunction with the Group’s annual consolidated financial statements as at
December 31, 2020.
New standards, interpretations and amendments adopted by the Group
The accounting policies adopted in the preparation of the interim condensed consolidated financial statements are consistent
with those followed in the preparation of the Group’s annual consolidated financial statements for the year ended December 31,
2020, except for the adoption of new standards effective as of January 1, 2021. The Group has not early adopted any standard,
interpretation or amendment that has been issued but is not yet effective.
Several amendments apply for the first time in 2021, but do not have an impact on the interim condensed consolidated financial
statements of the Group.


F-45
Interest Rate Benchmark Reform – Phase 2: Amendmends to IFRS 9, IAS 39, IFRS 7, IFRS 4 and IFRS 16
The amendments provide temporary reliefs which address the financial reporting effects when an interbank offered rate
(IBOR) is replaced with an alternative nearly risk-free interest rate (RFR). The amendments include the following practical
expedients:
●
A practical expedient to require contractual changes, or changes to cash flows that are directly required by the reform,
to be treated as changes to a floating interest rate, equivalent to a movement in a market rate of interest
●
Permit changes required by IBOR reform to be made to hedge designations and hedge documentation without the
hedging relationship being discontinued
●
Provide temporary relief to entities from having to meet the separately identifiable requirement when an RFR
instrument is designated as a hedge of a risk component
These amendments had no impact on the interim condensed consolidated financial statements of the Group. The Group
intends to use the practical expedients in future periods if they become applicable.
3.
Significant Accounting Judgments, Estimates and Assumptions
The preparation of the Group’s interim condensed consolidated financial statements requires the management to make
judgements, estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts in the interim condensed consolidated financial
statements. In preparing these interim condensed consolidated financial statements, management exercises its best judgement
based upon its experience and the circumstances prevailing at that time. The estimates and assumptions are based on available
information and conditions at the end of the financial period presented and are reviewed on an ongoing basis. Actual results may
differ from these estimates under different assumptions and conditions and may materially affect the financial results or the
financial position reported in future periods.
The significant judgements made by management in applying the Group’s accounting policies and key sources of
estimation uncertainty were the same as those described in the last annual financial statements.
The Group operates its business as a single operating segment, which is also its reporting segment. An operating segment is
defined as a component of an entity for which discrete financial information is available and whose results of operations are
regularly reviewed by the chief operating decision maker. The Group's chief operating decision maker is the Chief Executive
Officer, who reviews results of operations to make decisions about allocating resources and assessing performance based on
consolidated financial information.
4.
Covid-19 risks and uncertainties
Since January 2020, the Corona Virus (COVID-19) has spread worldwide. The strict measures to stop the spread of
COVID-19 adopted in several countries where the Group operates have resulted in the majority of the Company’s workforce
working from home with a small number of teams with special purposes for development of the Lilium Jet remaining onsite.
Modern forms of communication enabled contact to be maintained between various members of staff and deadlines defined
before the period during which employees were working from home have been complied with. We continue to take actions as
may be required or recommended by government authorities or in the best interests of our employees and business partners but
COVID-19 could also affect the operations of our suppliers and business partners which may result in delays or disruptions in
the supply chain of our components and delay the development and rollout of a vertiport network and commercial operations.
The potential delay did not trigger an impairment of assets. Additional costs were incurred related to health, safety and
transportation of employees which remained onsite, however, the impact of these did not materially impact these consolidated
financial statements.
The current uncertainty regarding the consequences and duration of COVID-19 has negatively impacted the ability to
develop a precise forecast for product development. Based on COVID-19 developments throughout 2020 and 2021 and the
latest developments, the Group is expecting that business operation can be continued, no other impacts have been considered
relevant.


F-46
5.
Going Concern
Management assessed the Group’s ability to continue as a going concern and evaluated whether there are certain conditions
and events, considered in the aggregate, that raise substantial doubt about the Group’s ability to continue as a going concern
using all information available about the future, focusing on the twelve-month period after the issuance date of the financial
statements.
Historically, the Group has funded its operations primarily through capital raises and with loans from shareholders. Since
the inception the Group has incurred recurring losses and negative cash flows from operations including accumulated losses of
€417 million. The Group expects to continue to generate operating losses through 2024.
Based on the business plan the Group depends on additional financing for additional development activities and operations.
Management has realized plans to finance these investments and costs with the US public listing via a merger with a Special
Purpose Acquisition Company ("SPAC") which was completed in September 2021. This realization of the transaction has been
crucial for the Group's ability to continue as a going concern.
The financial statements have been prepared on a basis that assumes the Group will continue as a going concern and which
contemplates the realization of assets and satisfaction of liabilities and commitments in the ordinary course of business.
6.
Research and Development Expenses
For the six-months periods ended June 30, 2021 and 2020, research and development expenses mainly consist of personnel
expenses which include salary, salary-related expenses and share-based payments recognized from the Group’s ESOP (note 14).
For projects in aircraft engineering and software development, external consultants and contractors have been used increasingly
in the first half-year 2021 (€11,615 compared with €1,046 in the first half-year 2020), due, as for all other expense categories, to
our increased activites to make sure we adhere to our timeline.
7.
General and Administrative Expenses
For the six-months periods ended June 30, 2021 and 2020, general and administrative expenses mainly consist of personnel
expenses which include salary, salary-related expenses and share-based payments recognized from the Group’s ESOP (note 14).
In the first half-year 2021, additional expenses were incurred due to the De-SPAC transaction for legal advice, external
consultants and other related expenses, in total €10,493 thousand.
8.
Selling expenses
For the six-months periods ended June 30, 2021 and 2020, selling expenses mainly consist of personnel expenses which
include salary and salary-related expenses and share-based payments recognized from the Group’s ESOP (note 14).
9.
Financial Result
Financial result is comprised of the following:
In € thousand
    06/30/2021    06/30/2020
Finance income
 
6,810  
—
thereof: fair value changes
 
6,757  
—
Finance expenses
 
(13,094) 
(3,577)
thereof: interest portion of lease payments
 
(214) 
(212)
thereof: fair value changes
 
(9,391) 
(55)
thereof: interest on convertible loans
 
(3,422) 
(3,211)
Financial result
 
(6,284)  
(3,577)
Fair value changes in the period result from the embedded derivatives of the convertible loans (2021: €6,757 thousand in
finance income), as well as from a forex forward entered into in May 2021 (€9,376 thousand in finance expense).


F-47
10. Income Taxes
The Group calculated the period income tax expense, during the periods ended June 30, 2021 and June 30, 2020, the Group
recorded consolidated income tax expense of €200 thousand and €21 thousand, respectively. These income tax expenses mainly
relate to foreign subsidiaries. Deferred income taxes have not been recorded, as we consider it prudent given the current
development stage of Lilium.
11. Investment in an associate
Investment in Zenlabs
On March 10, 2021 the Group entered into a Share Purchase Agreement according to which the Lilium Group acquired
25.72% of the shares of Zenlabs Energy Inc. (“Zenlabs”) for a purchase price of €8,409 thousand ($10,000 thousand). Zenlabs is
a development partner of Lilium involved in lithium-ion batteries. In addition, the Group has bought promissory notes, which
subsequently were converted into shares of Zenlabs as mentioned in note 20. Group’s investment in Zenlabs is accounted for
using the equity method of accounting.
On acquisition of the investment, any difference between the cost of the investment and the entity’s share of the net fair
value of the investee’s identifiable assets and liabilities is accounted for as follows:
(a) Goodwill relating to an associate is included in the carrying amount of the investment. Amortisation of that goodwill is not
permitted.
(b) Any excess of the entity’s share of the net fair value of the investee’s identifiable assets and liabilities over the cost of
the investment is included as income in the determination of the entity’s share of the associate’s profit or loss in the period in
which the investment is acquired.
On the date of acquisition of an equity-accounted investee, fair values of the Zenlabs’ identifiable net assets and liabilities
was approximately €18 million. The purchase price allocation has not been finalized.
Subsequent accounting
The Group’s investment in Zenlabs is accounted for using equity accounting method in the consolidated financial 
statements.  Under the equity accounting method, the investment in an associate is initially recognised at cost.  The carrying 
amount of the investment is adjusted to recognise changes in the Group’s share of net assets of the associate since the 
acquisition date.
The statement of profit or loss reflects the Group’s share of the results of operations of the associate. Any change in OCI of
those investees is presented as part of the Group’s OCI. In addition, when there has been a change recognised directly in the
equity of the associate, the Group recognises its share of any changes, when applicable, in the statement of changes in equity.
Unrealised gains and losses resulting from transactions between the Group and the associate would be eliminated to the extent
of the interest in the associate.
The following table illustrates the summarised the valuation of the Group’s investment in Zenlabs:
In € thousand
     Carrying Value
January 1, 2021
 
—
Initial recognition
 
8,502
Share of income/(loss) of an associate
 
(201)
June 30, 2021
 
8,301


F-48
12. Property, Plant and Equipment
During the six months ended June 30, 2021, the Group acquired assets with a cost of €5,700 thousand (June 30, 2020:
€2,519 thousand):
In € thousand
    June 30, 2021    Dec 31, 2020
Right of use assets - buildings, net
 
11,124  
10,744
Technical machinery, net
 
7,258  
5,448
Furniture and fixtures, net
 
5,336  
4,469
Technical machinery under construction
 
1,153  
435
Other, net
 
2,047  
1,619
Property, Plant and Equipment, net
 
26,918  
22,715
Assets with a net book value of €0 thousand were disposed by the Group during the six months ended June 30, 2021 (June
30, 2020: €74 thousand), resulting in a net gain on disposal of €8 thousand (June 30, 2020: net loss of €74 thousand). No
indicators of impairment existed which would have required items of property, plant and equipment to be tested for impairment
in the six-month ended June 30, 2021 and June 30, 2020.
13. Other Financial Assets
Lilium has placed part of its liquidity in fixed term deposits to gain a better return on the surplus liquidity. End of 2020 the
company had made such deposits of €50 million which was ended in the 6 months of 2021.
14. Shareholders’ Equity
Subscribed capital consists of common, seed, series A, B1 and B2 shares which have a nominal value of €1 each. Common
shares and preferred shares (Seed, Series A, B1 and B2) have voting rights and are fully paid in. Preferred shares have certain
additional rights in case of an exit or liquidity event, and 60 % of the preferred share votes are required for certain fundamental
decisions. As of June 30, 2021, there were additional 8,529 shares authorized for issue. The amount of common and preferred
shares are as follows:
Common 
Seed 
(in units)
    
shares
    
shares
     Series A      Series B1      Series B2     
Total
Outstanding as of January 1, 2021
 
24,736  
4,412  
10,934  
14,102  
14,847  
69,031
Issued as of January 1, 2021
 
24,808  
4,412  
10,934  
14,102  
14,847  
69,103
Treasury shares
 
—  
—  
—  
—  
—  
—
Issued Seed shares
 
—  
—  
—  
—  
—  
—
Issued Series A shares
 
—  
—  
—  
—  
—  
—
Issued Series B1 shares
 
—  
—  
—  
—  
—  
—
Issued Series B2 shares
 
—  
—  
—  
—  
7,187  
7,187
Outstanding as of June 30, 2021
 
24,736  
4,412  
10,934  
14,102  
22,034  
76,218
Issued as of June 30, 2021
 
24,808  
4,412  
10,934  
14,102  
22,034  
76,290
On March 26, 2021 the convertible loan of €85,900 thousand and the accrued interest were converted into series B2 shares.
In order to facilitate the transaction, the Company issued 7,187 series B2 shares.
As of June 30, 2020 an amount of €32,239 paid into capital reserve was not paid and is included in the current assets. The
amount was paid in the following month.
15. Share-based Payments
Description of the ESOP
The Group maintains an Employee Stock Option Program (“ESOP”), originally established in 2017, which allows for the
issuance of options to purchase ordinary shares to its employees and certain advisors. Share options typically follow a vesting
schedule over a four-year period. 25 % will vest after the one-year anniversary of the applicable vesting commencement data
(the “Cliff Period”) and then monthly thereafter on a graded vesting basis through the end of the vesting period. Individuals
must continue to provide services


F-49
to a Group entity in order to vest. Upon termination, all unvested options are forfeited. There is no contractual life for the share
options provided in the contract.
Options allocated and earned will be settled by Lilium in cash or equity shares if an exit event occurs (e.g. share purchase,
asset purchase, initial public offering (“IPO”). In case of an exit event, the Company will notify the participants two weeks in
advance of the exit event informing them of the number of vested options held by the participant and the deadline to exercise
such vested options, which must be at least two weeks (the “exercise period”). The particpants may only exercise the vested
portion of their options upon an exit event and within the exercise period specified in the notice. If a participant does not
exercise the vested portion of such participant´s options or if the exit notification is not duly submitted, the vested portion of the
participant´s options may be settled in cash. Furthermore, the Company has the choice to settle the award in cash even if the
participant timely exercises such options. Any options that are unvested as of the date of an exit event (“Accelerated Options”)
will cliff vest after a period of 24 months starting from the exit event, or upon an earlier termination of service initiated by the
Company without good cause. The Accelerated Options will be forefeited if, prior to vesting, the participant’s service is
terminated by the Company for good cause or due to person-related or conduct-related reasons according to German labour law.
The manner of settlement in the form of cash or shares under the original terms of the ESOP implemented in 2017 (the
“2017 ESOP”) was at the election of the holders and, accordingly, options granted under the 2017 ESOP were classified as cash-
settled. In November 2020, the Company modified certain terms and conditions of the 2017 ESOP (the “2020 ESOP”), which
included modifications to the manner of settlement and stipulated that the Company has the discretion to determine the form of
settlement of the options. Furthermore, the definition of an exit event was extended to include an indirect IPO, such as a merger
of the Company into a publicly-traded shell company, if certain additional conditions are met.
Letters were sent to all holders of options granted under the 2017 ESOP and each such holder was asked to provide
acceptance of the amendments before the end of December 2020. Options granted to participants who were U.S. resident
taxpayers at the time of grant were also revised to clarify that such awards would be functionally treated as restricted stock units
for U.S. tax purposes, and such options would be automatically settled to the extent vested upon an exit event that occurs within
eight years of the grant date, and would continue to be automatically settled on each vesting date. As of June 30, 2021 95 %
(December 31, 2020: 89 %) of the holders of options granted under the 2017 ESOP accepted the terms of the modification,
which triggered a change in the accounting treatment from cash-settled to equity-settled. Consequently, these options were
remeasured at the modification date fair value and the relevant liability was included in equity.
The remaining options continue to be classified as cash-settled awards. The settlement of these cash-settled awards is
dependent upon an exit event, which is not probable as of December 31, 2020 and as of June 30, 2021. The liability amounting
to €2,596 thousand (December 31, 2020: €6,948 thousand) has been recognized as a liability (refer to note 17). The carrying
amount of the liability for the 2017 ESOP at June 30, 2021 was €0 thousand (December 31, 2020: €0 thousand).
The grant date fair value of the equity-settled options was estimated for those participants who received options under the
2020 ESOP or who signed the revised agreement which resulted in a capital reserve of €89,916 thousand in total as of June 30,
2021 (December 31, 2020: €71,990 thousand).
The expense recognized for participant services received during the periods is shown in the following table:
01/01/-
01/01/-
In € thousand
     06/30/2021      06/30/2020
Expense arising from equity-settled share-based payments
 
17,925  
0
Expense arising from cash-settled share-based payments
 
0  
6,998
The weighted average fair value of options granted during the period was €15,430 thousand (2020: €1.815 thousand). The
exercise price for all options is €1.
Movements during the period
The following table illustrates the number and weighted average exercise prices (“WAEP”) of, and movements in, share
options during the periods ended June 30, 2021 and 2020:


F-50
Equity-settled options:
2021
2020
Number of 
2021
Number of 
2020
(in units)
    
options
    
WAEP
    
options
    
WAEP
Outstanding at January 1
 
6,022  
1  
—  
—
Granted during the period
 
448  
1  
—  
—
Forfeited during the period
 
-100 
1  
—  
—
Transferred from cash-settled
 
318  
1  
—  
—
Outstanding at June 30
 
6,688  
1  
—  
—
Cash-settled options:
    
2021
    
    
2020
    
Number of
2021
Number of
2020
(in units)
options
WAEP
options
WAEP
Outstanding at January 1
 
—  
—  
5,108  
1
Granted during the period
 
—  
—  
270  
1
Forfeited during the period
 
—  
—  
-38 
1
Outstanding at June 30
 
—  
—  
5,340  
1
Total options vested during the period were 853 options (2020: 593 options).
Measurement of fair values
The following table lists the inputs to the models used for the ESOP for the periods ended June 30, 2021 and 2020:
    
06/30/2021
    
06/30/2020
 
Discount for lack of marketability
 
5 %  
10 %
Expected volatility (%)
 
148.3 %  
123.8 %
Probability of direct IPO
 
0 %  
50 %
Probability of indirect IPO
 
85 %  
0 %
Probability of other scenarios
 
15 %  
50 %
The expected volatility was based on an evaluation of the historical volatilities of comparable listed peer group companies.
It reflects the assumption that the historical volatility is indicative of future trends, which may not necessarily be the actual
outcome. Other common inputs to option pricing models such as discount rate, dividends expected and expected term are not
significant due to the low exercise price.
The fair value of the options at June 30, 2021 was derived from the estimated equity value of Lilium on that date because
the beneficiary is entitled to shares of Lilium for a nominal amount in the case of an exit event. The value of the common shares
was derived by applying a market approach on the basis of external financing rounds and an expected financing round valuation.
With regards to the financing rounds, the liquidation preferences of the Seed shares, Series A, B1 and B2 shares (as described in
note 13, Equity) were taken into account. A hybrid model between option pricing method and probability-weighted expected
return method was used for the valuation. This led to a fair value of €20,143 per share of June 30, 2021 (December 31, 2020:
€17,297).
Performance-based equity award
The Group has granted a performance-based equity award to a certain key management personnel as a bonus for successful
fundraising which is accounted for as equity-settled. Upon successful financing, the recipient will receive a variable number of
shares equal to an agreed percentage of the fundraising capital based upon the post-round valuation, capped at specific
maximum funding amount. The compensation expense for awards with performance-based vesting conditions is recognized
over the remaining service period when management determines that achievement of the performance condition is probable. The
compensation cost has been recorded pro rata in the general and administrative expenses in the second half of 2020 (€592) and
in the first half of 2021 (€1,506).


F-51
16. Convertible Loans and Other Financial Liabilities
Convertible loans and other financial liabilities are as follows:
in € thousand
    
06/30/2021
    
12/31/2020
Other non-current financial liabilities
 
25  
27
Other current financial liabilities
 
9,391  
21
Convertible loans – host
 
1,659  
84,287
Convertible loans – embedded derivative
 
327  
14,948
Convertible loans
 
1,986  
99,235
In May 2021, the Group has closed a deal contingent forward contract, subject to the closing of the De-SPAC transaction,
for the conversion of a potential De-SPAC cashflow in US-Dollar ($ 400-500 million) to be converted to Euro. As of June 30,
2021, a valuation resulted in a financial expense of €9,376 which has been posted in current financial liabilities.
In January 2021, the Group entered into a new loan convertible (CLA4) to equity for an amount of €1,850 thousand. The
loan bears 5 % accrued interest and matures upon the occurrence of certain conversion or termination events. The Group
assessed that the entire instrument is a liability. There is one component to be bifurcated as equity because one conversion
feature of the loan leads to a conversion into a fixed number of shares for a fixed amount. However, the Group has assessed that
the fair value of this equity component equals zero. In addition some of the embedded conversion features were bifurcated and
separately measured as one combined derivative financial liability at fair value through profit or loss, since they share the same
risk exposure and are interdependent. The remaining debt component is measured as liability at amortized cost until it is
converted into equity before or on maturity.
On March 11, 2020 the Group entered into a loan convertible (CLA3) to equity for an amount of €85,900 thousand. The
loan bears 2 % accrued interest and matures on March 11, 2027, or earlier upon the occurrence of certain conversion or
termination events. At initial recognition, a day one gain for the Group in the amount of €34,084 thousand incurred, as the
consideration received exceeded the initial fair value of the convertible loan by this amount. As the lender is a shareholder at the
same time, this amount was considered as additional capital contribution to the Group and was therefore recognized in equity
without subsequent measurement. The Group assessed that the entire instrument is a liability and there is no component to be
bifurcated as equity because some conversion features of the loan lead to a conversion into a variable number of shares and are
not under the control of the Group. Instead, some of the embedded conversion and prepayment features were bifurcated and
separately measured as one combined derivative financial liability at fair value through profit or loss, since they share the same
risk exposure and are interdependent. The remaining debt component is measured as liability at amortized cost until it is
converted into equity or becomes due for repayment. On March 26, 2021 the convertible loan of €85,900 thousand and the
accrued interest were converted into series B2 shares. In order to facilitate the transaction, the Company issued 7,187 series B2
shares.


F-52
17. Additional Disclosures on Financial Instruments
The following tables disclose the carrying amounts of each class of financial instruments together with its corresponding
fair value:
Financial instruments, analyzed by classes and categories
06/30/2021
In € thousand
    
Category
     Carrying amount     
Fair value
Financial assets, by class
 
   
   
  
Cash and cash equivalents
  AC
 
62,736  
n/a
Fixed term deposit
  AC
 
—  
n/a
Promissory notes
  FVTPL
 
2,212  
2,212
Security deposits
  AC
 
2,445  
2,445
Trade receivables
  AC
 
47  
n/a
Other financial assets
  AC
 
80  
n/a
Total financial assets
 
 
67,520  
  
Financial liabilities, by class
 
   
   
  
Trade and other payables
  AC
 
20,764  
n/a
Forward contract EUR/USD
  FVTPL
 
9,376  
9,376
Convertible loans – host contract
  AC
 
1,659  
1,659
Convertible loans – embedded derivative
  FVTPL
 
327  
327
Other financial liabilities
  AC
 
40  
n/a
Total financial liabilities
 
 
32,166  
  
Financial instruments, analyzed by classes and categories
12/31/2020
In € thousand
   
Category
    Carrying amount    
Fair value
Financial assets, by class
Cash and cash equivalents
AC
 
102,144  
n/a
Fixed term deposit
AC
 
50,000  
n/a
Promissory notes
FVTPL
 
676  
676
Security deposits
AC
 
2,096  
2,096
Other financial assets
AC
 
16  
n/a
Total financial assets
 
154,932
Financial liabilities, by class
Trade and other payables
AC
 
11,092  
n/a
Convertible loans – host contract
AC
 
84,287  
105,007
Convertible loans – embedded derivative
FVTPL
 
14,948  
14,948
Other financial liabilities
AC
 
48  
n/a
Total financial liabilities
 
110,375
Except for the promissory notes, the convertible loans (both host contract and embedded derivative) and the contingent
forex forward contract, which are categorized in level 3 of the fair value hierarchy, all other financial instruments are
categorized in level 2 of the fair value hierarchy. Transfers between levels of the fair value hierarchy are deemed to take place at
the end of the period.
Fair Values in level 2 are expected cashflows discounted using market-based credit risk adjusted interest rate curves that are
applicable for the Group and specific for the residual term of each financial instrument.
The fair value of the promissory notes is calculated using a trinomial tree approach, set to optional conversion at an
expected date. The primary inputs used in the model include the borrower’s share price at valuation date, probability of
occurrence of each possible conversion and termination event, borrower-specific credit risk and risk-free interest rate. While the
risk-free interest rate is based on currency specific time congruent IBOR and swap rates, the credit risk and stock prices of the
borrower are not observable in a market and therefore highly judgemental.


F-53
The fair value of the embedded derivatives that were bifurcated from the convertible loan issued in 2021 is determined by
aggregating the valuations for the various expected conversion and termination events. Since all relevant events would lead to a
conversion for a set fixed conversion rate, the value is derived as a forward contract embedded in the loan contract. The primary
inputs used in the model include the probability of occurrence and timing of each possible conversion and termination event,
borrower-specific credit spread and risk-free interest rate. Credit risk is model-implied and adjusted for movement in credit
spreads to consider the investor’s higher risk in connection with this convertible instrument at each valuation date, and the risk-
free interest rate is based on currency specific time congruent IBOR and swap rates. As credit spreads and probability of
occurrence as well as the timing of each possible conversion and termination event are not observable in a market, these input
parameters are highly judgemental. The effect of reasonable changes of these judgemental input parameters on the fair value of
the embedded derivative as of June 30, 2021 would be immaterial.
The contingent forex forward contract was valuated based on expected cashflows discounted using market-based credit risk
adjusted interest rate curves that are applicable for the Group and specific for the residual term of each financial instrument. The
probabilities for different scenarios have been used to consider the contingency.
The following schedules show the differentiation of the level 3 fair values:
Financial instruments, changes in Fair Value of level 3 instruments
    
     Convertible loan – 
In € thousand
    Promissory Notes    embedded derivative
January 1, 2021
676  
(14,948)
Additions
 
1,051  
(311)
Settlement
—
8,597
Measurement changes
 
485  
6,335
June 30, 2021
 
2,212  
(327)
Financial instruments, changes in Fair Value of level 3 instruments
    
     Convertible loan – 
In € thousand
    Promissory Notes    embedded derivative
January 1, 2020
 
—  
—
Additions
 
—  
274
Measurement changes
 
—  
(55)
June 30, 2020
 
—  
219
The effect of reasonable changes of the most significant input parameters on the fair values of the embedded derivatives of
the convertible loan issued in January 2021 (CLA4) and the contingent forex forward contract were determined as insignificant
as of June 30, 2021. The following table shows the effect of reasonable changes of the most significant input parameter on the
fair values of the promissory notes as of June 30, 2021:
in € thousand
    
    
    Effect on financial
June 30, 2021
    Share Price     Value derivative    
 result
Base
 
0 %  
2,212
Up
 
10 %  
2,433  
221
Down
 
(10)%  
2,011  
(201)
The following tables show the effect of reasonable changes of the most significant input parameters on the fair values of the
embedded derivatives of the convertible loan issued in March 2020 (CLA3) as of December 31, 2020:
in € thousand
    
    
    Effect on financial 
December 31, 2020
    Share Price
Value derivative
result
Base
  
0 %  
14,948   
  
Up
  
10 %  
18,815   
(3,867)
Down
  
(10)%  
11,081   
3,867


F-54
in € thousand
Effect on financial 
December 31, 2020
     
Credit Spread
Value derivative    
Result
Base
  
0 %  
14,948  
  
Up
  
10 %  
14,282  
666
Down
  
(10)%  
15,646  
(698)
18. Commitments and Contingencies
As mentioned in the note 14, 5 % (December 31, 2020: 11 %) of the ESOP participants have not signed the 2020 ESOP as
of June 30, 2021 and are classified as cash-settled options. Based on the contract terms, the liability for such options is settled
upon occurrence of an exit event. As of June 30, 2021, the exit event is not probable in the near future. Therefore, the liability is
classified as contingent depending upon the determination of an exit event in the future amounting to €2,596 thousand
(December 31, 2020: €6,948 thousand). The liability is calculated based on the vesting schedule per contract terms and which
will be assessed continually to determine whether circumstances have changed, and the exit event becomes probable.
Further, the Group has commitments of €9.9 million to acquire items of property, plant & equipment and commitments of
€0.7 million to acquire items of intangible assets.
19. Related Party Disclosures
Transactions with Key Management
Key management personnel have been defined as the members of the Advisory Board and Senior Leadership Team of
Lilium. The Group had entered into a short-term consultancy contract with one of the key management personnel before his
appointment as an employee; total remuneration paid amounted to €8,804 thousand (June 30, 2020: €2,868 thousand).
The annual remuneration and related compensation costs recognized as expense during the reporting period is comprised of
the following:
In € thousand
    06/30/2021    06/30/2020
Short-term employee benefits
 
1,697  
885
Share-based payment remuneration (2021: 2,077 options; 2020: 1,400 options)  
7,107  
1,983
Short-term benefits
Short-term benefits include salaries, bonus and other benefits such as medical, death and disability coverage, company car
and other usual facilities as applicable.
Share-based payment remuneration
The share-based payment remuneration represents the compensation cost of ESOP and the performance-based equity
award. Refer to note 14.
Other transactions
One member of the management board has been granting a convertible loan of €1 million to Lilium in January 2021.
Transactions with related parties
During the period ended June 30, 2021, the convertible loan of €85,900 thousand were converted into 7,187 Series B shares
in March 2021. In January 2021, the Group entered into another loan convertible to equity of €1,000 thousand, partially with a
related party; the entire loan is outstanding as of the reporting date.


F-55
Balances held by entities with significant influence over the Company is as follows:
(In € thousand)
    06/30/2021    12/31/2020
Share capital
 
42  
35
Share premium
  305,269   174,998
In June 2021, Lilium has closed a licensing agreement for the use of Zenlabs Energy Inc.’s intellectual property. Starting
from 2026, there will be a minimum fee which will increase until a certain maximum is reached. In 2020 and 2021, Lilium has
purchased promissory notes from Zenlabs Energy Inc., amounting in total to 2,212 thousand as of June 30, 2021 (including
interest).
20. Events after the Reporting Period
Business Combination Agreement
Lilium entered into a Business Combination Agreement with Qell Acquisition Corp. (“Qell”) on March 30, 2021 which was 
finally closed on September 14, 2021. In connection with the business combination our remaining convertible loans were also 
converted. The Business Combination, which is not within the scope of IFRS 3 since Qell does not meet the definition of a 
business in accordance with IFRS 3, will be accounted for within the scope of IFRS 2. As such, the Business Combination will 
be treated as the equivalent of Lilium GmbH issuing shares at the closing of the Business Combination for the net assets of Qell 
as of the closing date, accompanied by a recapitalization.  The net assets of Qell will be stated at historical cost, with no 
goodwill or other intangible assets recorded.  Any excess of fair value of Lilium GmbH shares issued over the fair value of 
Qell's identifiable net assets acquired represents compensation for the service of a stock exchange listing for its shares and will 
be recognized as an expense. We expect to be deemed the accounting predecessor of the combined business, and Lilium N.V. as 
the new parent company of the combined business, will be the successor SEC registrant, meaning that our financial statements 
for previous periods will be disclosed in the registrant’s future periodic reports filed with the SEC. The Business Combination is 
expected to have a significant impact on our future capital structure and operating results, securing part of our product 
development, manufacturing and commercialization. The most significant change in Lilium’s future reported financial positions 
is an estimated net increase in cash (as compared to our consolidated balance sheet at June 30, 2021) of $ 584.3 million,
including $ 450.0 million in proceeds from the PIPE Investment to be consummated substantially simultaneously with the
Business Combination of which $ 35.9 million represents deferred underwriter and legal fees related to Qell’s initial public
offering. The outstanding warrants associated with the Business Combination Agreement will also be recognized in Liium’s
future reported financial position.
As a result of the Business Combination, Lilium through its new parent company Lilium N.V.  will become a SEC-
registered Foreign Private Issuer (FPI) and a NASDAQ-listed company, which will require us to hire additional personnel and 
implement procedures and processes to address public company regulatory requirements and customary practices. We expect to 
incur additional annual expenses as a public company for, among other things, directors’ and officers’ liability insurance, 
director fees, and additional internal and external accounting, legal and administrative resources.
Zenlabs Investment
The Group has participated in a capital increase in the associated company Zenlabs Energy, Inc. in July 2021 and has paid
$6,000 for new shares. In addition, the Group has converted the promissory notes of €2,212 into shares of Zenlabs. In total,
Lilium’s share in Zenlabs is 34.8 % by the end of September 2021.
ESOP amendment
On October 8, 2021 we started to offer ESOP participants the possibility to convert their vested ESOP’s in Lilium GmbH to
stock options in Lilium N.V. The participants will also be able to exercise vested options at a conversion rate of 1 ESOP in
Lilium GmbH into 2,857 options in Lilium N.V. in accordance with the relevant exercise windows.
Insurance claim settled
An insurance claim has been settled and €1,363 thousand have been refunded to Lilium in October 2021.


F-56
Strategic Commercial Collaboration
On July 31, 2021, we executed a term sheet in which we agreed to enter into negotiations with Brazilian airline Azul S.A.
and Azul Linhas Aereas Brasileiras S.A. (collectively, “Azul”) to establish a strategic collaboration whereby Azul is expected to
commit to purchase from us 220 Lilium Jets for an aggregate value of up to $1.0 billion, with anticipated delivery to commence
in 2025.
In consideration of the strategic commercial collaboration, we agreed to use all efforts to grant to Azul warrants to purchase
up to 8,000,000 Class A Shares at an exercise price of €0.12 a share, consisting of (i) warrants to purchase 1,800,000 Class A
Shares, which warrants were issued to Azul on a fully vested basis on October 22, 2021, and (ii) subject to the execution of
definitive agreements, warrants to purchase up to an additional 6,200,000 Class A Shares, which are expected to vest in three
tranches.


F-44
REPORT OF INDEPENDENT REGISTERED PUBLIC ACCOUNTING FIRM
To the Shareholders and the Board of Directors of
Qell Acquisition Corp.
Opinion on the Financial Statements
We have audited the accompanying balance sheet of Qell Acquisition Corp. (“Company”) as of December 31, 2020, the
related statements of operations, changes in shareholders’ equity and cash flows for the period from August 7, 2020 (inception)
through December 31, 2020, and the related notes (collectively referred to as the “financial statements”). In our opinion, the
financial statements present fairly, in all material respects, the financial position of the Company as of December 31, 2020, and
the results of its operations and its cash flows for the period from August 7, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020, in
conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America.
Restatement of Financial Statements
As discussed in Note 2 to the financial statements, the Securities and Exchange Commission issued a public statement
entitled Staff Statement on Accounting and Reporting Considerations for Warrants Issued by Special Purpose Acquisition
Companies (“SPACs”) (the “Public Statement”) on April 12, 2021, which discusses the accounting for certain warrants as
liabilities. The Company previously accounted for its warrants as equity instruments. Management evaluated its warrants against
the Public Statement, and determined that the warrants should be accounted for as liabilities. Accordingly, the 2020 financial
statements have been restated to correct the accounting and related disclosure for the warrants.
Basis for Opinion
These financial statements are the responsibility of the Company’s management. Our responsibility is to express an opinion
on the Company’s financial statements based on our audit. We are a public accounting firm registered with the Public Company
Accounting Oversight Board (United States) (the “PCAOB”) and are required to be independent with respect to the Company in
accordance with the U.S. federal securities laws and the applicable rules and regulations of the Securities and Exchange
Commission and the PCAOB.
We conducted our audit in accordance with the standards of the PCAOB. Those standards require that we plan and perform
the audit to obtain reasonable assurance about whether the financial statements are free of material misstatement, whether due to
error or fraud. The Company is not required to have, nor were we engaged to perform, an audit of its internal control over
financial reporting. As part of our audit we are required to obtain an understanding of internal control over financial reporting
but not for the purpose of expressing an opinion on the effectiveness of the Company’s internal control over financial reporting.
Accordingly, we express no such opinion.
Our audit included performing procedures to assess the risks of material misstatement of the financial statements, whether
due to error or fraud, and performing procedures that respond to those risks. Such procedures included examining, on a test
basis, evidence regarding the amounts and disclosures in the financial statements. Our audit also included evaluating the
accounting principles used and significant estimates made by management, as well as evaluating the overall presentation of the
financial statements. We believe that our audit provides a reasonable basis for our opinion.
/s/ WithumSmith+Brown, PC
We have served as the Company’s auditor since 2020.
New York, New York
May 4, 2021


F-45
QELL ACQUISITION CORP.
BALANCE SHEET
As Restated- See Note 2
DECEMBER 31, 2020
Assets
    
Current assets:
Cash
$
2,023,823
Prepaid expenses
 
515,078
Total current assets
2,538,901
Investments held in Trust Account
379,579,492
Total Assets
$
382,118,393
Liabilities and Shareholders' Equity
 
  
Current liabilities:
Accounts payable
$
133,528
Accrued expenses
80,000
Total current liabilities
213,528
Derivative warrant liabilities
61,495,200
Deferred underwriting commissions
 
13,282,500
Total liabilities
 
74,991,228
 
  
Commitments and Contingencies (Note 5)
 
  
Class A ordinary shares subject to possible redemption; 30,212,716 shares at $10.00 per share
302,127,160
 
  
Shareholders' Equity:
 
  
Preference shares, $0.0001 par value; 1,000,000 shares authorized; none issued or outstanding
 
—
Class A ordinary shares, $0.0001 par value; 200,000,000 shares authorized; 7,737,284 shares issued and
outstanding (excluding 30,212,716 shares subject to possible redemption)
 
774
Class B ordinary shares, $0.0001 par value; 20,000,000 shares authorized; 9,487,500 shares issued and
outstanding
 
949
Additional paid-in capital
 
39,994,824
Accumulated deficit
 
(34,996,542)
Total shareholders' equity
 
5,000,005
Total Liabilities and Shareholders’ Equity
$
382,118,393
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these financial statements.


F-46
QELL ACQUISITION CORP.
STATEMENT OF OPERATIONS
As Restated – See Note 2
FOR THE PERIOD FROM AUGUST 7, 2020 (INCEPTION) THROUGH DECEMBER 31, 2020
Operating expenses:
General and administrative expenses
     $
343,207
Administrative fee - related party
30,000
Loss from operations
(373,207)
Other (expense) income:
Change in fair value of derivative warrant liabilities
(33,704,100)
Offering costs - derivative warrant liabilities
(998,727)
Income earned on investments in Trust Account
79,492
Net loss
$
(34,996,542)
Basic and diluted weighted average shares outstanding of Class A ordinary shares
37,950,000
Basic and diluted net income per ordinary share, Class A
$
0.00
Basic and diluted weighted average shares outstanding of Class B ordinary shares
9,016,071
Basic and diluted net loss per ordinary share, Class B
$
(3.89)
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these financial statements.


F-47
QELL ACQUISITION CORP.
STATEMENT OF CHANGES IN SHAREHOLDERS’ EQUITY
As Restated – See Note 2
FOR THE PERIOD FROM AUGUST 7, 2020 (INCEPTION) THROUGH DECEMBER 31, 2020
Ordinary Shares
Additional
Total
Class A
Class B
Paid-In
Accumulated
Shareholders’
    
Shares
     Amount     
Shares
     Amount     
Capital
    
Deficit
    
Equity
Balance — August 7, 2020 (inception)
—
$
—
—
$
—
$
—
$
—
$
—
Issuance of Class B ordinary shares to
Sponsor
—
—
9,487,500
949
24,051
—
25,000
Sale of units in initial public offering, less
derivative liabilities for public warrants
37,950,000
3,795
—
—
361,659,705
—
361,663,500
Offering costs
—
—
—
—
(20,200,193)
—
(20,200,193)
Excess cash received over the fair value of the
private warrants
—
—
—
—
635,400
—
635,400
Class A ordinary Shares subject to possible
redemption
(30,212,716)
(3,021)
—
—
(302,124,139)
—
(302,127,160)
Net loss
 
—
 
—
—
—
 
—
 
(34,996,542)
 
(34,996,542)
Balance — December 31, 2020
 
7,737,284
$
774
9,487,500
$
949
$
39,994,824
$ (34,996,542)
$
5,000,005
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these financial statements.


F-48
QELL ACQUISITION CORP.
STATEMENT OF CASH FLOWS
As Restated – See Note 2
FOR THE PERIOD FROM AUGUST 7, 2020 (INCEPTION) THROUGH DECEMBER 31, 2020
Cash Flows from Operating Activities:
       
Net loss
$
(34,996,542)
Adjustments to reconcile net loss to net cash used in operating activities:
 
Income earned on investments in Trust Account
(79,492)
General and administrative expenses paid by Sponsor under note payable
48,243
Change in fair value of derivative warrant liabilities
61,495,200
Offering costs - derivative warrant liabilities
998,727
Changes in operating assets and liabilities:
 
  
Prepaid expenses
(490,078)
Accounts payable
 
133,528
Accrued expenses
10,000
Net cash used in operating activities
 
27,119,586
Cash Flows from Investing Activities:
Cash deposited in Trust Account
(379,500,000)
Net cash used in investing activities
(379,500,000)
 
  
Cash Flows from Financing Activities:
 
  
Proceeds received from initial public offering, gross
 
361,663,500
Repayment of note payable to related party
(195,192)
Proceeds received from sale of private placement warrants
635,400
Offering costs paid net of reimbursements
 
(7,699,471)
Net cash provided by financing activities
 
354,404,237
 
  
Net change in cash
 
2,023,823
Cash — beginning of the period:
 
—
Cash — end of the period
$
2,023,823
 
Supplemental disclosure of non-cash investing and financing activities:
 
Expenses paid by Sponsor in exchange for issuance of Class B ordinary shares
$
25,000
Offering costs included in accrued expenses
$
70,000
Offering costs funded with note payable - related party
$
(146,949)
Deferred underwriting commissions payable
$
13,282,500
Initial value of Class A ordinary shares subject to possible redemption
$
336,062,230
Change in value of Class A ordinary shares subject to possible redemption
$
(33,935,070)
Derivative warrant liabilities in connection with initial public offering and private placement
$
27,791,100
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these financial statements.


F-49
Note 1 — Description of Organization, Business Operations and Basis of Presentation
Qell Acquisition Corp. (the “Company”) was incorporated as a Cayman Islands exempted company on August 7, 2020. The
Company was incorporated for the purpose of effecting a merger, capital stock exchange, asset acquisition, stock purchase,
reorganization or similar business combination with one or more businesses (the "Business Combination").The Company is an
emerging growth company and, as such, the Company is subject to all of the risks associated with emerging growth companies.
As of December 31, 2020, the Company had not commenced any operations. All activity for the period from August 7,
2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020 relates to the Company’s formation and the preparation of the initial public
offering described below (the “Initial Public Offering”). The Company will not generate any operating revenues until after the
completion of its initial Business Combination, at the earliest. The Company generates non-operating income in the form of
interest income on cash and cash equivalents from the proceeds derived from the Initial Public Offering. The Company has
selected December 31 as its fiscal year end.
The Company’s sponsor is Qell Partners LLC, a Cayman Islands limited liability company (the “Sponsor”). The registration
statement for the Company’s Initial Public Offering was declared effective on September 29, 2020. On October 2, 2020, the
Company consummated its Initial Public Offering of 37,950,000 units (the “Units” and, with respect to the Class A ordinary
shares included in the Units being offered, the “Public Shares”), including 4,950,000 additional Units to cover over-allotments
(the “Over-Allotment Units”), at $10.00 per Unit, generating gross proceeds of $379.5 million, and incurring offering costs of
approximately $21.1 million, inclusive of approximately $13.3 million in deferred underwriting commissions (Note 6).
Simultaneously with the consummation of the Initial Public Offering, the Company consummated the private placement
(“Private Placement”) of a total of 7,060,000 warrants (each, a “Private Placement Warrant” and collectively, the “Private
Placement Warrants”), at a price of $1.50 per Private Placement Warrant with the Sponsor, generating gross proceeds of
approximately $10.6 million (Note 5).
Upon the closing of the Initial Public Offering and the Private Placement, $379.5 million ($10.00 per Unit) of the net
proceeds of the Initial Public Offering and certain of the proceeds of the Private Placement were placed in a trust account
(“Trust Account”), located in the United States with Continental Stock Transfer & Trust Company acting as trustee, and will
invest only in United States government treasury obligations with a maturity of 185 days or less or in money market funds
meeting certain conditions under Rule 2a-7 under the Investment Company Act of 1940, as amended (the “Investment Company
Act”) which invest only in direct U.S. government treasury obligations, until the earlier of: (i) the completion of a Business
Combination and (ii) the distribution of the Trust Account as described below.
The Company’s management has broad discretion with respect to the specific application of the net proceeds of the Initial
Public Offering and the sale of Private Placement Warrants, although substantially all of the net proceeds are intended to be
applied generally toward consummating a Business Combination.
There is no assurance that the Company will be able to complete a Business Combination successfully. The Company must
complete one or more initial Business Combinations having an aggregate fair market value of at least 80% of the assets held in
the Trust Account (as defined below) (excluding the amount of deferred underwriting discounts held in trust and taxes payable
on the interest earned on the Trust Account) at the time of the agreement to enter into the initial Business Combination.
However, the Company will only complete a Business Combination if the post-transaction company owns or acquires 50% or
more of the outstanding voting securities of the partner or otherwise acquires a controlling interest in the partner sufficient for it
not to be required to register as an investment company under the Investment Company Act.
The Company will provide its holders (the “Public Shareholders”) of its Public Shares with the opportunity to redeem all or
a portion of their Public Shares upon the completion of a Business Combination either (i) in connection with a shareholder
meeting called to approve the Business Combination or (ii) by means of a tender offer. The decision as to whether the Company
will seek shareholder approval of a Business Combination or conduct a tender offer will be made by the Company, solely in its
discretion. The Public Shareholders will be entitled to redeem their Public Shares for a pro rata portion of the amount then in the
Trust Account (initially anticipated to be $10.00 per Public Share). The per-share amount to be distributed to Public
Shareholders who redeem their Public Shares will not be reduced by the deferred underwriting commissions the Company will
pay to the underwriters (as discussed in Note 6). These Public Shares will be classified as temporary equity upon the completion
of the Initial Public Offering in accordance with the Financial Accounting Standards Board’s (“FASB”) Accounting Standards
Codification (“ASC”) Topic 480 “Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity.” In such case, the Company will proceed with a
Business Combination if the Company has net tangible assets of at least $5,000,001 and the approval of an ordinary resolution.
If a shareholder vote is not required by law and the Company does not decide to hold a shareholder vote for business or other
legal reasons, the Company will, pursuant to its amended and restated memorandum and articles of association, conduct the
redemptions pursuant to the tender offer rules of the U.S. Securities and


F-50
Exchange Commission (“SEC”) and file tender offer documents with the SEC prior to completing a Business Combination. If,
however, shareholder approval of the transactions is required by law, or the Company decides to obtain shareholder approval for
business or legal reasons, the Company will offer to redeem shares in conjunction with a proxy solicitation pursuant to the proxy
rules and not pursuant to the tender offer rules. Additionally, each Public Shareholder may elect to redeem their Public Shares
irrespective of whether they vote for or against the proposed transaction. If the Company seeks shareholder approval in
connection with a Business Combination, the initial shareholders (as defined below) have agreed to vote their Founder Shares
(as defined below in Note 5) and any Public Shares purchased during or after the Initial Public Offering in favor of a Business
Combination. Subsequent to the consummation of the Initial Public Offering, the Company will adopt an insider trading policy
which will require insiders to: (i) refrain from purchasing shares during certain blackout period and when they are in possession
of any material non-public information and (ii) to clear all trades with the Company’s legal counsel prior to execution. In
addition, the initial shareholders have agreed to waive their redemption rights with respect to their Founder Shares and Public
Shares in connection with the completion of a Business Combination.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, the Amended and Restated Memorandum and Articles of Association will provide that a
Public Shareholder, together with any affiliate of such shareholder or any other person with whom such shareholder is acting in
concert or as a “group” (as defined under Section 13 of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended (the “Exchange
Act”)), will be restricted from redeeming its shares with respect to more than an aggregate of 15% or more of the Class A
ordinary shares sold in the Initial Public Offering, without the prior consent of the Company.
The Company’s Sponsor, officers and directors (the “initial shareholders”) have agreed not to propose an amendment to the
memorandum and articles of association (A) that would modify the substance or timing of the Company’s obligation to allow
redemption in connection with the initial business combination or to redeem 100% of its Public Shares if the Company does not
complete a Business Combination within 24 months from the closing of the Initial Public Offering, or October 2, 2022, (the
“Combination Period”) or (B) with respect to any other provision relating to shareholders’ rights or pre-initial Business
Combination activity, unless the Company provides the Public Shareholders with the opportunity to redeem their Class A
ordinary shares in conjunction with any such amendment.
If the Company is unable to complete a Business Combination within the Combination Period, the Company will (i) cease
all operations except for the purpose of winding up; (ii) as promptly as reasonably possible, but not more than ten business days
thereafter, redeem the Public Shares, at a per-share price, payable in cash, equal to the aggregate amount then on deposit in the
Trust Account, including interest earned on the funds held in the Trust Account and not previously released to the Company to
pay the income taxes, if any (less up to $100,000 of interest to pay dissolution expenses), divided by the number of the then-
outstanding Public Shares, which redemption will completely extinguish Public Shareholders’ rights as shareholders (including
the right to receive further liquidation distributions, if any); and (iii) as promptly as reasonably possible following such
redemption, subject to the approval of the remaining shareholders and the board of directors, liquidate and dissolve, subject in
the case of clauses (ii) and (iii), to the Company’s obligations under Cayman Islands law to provide for claims of creditors and
the requirements of other applicable law.
The Sponsor, officers and directors have agreed to waive their liquidation rights with respect to the Founder Shares if the
Company fails to complete a Business Combination within the Combination Period. However, if the initial shareholders or
members of the Company’s management team acquire Public Shares in or after the Initial Public Offering, they will be entitled
to liquidating distributions from the Trust Account with respect to such Public Shares if the Company fails to complete a
Business Combination within the Combination Period. The underwriters have agreed to waive their rights to its deferred
underwriting commission (see Note 6) held in the Trust Account in the event the Company does not complete a Business
Combination within the Combination Period and, in such event, such amounts will be included with the other funds held in the
Trust Account that will be available to fund the redemption of the Public Shares. In the event of such distribution, it is possible
that the per share value of the residual assets remaining available for distribution (including Trust Account assets) will be only
$10.00 per share initially held in the Trust Account. In order to protect the amounts held in the Trust Account, the Sponsor has
agreed to be liable to the Company if and to the extent any claims by a vendor for services rendered or products sold to the
Company, or a prospective partner business with which the Company has discussed entering into a transaction agreement,
reduce the amount of funds in the Trust Account. This liability will not apply with respect to any claims by a third party who
executed a waiver of any right, title, interest or claim of any kind in or to any monies held in the Trust Account or to any claims
under the Company’s indemnity of the underwriters of the Initial Public Offering against certain liabilities, including liabilities
under the Securities Act of 1933, as amended (the “Securities Act”). Moreover, in the event that an executed waiver is deemed
to be unenforceable against a third party, the Sponsor will not be responsible to the extent of any liability for such third-party
claims. The Company will seek to reduce the possibility that the Sponsor will have to indemnify the Trust Account due to claims
of creditors by endeavoring to have all vendors, service providers (except for the Company’s independent registered public
accounting firm), prospective partner businesses or other entities with which the Company does business, execute agreements
with the Company waiving any right, title, interest or claim of any kind in or to monies held in the Trust Account.


F-51
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2020, the Company had approximately $2.0 million in its operating bank account and working capital
of approximately $2.3 million.
The Company’s liquidity needs through December 31, 2020 were satisfied through a contribution of $25,000 from the
Sponsor to cover certain of the Company’s expenses in exchange for the issuance of the Founder Shares, a loan of
approximately $195,000 from the Sponsor under the Note (see Note 5), and the net proceeds from the consummation of the
Private Placement not held in the Trust Account. The Company fully repaid the Note on November 2, 2020. In addition, in order
to finance transaction costs in connection with a Business Combination, the Sponsor or an affiliate of the Sponsor, or certain of
the Company’s officers and directors may, but are not obligated to, provide the Company Working Capital Loans (see Note 5).
As of December 31, 2020, there were no amounts outstanding under any Working Capital Loan.
Based on the foregoing, management believes that the Company will have sufficient working capital and borrowing
capacity from the Sponsor or an affiliate of the Sponsor, or certain of the Company’s officers and directors to meet its needs
through the earlier of the consummation of a Business Combination or one year from this filing. Over this time period, the
Company will be using these funds for paying existing accounts payable, identifying and evaluating prospective initial Business
Combination candidates, performing due diligence on prospective target businesses, paying for travel expenditures, selecting the
target business to merge with or acquire, and structuring, negotiating and consummating the Business Combination.
Basis of Presentation
The Company’s financial statements have been prepared in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the
United States of America (“U.S. GAAP”) for financial information and pursuant to the rules and regulations of the Securities
and Exchange Commission (“SEC”) and include all adjustments necessary for the fair presentation of the Company’s financial
position for the periods presented.
As described in Note 2—Restatement of Previously Issued Financial Statements, the Company’s financial statements as of
December 31, 2020, and the period from August 7, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020 (collectively, the “Affected
Periods”), are restated in this Annual Report on Form 10-K/A (Amendment No. 1) (this “Annual Report”) to correct the
misapplication of accounting guidance related to the Company’s warrants in the Company’s previously issued audited and
unaudited condensed financial statements for such periods. The restated financial statements are indicated as “Restated” in the
audited and unaudited condensed financial statements and accompanying notes, as applicable. See Note 2—Restatement of
Previously Issued Financial Statements for further discussion.
Emerging growth company
The Company is an “emerging growth company,” as defined in Section 2(a) of the Securities Act of 1933, as amended, (the
“Securities Act”), as modified by the Jumpstart Business Startups Act of 2012, (the “JOBS Act”), and it may take advantage of
certain exemptions from various reporting requirements that are applicable to other public companies that are not emerging
growth companies including, but not limited to, not being required to comply with the auditor attestation requirements of
Section 404 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act, reduced disclosure obligations regarding executive compensation in its periodic reports
and proxy statements, and exemptions from the requirements of holding a nonbinding advisory vote on executive compensation
and shareholder approval of any golden parachute payments not previously approved.
Further, Section 102(b)(1) of the Jumpstart Our Business Startups Act of 2012 (the “JOBS Act”) exempts emerging growth
companies from being required to comply with new or revised financial accounting standards until private companies (that is,
those that have not had a Securities Act registration statement declared effective or do not have a class of securities registered
under the Exchange Act) are required to comply with the new or revised financial accounting standards. The JOBS Act provides
that an emerging growth company can elect to opt out of the extended transition period and comply with the requirements that
apply to non-emerging growth companies but any such an election to opt out is irrevocable. The Company has elected not to opt
out of such extended transition period, which means that when a standard is issued or revised and it has different application
dates for public or private companies, the Company, as an emerging growth company, can adopt the new or revised standard at
the time private companies adopt the new or revised standard. This may make the comparison of the Company’s financial
statements with another public company that is neither an emerging growth company nor an emerging growth company that has
opted out of using the extended transition period difficult or impossible because of the potential differences in accounting
standards used.


F-52
Note 2 — Restatement of Previously Issued Financial Statements
On May 3 2021, the Audit Committee of the Company, in consultation with management, concluded that, because of a 
misapplication of the accounting guidance related to its public and private placement warrants to purchase ordinary shares that 
the Company issued in October 2020 (the “Warrants”), the Company’s previously issued financial statements for the Affected 
Periods should no longer be relied upon.  As such, the Company is restating its financial statements for the Affected Periods 
included in this Annual Report. 
On April 12, 2021, the staff of the Securities and Exchange Commission (the “SEC Staff”) issued a public statement 
entitled “Staff Statement on Accounting and Reporting Considerations for Warrants issued by Special Purpose Acquisition 
Companies (“SPACs”)” (the “SEC Staff Statement”). In the SEC Staff Statement, the SEC Staff expressed its view that certain 
terms and conditions common to SPAC warrants may require the warrants to be classified as liabilities on the SPAC’s balance 
sheet as opposed to equity. Since issuance on October 2, 2020, the Company’s warrants were accounted for as equity within the 
Company’s previously reported balance sheets.  After discussion and evaluation, including with the Company’s independent 
registered public accounting firm and the Company’s Audit Committee, management concluded that the warrants should be 
presented as liabilities with subsequent fair value remeasurement.
Historically, the Warrants were reflected as a component of equity as opposed to liabilities on the balance sheets and the 
statement of operations did not include the subsequent non-cash changes in estimated fair value of the Warrants, based on the 
application of FASB ASC Topic 815-40, Derivatives and Hedging, Contracts in Entity’s Own Equity (“ASC 815-40). The views 
expressed in the SEC Staff Statement were not consistent with the Company’s historical interpretation of the specific provisions 
within its warrant agreement and the Company’s application of ASC 815-40 to the warrant agreement.  The Company reassessed 
its accounting for Warrants issued on October 2, 2020, in light of the SEC Staff’s published views.  Based on this reassessment, 
management determined that the Warrants should be classified as liabilities measured at fair value upon issuance, with 
subsequent changes in fair value reported in the Company Statement of Operations each reporting period.
Therefore, the Company, in consultation with its Audit Committee, concluded that its previously issued Financial
Statements for the period from August 7, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020 should be restated because of a
misapplication in the guidance around accounting for certain of our outstanding warrants to purchase ordinary shares (the
“Warrants”) and should no longer be relied upon.
Impact of the Restatement
The impact of the restatement on the balance sheets, statements of operations and cash flows for the Affected Periods is
presented below. The restatement had no impact on net cash flows from operating, investing or financing activities.
As of December 31, 2020
    
As Previously
    
Restatement
    
Reported
Adjustment
As Restated
Balance Sheet
 
   
   
  
Total assets
$
382,118,393
$
—
$
382,118,393
Liabilities and Shareholders’ Equity
 
  
 
  
 
  
Total current liabilities
$
213,528
$
—
$
213,528
Deferred underwriting commissions
 
13,282,500
 
—
 
13,282,500
Derivative warrant liabilities
 
—
 
61,495,200
 
61,495,200
Total liabilities
 
13,496,028
 
61,495,200
 
74,991,228
Class A ordinary shares, $0.0001 par value; shares
subject to possible redemption
 
363,622,360
 
(61,495,200)
 
302,127,160
Shareholders’ equity
 
  
 
  
 
  
Preference shares – $0.0001 par value
 
—
 
—
 
—
Class A ordinary shares – $0.0001 par value
 
159
 
615
 
774
Class B ordinary shares – $0.0001 par value
 
949
 
—
 
949
Additional paid-in-capital
 
5,292,612
 
34,702,212
 
39,994,824
Accumulated deficit
 
(293,715)
 
(34,702,827)
 
(34,996,542)
Total shareholders’ equity
 
5,000,005
 
—
 
5,000,005
Total liabilities and shareholders’ equity
$
382,118,393
$
—
$
382,118,393


F-53
For The Period From August 7, 2020 (Inception) through December 31, 2020
    
As Previously 
    
Restatement
    
Reported
Adjustment
As Restated
Statement of Operations and Comprehensive Loss
 
   
   
  
Loss from operations
$
(373,207)
$
—
$
(373,207)
Other (expense) income:
 
  
 
  
 
  
Change in fair value of derivative warrant liabilities
 
—
 
(33,704,100)
 
(33,704,100)
Offering costs – derivative warrant liabilities
 
(998,727)
 
(998,727)
 
  
Income earned on investments in Trust Account
 
79,492
 
—
 
79,492
Total other (expense) income
 
79,492
 
(34,702,827)
 
(34,623,335)
Net loss
$
(293,715)
$
(34,702,827)
$
(34,996,542)
Basic and Diluted weighted-average Class A ordinary
shares outstanding
 
37,950,000
 
—
 
37,950,000
Basic and Diluted net income per Class A share
$
—
 
—
$
—
Basic and Diluted weighted-average Class B ordinary
shares outstanding
 
9,016,071
 
—
 
9,016,071
Basic and Diluted net loss per Class B share
$
(0.04)
 
(3.84)
$
(3.88)
For The Period From August 7, 2020 (Inception) through December 31, 2020
    
As Previously 
    
Restatement
    
Reported
Adjustment
As Restated
Statement of Cash Flows
Net loss
$
(293,715)
$
(34,702,827)
$
(34,996,542)
Adjustment to reconcile net loss to net cash used in
operating activities
(377,799)
62,493,927
62,116,128
Net cash used in operating activities
 
(671,514)
 
27,791,100
 
27,119,586
Net cash used in investing activities
 
(379,500,000)
 
—
 
(379,500,000)
Net cash provided by financing activities
 
382,195,337
 
(27,791,100)
 
354,404,237
Net change in cash
$
2,023,823
 
—
$
2,023,823
In addition, the impact to the balance sheet dated October 2, 2020, filed on Form 8-K on October 8, 2020 related to the
impact of accounting for the public and private warrants as liabilities at fair value resulted in a $27.8 million increase to the
derivative warrant liabilities line item at October 2, 2020 and offsetting decrease to the Class A ordinary shares subject to
possible redemption mezzanine equity line item. There is no change to total shareholders’ equity at the reported balance sheet
date.
    
As of October 2, 2021
    
As Previously
    
Restatement
    
Reported
Adjustment
As Restated
Balance Sheet
   
   
  
Total assets
$
383,038,513
$
—
$
383,038,513
Liabilities and shareholders’ equity
 
  
 
  
 
  
Total current liabilities
$
902,681
$
—
$
902,681
Deferred underwriting commissions
 
13,282,500
 
—
 
13,282,500
Derivative warrant liabilities
 
—
 
27,791,100
 
27,791,100
Total liabilities
 
14,185,181
 
27,791,100
 
41,976,281
Class A ordinary shares, $0.0001 par value; shares
subject to possible redemption
 
363,853,330
 
(27,791,100)
 
336,062,230
Shareholders’ equity
 
  
 
  
 
  
Preference shares – $0.0001 par value
 
—
 
—
 
—
Class A ordinary shares – $0.0001 par value
 
157
 
278
 
431
Class B ordinary shares – $0.0001 par value
 
949
 
—
 
949
Additional paid-in-capital
 
5,061,644
 
998,449
 
6,060,097
Accumulated deficit
 
(62,748)
 
(998,727)
 
(1,061,475)
Total shareholders’ equity
 
5,000,002
 
—
 
5,000,002
Total liabilities and shareholders’ equity
$
383,038,513
$
—
$
383,038,513


F-54
Note 3 — Summary of Significant Accounting Policies
Use of Estimates
The preparation of financial statement in conformity with GAAP requires the Company’s management to make estimates
and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the
date of the financial statement. It is at least reasonably possible that the estimate of the effect of a condition, situation or set of
circumstances that existed at the date of the financial statement, which management considered in formulating its estimate,
could change in the near term due to one or more future confirming events. Accordingly, the actual results could differ
significantly from those estimates.
Concentration of Credit Risk
Financial instruments that potentially subject the Company to concentrations of credit risk consist of cash accounts in a
financial institution, which, at times, may exceed the Federal Depository Insurance Corporation limit of $250,000, and
investments held in Trust Account. At December 31, 2020, the Company has not experienced losses on these accounts and
management believes the Company is not exposed to significant risks on such accounts.
Cash and Cash Equivalents
The Company considers all short-term investments with an original maturity of three months or less when purchased to be
cash equivalents. The Company had $1,437 in cash equivalents held in the Trust Account as of December 31, 2020.
Derivative Warrant liabilities
The Company does not use derivative instruments to hedge exposures to cash flow, market, or foreign currency risks. The 
Company evaluates all of the financial instruments, including issued stock purchase warrants, to determine if such instruments 
are derivatives or contain features that qualify as embedded derivatives, pursuant to ASC 480 and ASC 815-15.  The 
classification of derivative instruments, including whether such instruments should be recorded as liabilities or as equity, is re-
assessed at the end of each reporting period.
The 12,650,000 warrants issued in connection with the Initial Public Offering (the “Public Warrants”) and the 7,060,000
Private Placement Warrants are recognized as derivative liabilities in accordance with ASC 815-40. Accordingly, the Company
recognizes the warrant instruments as liabilities at fair value and adjust the instruments to fair value at each reporting period.
The liabilities are subject to re-measurement at each balance sheet date until exercised, and any change in fair value is
recognized in the Company’s statement of operations. The fair value of the Public Warrants issued in connection with the Public
Offering and Private Placement Warrants was initially measured using a Monte Carlo simulation model and subsequently, the
fair value of the Private Placement Warrants has been estimated using a Monte Carlo simulation model as of each measurement
date. The fair value of Public Warrants issued in connection with the Initial Public Offering has subsequently been measured
based on the listed market price of such warrants.
Investments Held in Trust Account
The Company’s portfolio of investments held in the Trust Account is comprised of cash and U.S. government securities,
within the meaning set forth in Section 2(a)(16) of the Investment Company Act, with a maturity of 185 days or less, or
investments in money market funds that invest in U.S. government securities, or a combination thereof. The Company’s
investments held in the Trust Account are classified as trading securities. Trading securities are presented on the balance sheet at
fair value at the end of each reporting period. Gains and losses resulting from the change in fair value of these investments are
included in net gain from investments held in Trust Account in the accompanying statement of operations. The estimated fair
values of investments held in the Trust Account are determined using available market information, other than for investments
in open-ended money market funds with published daily net asset values (“NAV”), in which case the Company uses NAV as a
practical expedient to fair value. The NAV on these investments is typically held constant at $1.00 per unit. At December 31,
2020, substantially all of the assets held in the Trust Account were held in U.S. Treasury Bills.


F-55
Fair Value Measurement
Fair value is defined as the price that would be received for sale of an asset or paid for transfer of a liability, in an orderly
transaction between market participants at the measurement date. U.S. GAAP establishes a three-tier fair value hierarchy, which
prioritizes the inputs used in measuring fair value.
The hierarchy gives the highest priority to unadjusted quoted prices in active markets for identical assets or liabilities
(Level 1 measurements) and the lowest priority to unobservable inputs (Level 3 measurements). These tiers include:
●
Level 1, defined as observable inputs such as quoted prices for identical instruments in active markets;
●
Level 2, defined as inputs other than quoted prices in active markets that are either directly or indirectly observable
such as quoted prices for similar instruments in active markets or quoted prices for identical or similar instruments in
markets that are not active; and
●
Level 3, defined as unobservable inputs in which little or no market data exists, therefore requiring an entity to develop
its own assumptions, such as valuations derived from valuation techniques in which one or more significant inputs or
significant value drivers are unobservable.
In some circumstances, the inputs used to measure fair value might be categorized within different levels of the fair value
hierarchy. In those instances, the fair value measurement is categorized in its entirety in the fair value hierarchy based on the
lowest level input that is significant to the fair value measurement.
Fair Value of Financial Instruments
As of December 31, 2020, the carrying values of cash, accounts payable and accrued expenses approximate their fair values
primarily due to the short-term nature of the instruments. The Company’s investments held in Trust Account are comprised of
investments in U.S. Treasury securities with an original maturity of 185 days or less or investments in a money market funds
that comprise only U.S. treasury securities and are recognized at fair value. The fair value of investments held in Trust Account
is determined using quoted prices in active markets, other than for investments in open-ended money market funds with
published daily NAV, in which case the Company uses NAV as a practical expedient to fair value. The fair value of the Public
Warrants issued in connection with the Public Offering and Private Placement Warrants were initially measured at fair value
using a Monte Carlo simulation model and subsequently, the fair value of the Private Placement Warrants have been estimated
using a Monte Carlo simulation model each measurement date. The fair value of Public Warrants issued in connection with the
Initial Public Offering have subsequently been measured based on the listed market price of such warrants.
Offering Costs Associated with the Initial Public Offering
The Company complies with the requirements of the FASB ASC Topic 340-10-S99-1 and SEC Staff Accounting Bulletin Topic
5A — “Expenses of Offering.” Offering costs consist of legal, accounting, underwriting commissions and other costs incurred
that were directly related to the Initial Public Offering. Offering costs were allocated on a relative fair value basis between
shareholders’ equity and expense. The portion offering costs allocated to the public shares has been charged to shareholders’
equity. Offering costs totaled $21,198,920 (consisting of $7,590,000 of underwriting fee, $13,282,500 of deferred underwriting
fee, $626,420 of other offering costs and $300,000 of reimbursed offering costs), of which $998,727 was charged to expense
and $20,200,193 was charged to shareholders’ equity upon completion of the Initial Public Offering.
Class A Ordinary Shares Subject to Possible Redemption
The Company accounts for its Class A ordinary shares subject to possible redemption in accordance with the guidance in
FASB ASC Topic 480 “Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity.” Class A ordinary shares subject to mandatory redemption (if
any) are classified as liability instruments and are measured at fair value. Conditionally redeemable Class A ordinary shares
(including Class A ordinary shares that feature redemption rights that are either within the control of the holder or subject to
redemption upon the occurrence of uncertain events not solely within the Company’s control) are classified as temporary equity.
At all other times, Class A ordinary shares are classified as shareholders’ equity. The Company’s Class A ordinary shares feature
certain redemption rights that are considered to be outside of the Company’s control and subject to the occurrence of uncertain
future events. Accordingly, at December 31, 2020, an aggregate of 30,212,716 Class A ordinary shares subject to possible
redemption are presented as temporary equity, outside of the shareholders’ equity section of the Company’s balance sheet.


F-56
Net Income (Loss) Per Ordinary Share
Net income (loss) per ordinary share is computed by dividing net income (loss) by the weighted-average number of
ordinary shares outstanding during the periods. The Company has not considered the effect of the warrants sold in the Initial
Public Offering and the Private Placement to purchase an aggregate of 19,710,000 of the Company’s Class A ordinary shares in
the calculation of diluted income (loss) per share, since their inclusion would be anti-dilutive under the treasury stock method.
The Company’s statement of operations includes a presentation of income (loss) per share for ordinary shares subject to
redemption in a manner similar to the two-class method of income per share. Net income per ordinary share, basic and diluted
for Class A ordinary shares is calculated by dividing the gain on marketable securities, dividends, and interest held in the Trust
Account, net of applicable taxes available to be withdrawn from the Trust Account, resulting in net income of $79,492 for the
period from August 7, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020, by the weighted average number of Class A ordinary shares
outstanding for the period. Net loss per ordinary share, basic and diluted for Class B ordinary shares is calculated by dividing
the net loss of approximately $35 million, less income attributable to Class A ordinary shares by the weighted average number
of Class B ordinary shares outstanding for the period.
Income Taxes
FASB ASC Topic 740, “Income Taxes” prescribes a recognition threshold and a measurement attribute for the financial
statement recognition and measurement of tax positions taken or expected to be taken in a tax return. For those benefits to be
recognized, a tax position must be more likely than not to be sustained upon examination by taxing authorities. There were no
unrecognized tax benefits as of December 30, 2020. The Company’s management determined that the Cayman Islands is the
Company’s only major tax jurisdiction. The Company recognizes accrued interest and penalties related to unrecognized tax
benefits as income tax expense. No amounts were accrued for the payment of interest and penalties as of December 31, 2020.
The Company is currently not aware of any issues under review that could result in significant payments, accruals or material
deviation from its position. The Company is subject to income tax examinations by major taxing authorities since inception.
There is currently no taxation imposed on income by the Government of the Cayman Islands. In accordance with Cayman
income tax regulations, income taxes are not levied on the Company.
Consequently, income taxes are not reflected in the Company’s financial statements. The Company’s management does not
expect that the total amount of unrecognized tax benefits will materially change over the next twelve months.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
Management does not believe that any recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting pronouncement if currently adopted
would have a material effect on the Company’s financial statements.
Note 4 — Initial Public Offering
On October 2, 2020, the Company consummated its Initial Public Offering of 37,950,000 Units, including 4,950,000 Over-
Allotment Units, at $10.00 per Unit, generating gross proceeds of $379.5 million, and incurring offering costs of approximately
$21.1 million, inclusive of approximately $13.3 million in deferred underwriting commissions.
Each Unit consists of one Class A ordinary share, par value $0.0001 per share and one-third of one redeemable warrant 
(each, a “Public Warrant”). Each whole Public Warrant entitles the holder to purchase one Class A ordinary share at a price of 
$11.50 per share, subject to adjustment (see Note 8).
Note 5 — Related Party Transactions
Founder Shares
On August 7, 2020, the Sponsor paid $25,000 to cover certain offering costs in consideration for 25,000 ordinary shares, par
value $1.00 per share, of which 3,261 ordinary shares are subject to forfeiture to the extent that the over-allotment option is not
exercised in full by the underwriters. The Company amended its Memorandum and Articles of Association to designate the
25,000 ordinary shares into 9,487,500 Class B ordinary shares, par value $0.0001, prior to the consummation of the Initial
Public Offering (the “Founder Shares”). Up to 1,237,500 Founder Shares were subject to forfeiture to the extent that the over-
allotment option was not exercised in


F-57
full by the underwriters, so that the Founder Shares would represent 20.0% of the Company’s issued and outstanding shares 
after the Initial Public Offering. The underwriters fully exercised the over-allotment option on October 2, 2020; thus, these 
Founder Shares were no longer subject to forfeiture.
The initial shareholders agreed, subject to limited exceptions, not to transfer, assign or sell any of their Founder Shares until
the earlier to occur of: (A) one year after the completion of the initial Business Combination and (B) subsequent to the initial
Business Combination, (x) if the closing price of the Class A ordinary shares equals or exceeds $12.00 per share (as adjusted for
share sub-divisions, share capitalizations, reorganizations, recapitalizations and the like) for any 20 trading days within any 30-
trading day period commencing at least 150 days after the initial Business Combination, or (y) the date on which the Company
completes a liquidation, merger, share exchange, reorganization or other similar transaction that results in all of the Public
Shareholders having the right to exchange their ordinary shares for cash, securities or other property.
Private placement warrants
Simultaneously with the closing of the Initial Public Offering, the Company consummated the Private Placement of
7,060,000 Private Placement Warrants, at a price of $1.50 per Private Placement Warrant with the Sponsor, generating gross
proceeds of approximately $10.6 million.
Each warrant is exercisable to purchase one Class A ordinary share at $11.50 per share. A portion of the proceeds from the
Private Placement Warrants was added to the proceeds from the Initial Public Offering held in the Trust Account. If the
Company does not complete a Business Combination within the Combination Period, the Private Placement Warrants will
expire worthless.
The Sponsor and the Company’s officers and directors agreed, subject to limited exceptions, not to transfer, assign or sell
any of their Private Placement Warrants until 30 days after the completion of the initial Business Combination.
Sponsor loan
On August 7, 2020, the Sponsor agreed to loan the Company up to $300,000 to cover expenses related to the Initial Public
Offering pursuant to a promissory note (the “Note”). This loan is non-interest bearing and payable upon the completion of the
Initial Public Offering. As of October 2, 2020, the Company borrowed approximately $195,000 under the Note and fully repaid
to Note on November 2, 2020.
Working capital loans
In addition, in order to finance transaction costs in connection with a Business Combination, the Sponsor or an affiliate of
the Sponsor, or certain of the Company’s officers and directors may, but are not obligated to, loan the Company funds as may be
required (“Working Capital Loans”). If the Company completes a Business Combination, the Company would repay the
Working Capital Loans. In the event that a Business Combination does not close, the Company may use a portion of proceeds
held outside the Trust Account to repay the Working Capital Loans but no proceeds held in the Trust Account would be used to
repay the Working Capital Loans. The Working Capital Loans would either be repaid upon consummation of a Business
Combination, without interest, or, at the lender’s discretion, up to $1.5 million of such Working Capital Loans may be
convertible into private placement warrants at a price of $1.50 per warrant. Except for the foregoing, the terms of such Working
Capital Loans, if any, have not been determined and no written agreements exist with respect to such loans. As of December 31,
2020, the Company had no borrowings under the Working Capital Loans.
Administrative support agreement
Commencing on the date the Company’s securities are first listed on Nasdaq, the Company agreed to pay the Sponsor a
total of $10,000 per month for office space, secretarial and administrative services. Upon completion of the initial Business
Combination or the Company’s liquidation, the Company will cease paying these monthly fees. On January 28, 2021, the
Company entered into an Administrative Services Agreement with Qell Operational Holdings LLC (“Holdings”), an affiliate of
the Sponsor, pursuant to which Holdings will provide certain administrative services to the Company and the Company will
reimburse Holdings up to $50,000 a month, subject to adjustment in accordance with the terms of the agreement. In connection
therewith, the Company terminated the Administrative Services Agreement between the Company and the Sponsor dated
October 2, 2020.


F-58
Note 6 — Commitments and Contingencies
Registration and Shareholder Rights
The holders of Founder Shares, Private Placement Warrants and warrants that may be issued upon conversion of Working
Capital Loans (and any Class A ordinary shares issuable upon the exercise of the Private Placement Warrants and warrants that
may be issued upon conversion of Working Capital Loans) were entitled to registration rights pursuant to a registration and
shareholder rights agreement. These holders were entitled to certain demand and “piggyback” registration rights. However, the
registration and shareholder rights agreement provide that the Company will not permit any registration statement filed under
the Securities Act to become effective until the termination of the applicable lock-up period for the securities to be registered.
The Company will bear the expenses incurred in connection with the filing of any such registration statements.
Underwriting agreement
The Company granted the underwriters a 45-day option from the final prospectus relating to the Initial Public Offering to
purchase up to 4,950,000 additional Units to cover over-allotments, if any, at the Initial Public Offering price less the
underwriting discounts and commissions. The underwriters fully exercised the over-allotment option on October 2, 2020.
The underwriters were entitled to an underwriting discount of $0.20 per unit, or approximately $7.6 million in the
aggregate, paid upon the closing of the Initial Public Offering. The underwriters reimbursed $300,000 for certain offering costs
to the Company. In addition, $0.35 per unit, or approximately $13.3 million in the aggregate will be payable to certain of the
underwriters for deferred underwriting commissions. The deferred fee will become payable to the underwriters from the
amounts held in the Trust Account solely in the event that the Company completes a Business Combination, subject to the terms
of the underwriting agreement.
Risks and Uncertainties
On January 30, 2020, the World Health Organization (“WHO”) announced a global health emergency because of a new
strain of coronavirus (the “COVID-19 outbreak”). In March 2020, the WHO classified the COVID-19 outbreak as a pandemic,
based on the rapid increase in exposure globally. The full impact of the COVID-19 outbreak continues to evolve. Management
continues to evaluate the impact of the COVID-19 outbreak on the industry and has concluded that while it is reasonably
possible that the virus could have a negative effect on the Company’s financial position, results of its operations and/or search
for a target company, the specific impact is not readily determinable as of the date of these financial statements. The financial
statements do not include any adjustments that might result from the outcome of this uncertainty.
Note 7 — Derivative Warrant Liabilities
As of December 31, 2020, there was an aggregate of 19,710,000 Public Warrants and Private Placement Warrants
outstanding. Public Warrants may only be exercised for a whole number of shares. No fractional Public Warrants will be issued
upon separation of the Units and only whole Public Warrants will trade. The Public Warrants will become exercisable on the
later of  (a) 30 days after the completion of a Business Combination or (b) 12 months from the closing of the Initial Public
Offering; provided in each case that the Company has an effective registration statement under the Securities Act covering the
Class A ordinary shares issuable upon exercise of the warrants and a current prospectus relating to them is available (or the
Company permits holders to exercise their warrants on a cashless basis and such cashless exercise is exempt from registration
under the Securities Act). The Company has agreed that as soon as practicable, but in no event later than 20 business days after
the closing of the initial Business Combination, the Company will use its commercially reasonable efforts to file with the SEC a
registration statement covering the Class A ordinary shares issuable upon exercise of the warrants, and the Company will use its
commercially reasonable efforts to cause the same to become effective within 60 business days after the closing of the initial
Business Combination, and to maintain the effectiveness of such registration statement and a current prospectus relating to those
Class A ordinary shares until the warrants expire or are redeemed; provided that if the Class A ordinary shares are at the time of
any exercise of a warrant not listed on a national securities exchange such that they satisfy the definition of a “covered security”
under Section 18(b)(1) of the Securities Act, the Company may, at its option, require holders of Public Warrants who exercise
their warrants to do so on a “cashless basis” in accordance with Section 3(a)(9) of the Securities Act and, in the event the
Company so elect, it will not be required to file or maintain in effect a registration statement. If a registration statement covering
the Class A ordinary shares issuable upon exercise of the warrants is not effective by the 60th day after the closing of the initial
Business Combination, warrant holders may, until such time as there is an effective registration statement and during any period
when the Company will have failed to maintain an effective registration statement, exercise warrants on a “cashless basis” in
accordance with Section 3(a)(9) of the Securities Act or another exemption, but the Company will use its best efforts to register
or qualify the shares under applicable blue sky laws to the extent an exemption is not available.


F-59
The warrants have an exercise price of at $11.50 per share and will expire five years after the completion of a Business 
Combination or earlier upon redemption or liquidation. In addition, if  (x) the Company issues additional Class A ordinary 
shares or equity linked securities for capital raising purposes in connection with the closing of the initial Business Combination 
at an issue price or effective issue price of less than $9.20 per Class A ordinary share (with such issue price or effective issue 
price to be determined in good faith by the board of directors and, in the case of any such issuance to the Sponsor or its 
affiliates, without taking into account any Founder Shares held by the Sponsor or such affiliates, as applicable, prior to such 
issuance), or the Newly Issued Price, (y) the aggregate gross proceeds from such issuances represent more than 60% of the total 
equity proceeds, and interest thereon, available for the funding of the initial Business Combination on the date of the 
consummation of the initial Business Combination (net of redemptions), and (z) the volume-weighted average trading price of 
the ordinary shares during the 20 trading day period starting on the trading day after the day on which the Company 
consummates its initial Business Combination (such price, the “Market Value”) is below $9.20 per share, the exercise price of 
the warrants will be adjusted (to the nearest cent) to be equal to 115% of the higher of the Market Value and the Newly Issued 
Price, and the $10.00 and 18.00 per share redemption trigger prices described below under “Redemption of warrants for Class A 
ordinary shares when the price per Class A ordinary share equal or exceed $10.00” and “Redemption of warrants for cash when 
the price per Class A ordinary share equals or exceeds $18.00” will be adjusted (to the nearest cent) to be equal to 100% and 
180% of the higher of the Market Value and the Newly Issued Price, respectively.
The Private Placement Warrants are identical to the Public Warrants underlying the Units sold in the Initial Public Offering,
except that the Private Placement Warrants will not be transferable, assignable or salable until 30 days after the completion of
the initial Business Combination and they will not be redeemable by the Company (except as described below) so long as they
are held by the Sponsor or its permitted transferees. The Sponsor, or its permitted transferees, has the option to exercise the
Private Placement Warrants on a cashless basis. If the Private Placement Warrants are held by holders other than the Sponsor or
its permitted transferees, the Private Placement Warrants will be redeemable by the Company in all redemption scenarios and
exercisable by the holders on the same basis as the warrants included in the units being sold in the Initial Public Offering.
Redemptions for warrants for cash when the price per Class A ordinary share equals or exceeds $18.00.
Once the warrants become exercisable, the Company may redeem the outstanding warrants (except with respect to the
Private Placement Warrants):
●
in whole and not in part;
●
at a price of $0.01 per warrant;
●
upon a minimum of 30 days' prior written notice of redemption; and
●
if, and only if, the closing price of the Class A ordinary shares equals or exceeds $18.00 per share (as adjusted for share
sub-divisions, share capitalizations, reorganizations, recapitalizations and the like) for any 20 trading days within a 30-
trading day period ending on the third trading day prior to the date on which the Company sends the notice of
redemption to the warrant holders (the “Reference Value”).
The Company will not redeem the warrants as described above unless a registration statement under the Securities Act
covering the Class A ordinary shares issuable upon exercise of the warrants is effective and a current prospectus relating to those
Class A ordinary shares is available throughout the 30-day redemption period. If and when the warrants become redeemable by
the Company, it may exercise its redemption right even if it is unable to register or qualify the underlying securities for sale
under all applicable state securities laws.
Redemption of warrants for Class A ordinary shares when the price per Class A ordinary share equals or exceeds $10.00.
Once the warrants become exercisable, the Company may redeem the outstanding warrants (except as described herein with
respect to the Private Placement Warrants):
●
in whole and not in part;
●
at $0.10 per warrant upon a minimum of 30 days’ prior written notice of redemption provided that holders will be able
to exercise their warrants on a cashless basis prior to redemption and receive that number of shares determined by
reference to an agreed table based on the redemption date and the “fair market value” of Class A ordinary shares;


F-60
●
if, and only if, the closing price of Class A ordinary shares equals or exceeds $10.00 per public share (as adjusted per
share subdivisions, share dividends, reorganizations, recapitalizations and the like) on the trading day before sending
the notice of redemption to the warrant holders; and
●
if the Reference Value is less than $18.00 per share (as adjusted for share splits, share dividends, rights issuances,
subdivisions, reorganizations, recapitalizations and the like), then the Private Placement Warrants must also
concurrently be called for redemption on the same terms (except as described herein with respect to a holder’s ability
to cashless exercise its warrants) as the outstanding Public Warrants as described above.
The “fair market value” of the Class A ordinary shares for the above purpose shall mean the volume weighted average price
of the Class A ordinary shares during the 10 trading days immediately following the date on which the notice of redemption is
sent to the holders of warrants. In no event will the warrants be exercisable in connection with this redemption feature for more
than 0.361 Class A ordinary shares per warrant (subject to adjustment).
In no event will the Company be required to net cash settle any Warrants. If the Company is unable to complete the initial
Business Combination within the Combination Period and the Company liquidates the funds held in the Trust Account, holders
of warrants will not receive any of such funds with respect to their warrants, nor will they receive any distribution from the
Company’s assets held outside of the Trust Account with the respect to such warrants. Accordingly, the warrants may expire
worthless.
Note 8 — Shareholders’ Equity
Preference shares — The Company is authorized to issue 1,000,000 preference shares with a par value of $0.0001 per
share. As of December 31, 2020, there were no preference shares issued or outstanding.
Class A ordinary shares— The Company is authorized to issue 200,000,000 Class A ordinary shares with a par value of
$0.0001 per share. As of December 31, 2020, there were 1,587,764 Class A ordinary shares issued or outstanding, excluding
36,362,236 Class A ordinary shares subject to possible redemption.
Class B ordinary shares— The Company is authorized to issue 20,000,000 Class B ordinary shares with a par value of
$0.0001 per share. As of December 31, 2020, there were 9,487,500 Class B ordinary shares issued or outstanding.
Ordinary shareholders of record are entitled to one vote for each share held on all matters to be voted on by shareholders.
Holders of Class A ordinary shares and holders of Class B ordinary shares will vote together as a single class on all matters
submitted to a vote of the shareholders except as required by law.
The Class B ordinary shares will automatically convert into Class A ordinary shares on the first business day following the
consummation of the initial Business Combination at a ratio such that the number of Class A ordinary shares issuable upon
conversion of all Founder Shares will equal, in the aggregate, on an as-converted basis, 20% of the sum of  (i) the total number
of ordinary shares issued and outstanding upon the consummation of the Initial Public Offering, plus the sum of the total
number of Class A ordinary shares issued or deemed issued or issuable upon conversion or exercise of any equity-linked
securities or rights issued or deemed issued, by the Company in connection with or in relation to the consummation of the initial
Business Combination (net of any redemptions of Class A ordinary shares by Public Shareholders), excluding any Class A
ordinary shares or equity-linked securities exercisable for or convertible into Class A ordinary shares issued, deemed issued, or
to be issued, to any seller in the initial Business Combination and any Private Placement Warrants issued to the Sponsor,
members of the Company’s founding team or any of their affiliates upon conversion of Working Capital Loans. In no event will
the Class B ordinary shares convert into Class A ordinary shares at a rate of less than one to one.


F-61
Note 9 — Fair Value Measurements
The following table presents information about the Company’s financial assets and financial liabilities that are measured at
fair value on a recurring basis as of December 31, 2020 by level within the fair value hierarchy:
     Quoted Prices in      Significant Other     
Significant Other
Active Markets
Observable Inputs
Unobservable Inputs
(Level 1)
(Level 2)
(Level 3)
Assets:
Investments held in Trust Account -
  $ 379,578,055   $
—   $
—
U.S. Treasury Securities(1)
Liabilities:
Derivative warrant liabilities
$
39,468,000
$
—
$
22,027,200
(1) Excludes $1,437 of investments in an open-ended money market fund, in which the Company uses NAV as a practical
expedient to fair value.
Transfers to/from Levels 1, 2, and 3 are recognized at the end of the reporting period. The estimated fair value of the Public
Warrants transferred from a Level 3 measurement to a Level 1 fair value measurement in November 2020, when the Public
Warrants were separately listed and traded.
Level 1 instruments include investments in government securities. The Company uses inputs such as actual trade data,
benchmark yields, quoted market prices from dealers or brokers, and other similar sources to determine the fair value of its
investments.
The fair value of the Public Warrants issued in connection with the Public Offering and Private Placement Warrants was
initially measured using a Monte Carlo simulation model and subsequently, the fair value of the Private Placement Warrants has
been estimated using a Monte Carlo simulation model as of each measurement date. The fair value of Public Warrants issued in
connection with the Initial Public Offering has been measured based on the listed market price of such warrants, a Level 1
measurement, since November 2020. For the period ended December 31, 2020, the Company recognized a charge to the
statement of operations resulting from an increase in the fair value of liabilities of approximately $33.7 million presented as
change in fair value of derivative warrant liabilities on the accompanying statement of operations.
The estimated fair value of the Private Placement Warrants, and the Public Warrants prior to being separately listed and
traded, is determined using Level 3 inputs. Inherent in a Monte Carlo simulation are assumptions related to expected stock-price
volatility, expected life, risk-free interest rate and dividend yield. The Company estimates the volatility of its warrants based on
implied volatility from the Company’s traded warrants and from historical volatility of select peer company’s common stock
that matches the expected remaining life of the warrants. The risk-free interest rate is based on the U.S. Treasury zero-coupon
yield curve on the grant date for a maturity similar to the expected remaining life of the warrants. The expected life of the
warrants is assumed to be equivalent to their remaining contractual term. The dividend rate is based on the historical rate, which
the Company anticipates remaining at zero.
The following table provides quantitative information regarding Level 3 fair value measurements inputs at their
measurement dates:
    As of October 2,     As of December 31, 
2020
2020
 
Exercise price
 
11.50
 
11.50
Stock Price
 
9.66  
12.29
Option term (in years)
 
5.50  
5.50
Volatility
 
22.20 %  
25 %
Risk-free interest rate
 
0.33 %  
0.43 %
The change in the fair value of the derivative warrant liabilities for the period from August 7, 2020 (inception) through
December 31, 2020 is summarized as follows:
Derivative warrant liabilities as of October 2, 2021
    $ 27,791,100
Change in fair value of derivative warrant liabilities
 
33,704,100
Derivative warrant liabilities as of December 31, 2020
$ 61,495,200


F-62
Note 10 — Subsequent Events
The Company evaluated subsequent events and transactions that occurred after the balance sheet date up to the date that the
financial statements were issued. Based on this evaluation, the Company identified the following subsequent events for
disclosure in addition to Notes 2.
On January 28, 2021, the Company entered into an Administrative Services Agreement with Holdings, pursuant to which
Holdings will provide certain administrative services to the Company and the Company will reimburse Holdings up to $50,000
a month, subject to adjustment in accordance with the terms of the agreement. In connection therewith, the Company terminated
the Administrative Services Agreement between the Company and the Sponsor dated October 2, 2020.
On March 30, 2021, the Company entered into a Business Combination Agreement (as it may be amended, supplemented or
otherwise modified from time to time, the “Business Combination Agreement”), by and among Qell DutchCo B.V., a
Netherlands limited liability company and wholly owned subsidiary of Sponsor (“Holdco”), Queen Cayman Merger LLC, a
Cayman Islands limited liability company (“Merger Sub”), and Lilium GmbH, a German limited liability company ( “Lilium”).
In accordance with the terms and subject to the conditions of the Business Combination Agreement, the consideration to be
received by the shareholders of Lilium in connection with the transactions contemplated under the Business Combination
Agreement shall be an aggregate number of Holdco Ordinary Shares equal to (a) $2,400,000,000, divided by (b) $10.00. Each
shareholder of the Company will receive one Holdco Ordinary Share per the Company ordinary share, as set forth above. Cash
held in the trust account net of redemptions and the proceeds of the Private Placement (as defined below), less the transaction
costs of the Business Combination, will be received by Sponsor and used for general corporate purposes after the Business
Combination.
Concurrently with the execution of the Business Combination Agreement, the Company entered into Subscription
Agreements with certain investors (collectively, the “Private Placement Investors”) pursuant to which, among other things, such
investors agreed to subscribe for and purchase and Holdco agreed to issue and sell to such investors, 45,000,000 Holdco
Ordinary Shares (the “Private Placement Shares”), for an aggregate of $450,000,000 (the “Private Placement”) in proceeds.
The closing of the Private Placement is contingent upon, among other things, the substantially concurrent consummation of the
Business Combination and related transactions.


F-64
QELL ACQUISITION CORP.
CONDENSED BALANCE SHEETS
June 30, 2021
December 31, 2020
    
(Unaudited)
    
Assets
Current assets:
  
 
Cash
$
337,744
$
2,023,823
Prepaid expenses
 
390,307
 
515,078
Due from related party
87,365
—
Total current assets
 
815,416
 
2,538,901
Investments held in Trust Account
 
379,656,050
 
379,579,492
Total Assets
$ 380,471,466
$ 382,118,393
 
  
 
Liabilities and Shareholders' Equity
 
  
 
Current liabilities:
 
  
 
Accounts payable
$
342,203
$
133,528
Accrued expenses
 
4,993,894
 
80,000
Total current liabilities
 
5,336,097
 
213,528
Derivative warrant liabilities
31,536,000
61,495,200
Deferred underwriting commissions
 
13,282,500
 
13,282,500
Total liabilities
 
50,154,597
 
74,991,228
 
  
 
Commitments and Contingencies (Note 5)
 
  
 
Class A ordinary shares subject to possible redemption; 32,531,686 and 30,212,716 shares
at $10.00 per share as of June 30, 2021 and December 31,2020, respectively
 
325,316,860
 
302,127,160
 
  
 
Shareholders' Equity:
 
  
 
Preference shares, $0.0001 par value; 1,000,000 shares authorized; none issued or
outstanding
 
—
 
—
Class A ordinary shares, $0.0001 par value; 200,000,000 shares authorized; 5,418,314 and
7,737,284 shares issued and outstanding (excluding 32,531,686 and 30,212,716 shares
subject to possible redemption) as of June 30, 2021 and December 31, 2020,
respectively
 
542
 
774
Class B ordinary shares, $0.0001 par value; 20,000,000 shares authorized; 9,487,500
shares issued and outstanding as of June 30, 2021 and December 31, 2020
 
949
 
949
Additional paid-in capital
 
16,805,356
 
39,994,824
Accumulated deficit
 
(11,806,838)
 
(34,996,542)
Total shareholders' equity
 
5,000,009
 
5,000,005
Total Liabilities and Shareholders' Equity
$ 380,471,466
$ 382,118,393
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these unaudited condensed financial statements.


F-65
QELL ACQUISITION CORP.
UNAUDITED CONDENSED STATEMENTS OF OPERATIONS
For the Three Months
For the Six Months
     Ended June 30, 2021      Ended June 30, 2021
Operating expenses:
General and administrative expenses
     $
2,695,836
$
6,683,419
Administrative fee – related party
84,677
162,635
Loss from operations
(2,780,513)
(6,846,054)
Other income:
Change in fair value of derivative warrant liabilities
2,365,200
29,959,200
Income earned on investments held in Trust Account
13,570
76,558
Net income (loss)
$
(401,743)
$
23,189,704
Basic and diluted weighted average shares outstanding of Class A ordinary
shares
 
37,950,000
37,950,000
Basic and diluted net income per ordinary share, Class A
$
0.00
$
0.00
Basic and diluted weighted average shares outstanding of Class B ordinary
shares
9,487,500
9,487,500
Basic and diluted net income (loss) per ordinary share, Class B
$
(0.04)
$
2.44
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these unaudited condensed financial statements.


F-66
QELL ACQUISITION CORP.
UNAUDITED CONDENSED STATEMENTS OF CHANGES IN SHAREHOLDERS’ EQUITY
FOR THE THREE AND SIX MONTHS ENDED JUNE 30, 2021
    
Ordinary Shares
    
        
    
Total
Class A
Class B
Additional Paid-In
Retained Earnings
Shareholders'
    
Shares
    Amount    
Shares
    Amount    
Capital
    (Accumulated Deficit)    
Equity
Balance – December 31,
2020
 
7,737,284
$ 774   9,487,500
$ 949
$
39,994,824
$
(34,996,542)
$
5,000,005
Class A ordinary Shares
subject to possible
redemption
(2,359,145)
(236)
—
—
(23,591,214)
—
(23,591,450)
Net income
 
—
 
—  
—
 
—
 
—
 
23,591,447
  23,591,447
Balance – March 31,
2021 (unaudited)
 
5,378,139
538   9,487,500
949
16,403,610
(11,405,095)
5,000,002
Class A ordinary Shares
subject to possible
redemption
40,175
4
—
—
401,746
—
401,750
Net loss
—
—
—
—
—
(401,743)
(401,743)
Balance – June 30, 2021
(unaudited)
5,418,314
$ 542
9,487,500
$ 949
$
16,805,356
$
(11,806,838)
$
5,000,009
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these unaudited condensed financial statements.


F-67
QELL ACQUISITION CORP.
UNAUDITED CONDENSED STATEMENT OF CASH FLOWS
FOR THE SIX MONTHS ENDED JUNE 30, 2021
Cash Flows from Operating Activities:
    
  
Net income
$
23,189,704
Adjustments to reconcile net income to net cash used in operating activities:
 
  
Income earned on investments in Trust Account
(76,558)
Change in fair value of derivative warrant liabilities
(29,959,200)
Changes in operating assets and liabilities:
 
  
Prepaid expenses
 
124,771
Due from related party
(87,365)
Accounts payable
 
208,675
Accrued expenses
 
4,913,894
Net cash used in operating activities
 
(1,686,079)
Net decrease in cash
 
(1,686,079)
Cash – beginning of the period:
 
2,023,823
Cash – end of the period
$
337,744
Supplemental disclosure of non-cash investing and financing activities:
 
  
Change in initial value of Class A ordinary shares subject to possible redemption
$
23,189,700
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these unaudited condensed financial statements.


F-68
QELL ACQUISITION CORP.
NOTES TO UNAUDITED CONDENSED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
Note 1 — Description of organization, business operations and basis of presentation
Qell Acquisition Corp. (the “Company”) was incorporated as a Cayman Islands exempted company on August 7, 2020. The
Company was incorporated for the purpose of effecting a merger, share exchange, asset acquisition, share purchase,
reorganization or similar business combination with one or more businesses (the “Business Combination”). The Company is an
emerging growth company and, as such, the Company is subject to all of the risks associated with emerging growth companies.
As of June 30, 2021, the Company had not commenced any operations. All activity through June 30, 2021 relates to the
Company’s formation, the initial public offering (“Initial Public Offering”) described below, identifying a target for a Business
Combination, and activities in connection with the proposed Business Combination with Lilium GmbH, a German limited
liability company, Lilium B.V., a Dutch private liability company and Queen Cayman Merger LLC, a Cayman Islands limited
liability company, as described further below. The Company will not generate any operating revenues until after the completion
of its initial Business Combination, at the earliest. The Company generates non-operating income in the form of interest income
from the proceeds derived from the Initial Public Offering. The Company has selected December 31 as its fiscal year end.
The Company’s sponsor is Qell Partners LLC, a Cayman Islands limited liability company (the “Sponsor”). The registration
statement for the Company’s Initial Public Offering was declared effective on September 29, 2020. On October 2, 2020, the
Company consummated its Initial Public Offering of 37,950,000 units (each, a “Unit” and collectively, the “Units” and, with
respect to the Class A ordinary shares included in the Units being offered, the “Public Shares”), including 4,950,000 additional
Units to cover over-allotments (the “Over-Allotment Units”), at $10.00 per Unit, generating gross proceeds of $379.5 million,
and incurring offering costs of approximately $21.1 million, inclusive of approximately $13.3 million in deferred underwriting
commissions (Note 5).
Simultaneously with the consummation of the Initial Public Offering, the Company consummated the private placement
(“Private Placement”) of a total of 7,060,000 warrants (each, a “Private Placement Warrant” and collectively, the “Private
Placement Warrants”), at a price of $1.50 per Private Placement Warrant with the Sponsor, generating gross proceeds of
approximately $10.6 million (Note 4).
Upon the closing of the Initial Public Offering and the Private Placement, $379.5 million ($10.00 per Unit) of the net
proceeds of the Initial Public Offering and certain of the proceeds of the Private Placement were placed in a trust account
(“Trust Account”), located in the United States with Continental Stock Transfer & Trust Company acting as trustee, and will
invest only in United States government treasury obligations with a maturity of 185 days or less or in money market funds
meeting certain conditions under Rule 2a-7 under the Investment Company Act of 1940, as amended (the “Investment Company
Act”) which invest only in direct U.S. government treasury obligations, until the earlier of: (i) the completion of a Business
Combination and (ii) the distribution of the Trust Account as described below.
The Company’s management has broad discretion with respect to the specific application of the net proceeds of the Initial
Public Offering and the sale of Private Placement Warrants, although substantially all of the net proceeds are intended to be
applied generally toward consummating a Business Combination. There is no assurance that the Company will be able to
complete a Business Combination successfully. The Company must complete one or more initial Business Combinations having
an aggregate fair market value of at least 80% of the assets held in the Trust Account (excluding the amount of deferred
underwriting discounts held in trust and taxes payable on the interest earned on the Trust Account) at the time of the agreement
to enter into the initial Business Combination. However, the Company will only complete a Business Combination if the post-
transaction company owns or acquires 50% or more of the outstanding voting securities of the partner or otherwise acquires a
controlling interest in the partner sufficient for it not to be required to register as an investment company under the Investment
Company Act.
The Company will provide its holders of its Public Shares (individually, “Public Shareholder”, and collectively,the “Public
Shareholders”) with the opportunity to redeem all or a portion of their Public Shares upon the completion of a Business
Combination either (i) in connection with a shareholder meeting called to approve the Business Combination or (ii) by means of
a tender offer. The decision as to whether the Company will seek shareholder approval of a Business Combination or conduct a
tender offer will be made by the Company, solely in its discretion. The Public Shareholders will be entitled to redeem their
Public Shares for a pro rata portion of the amount then in the Trust Account (initially anticipated to be $10.00 for each of the
Public Shares). The per-share amount to be distributed to Public Shareholders who redeem their Public Shares will not be
reduced by the deferred underwriting commissions the Company will pay to the underwriters (as discussed in Note 5). These
Public Shares will be classified as temporary equity upon the completion of the Initial Public Offering in accordance with the
Financial Accounting Standards Board’s (“FASB”) Accounting




F-69
Standards Codification (“ASC”) Topic 480 “Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity” (“ASC 480”). In such case, the Company
will proceed with a Business Combination if the Company has net tangible assets of at least $5,000,001 and the approval of an
ordinary resolution. If a shareholder vote is not required by law and the Company does not decide to hold a shareholder vote for
business or other legal reasons, the Company will, pursuant to its amended and restated memorandum and articles of
association, conduct the redemptions pursuant to the tender offer rules of the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission
(“SEC”) and file tender offer documents with the SEC prior to completing a Business Combination. If, however, shareholder
approval of the transactions is required by law, or the Company decides to obtain shareholder approval for business or legal
reasons, the Company will offer to redeem shares in conjunction with a proxy solicitation pursuant to the proxy rules and not
pursuant to the tender offer rules. Additionally, each Public Shareholder may elect to redeem their Public Shares irrespective of
whether they vote for or against the proposed transaction. If the Company seeks shareholder approval in connection with a
Business Combination, the initial shareholders (as defined below) have agreed to vote their Founder Shares (as defined below in
Note 4) and any Public Shares purchased during or after the Initial Public Offering in favor of a Business Combination.
Subsequent to the consummation of the Initial Public Offering, the Company will adopt an insider trading policy which will
require insiders to: (i) refrain from purchasing shares during certain blackout period and when they are in possession of any
material non-public information and (ii) to clear all trades with the Company’s legal counsel prior to execution. In addition, the
initial shareholders have agreed to waive their redemption rights with respect to their Founder Shares and Public Shares in
connection with the completion of a Business Combination.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, the Amended and Restated Memorandum and Articles of Association (the “Article of
Association”) will provide that a Public Shareholder, together with any affiliate of such shareholder or any other person with
whom such shareholder is acting in concert or as a “group” (as defined under Section 13 of the Securities Exchange Act of
1934, as amended (the “Exchange Act”)), will be restricted from redeeming its shares with respect to more than an aggregate of
15% or more of the Class A ordinary shares sold in the Initial Public Offering, without the prior consent of the Company.
The Company’s Sponsor, officers and directors (the “initial shareholders”) have agreed not to propose an amendment to the
Articles of Association (A) that would modify the substance or timing of the Company’s obligation to allow redemption in
connection with our initial Business Combination or to redeem 100% of its Public Shares if the Company does not complete a
Business Combination within 24 months from the closing of the Initial Public Offering, or October 2, 2022, (the “Combination
Period”) or (B) with respect to any other provision relating to shareholders’ rights or pre-initial Business Combination activity,
unless the Company provides the Public Shareholders with the opportunity to redeem their Class A ordinary shares in
conjunction with any such amendment. If the Company is unable to complete a Business Combination within the Combination
Period, the Company will (i) cease all operations except for the purpose of winding up; (ii) as promptly as reasonably possible,
but not more than ten business days thereafter, redeem the Public Shares, at a per-share price, payable in cash, equal to the
aggregate amount then on deposit in the Trust Account, including interest earned on the funds held in the Trust Account and not
previously released to the Company to pay the income taxes, if any (less up to $100,000 of interest to pay dissolution expenses),
divided by the number of the then-outstanding Public Shares, which redemption will completely extinguish Public
Shareholders’ rights as shareholders (including the right to receive further liquidation distributions, if any); and (iii) as promptly
as reasonably possible following such redemption, subject to the approval of the remaining shareholders and the board of
directors, liquidate and dissolve, subject in the case of clauses (ii) and (iii), to the Company’s obligations under Cayman Islands
law to provide for claims of creditors and the requirements of other applicable law.
The Sponsor, officers and directors have agreed to waive their liquidation rights with respect to the Founder Shares if the
Company fails to complete a Business Combination within the Combination Period. However, if the initial shareholders or
members of the Company’s management team acquire Public Shares in or after the Initial Public Offering, they will be entitled
to liquidating distributions from the Trust Account with respect to such Public Shares if the Company fails to complete a
Business Combination within the Combination Period. The underwriters have agreed to waive their rights to its deferred
underwriting commission (see Note 5) held in the Trust Account in the event the Company does not complete a Business
Combination within the Combination Period and, in such event, such amounts will be included with the other funds held in the
Trust Account that will be available to fund the redemption of the Public Shares. In the event of such distribution, it is possible
that the per share value of the residual assets remaining available for distribution (including Trust Account assets) will be only
$10.00 per share initially held in the Trust Account. In order to protect the amounts held in the Trust Account, the Sponsor has
agreed to be liable to the Company if and to the extent any claims by a vendor for services rendered or products sold to the
Company, or a prospective partner business with which the Company has discussed entering into a transaction agreement,
reduce the amount of funds in the Trust Account. This liability will not apply with respect to any claims by a third party who
executed a waiver of any right, title, interest or claim of any kind in or to any monies held in the Trust Account or to any claims
under the Company’s indemnity of the underwriters of the Initial Public Offering against certain liabilities, including liabilities
under the Securities Act of 1933, as amended (the “Securities Act”). Moreover, in the event that an executed waiver is deemed
to be unenforceable against a third party, the Sponsor will not be responsible to the extent of any liability for such third party
claims. The Company will seek to reduce the possibility that the Sponsor will have to indemnify the Trust Account due to claims
of creditors by endeavoring to have all vendors, service providers (except for the Company’s independent registered


F-70
public accounting firm), prospective partner businesses or other entities with which the Company does business, execute
agreements with the Company waiving any right, title, interest or claim of any kind in or to monies held in the Trust Account.
Going Concern
As of June 30, 2021, the Company had approximately $0.3 million in its operating bank account and a working capital
deficit of approximately $4.5 million.
The Company’s liquidity needs through June 30, 2021 were satisfied through a contribution of $25,000 from the Sponsor to
cover certain of the Company’s expenses in exchange for the issuance of the Founder Shares, a loan of approximately $195,000
from the Sponsor under the Note (see Note 4), and the net proceeds from the consummation of the Private Placement not held in
the Trust Account. The Company fully repaid the Note on November 2, 2020. In addition, in order to finance transaction costs in
connection with a Business Combination, the Sponsor or an affiliate of the Sponsor, or certain of the Company’s officers and
directors may, but are not obligated to, provide the Company Working Capital Loans (see Note 4). As of June 30, 2021, there
were no amounts outstanding under any Working Capital Loans.
The liquidity condition raises substantial doubt about the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern for one year
from the date of the filing of this Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q. These condensed financial statements do not include any
adjustments relating to the recovery of the recorded assets or the classification of the liabilities that might be necessary should
the Company be unable to continue as a going concern.
Basis of Presentation
The accompanying unaudited condensed financial statements are presented in U.S. dollars in conformity with accounting
principles generally accepted in the United States of America (“GAAP”) for financial information and pursuant to the rules and
regulations of the SEC. Accordingly, they do not include all of the information and footnotes required by GAAP. In the opinion
of management, the unaudited condensed financial statements reflect all adjustments, which include only normal recurring
adjustments necessary for the fair statement of the balances and results for the period presented.
The accompanying unaudited condensed consolidated financial statements should be read in conjunction with the
Company’s Annual Report on Form 10-K/A for the year ended December 31, 2020 as filed with the SEC on May 4, 2021, which
contains the audited financial statements and notes thereto. The interim results for the three and six months ended June 30, 2021
are not necessarily indicative of the results to be expected for the year ending December 31, 2021 or for any future periods.
Emerging Growth Company
The Company is an “emerging growth company,” as defined in Section 2(a) of the Securities Act, as modified by the
Jumpstart Business Startups Act of 2012, (the “JOBS Act”), and it may take advantage of certain exemptions from various
reporting requirements that are applicable to other public companies that are not emerging growth companies including, but not
limited to, not being required to comply with the auditor attestation requirements of Section 404 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act,
reduced disclosure obligations regarding executive compensation in its periodic reports and proxy statements, and exemptions
from the requirements of holding a nonbinding advisory vote on executive compensation and shareholder approval of any
golden parachute payments not previously approved.
Further, Section 102(b)(1) of the JOBS Act exempts emerging growth companies from being required to comply with new
or revised financial accounting standards until private companies (that is, those that have not had a Securities Act registration
statement declared effective or do not have a class of securities registered under the Exchange Act) are required to comply with
the new or revised financial accounting standards. The JOBS Act provides that an emerging growth company can elect to opt
out of the extended transition period and comply with the requirements that apply to non-emerging growth companies but any
such an election to opt out is irrevocable. The Company has elected not to opt out of such extended transition period, which
means that when a standard is issued or revised and it has different application dates for public or private companies, the
Company, as an emerging growth company, can adopt the new or revised standard at the time private companies adopt the new
or revised standard. This may make the comparison of the Company’s unaudited condensed financial statements with another
public company that is neither an emerging growth company nor an emerging growth company that has opted out of using the
extended transition period difficult or impossible because of the potential differences in accounting standards used.


F-71
Proposed Business Combination and Related Transaction
On March 30, 2021, the Company entered into a business combination agreement (as it may be amended, supplemented or
otherwise modified from time to time, the “Business Combination Agreement”), by and among Qell DutchCo B.V., a
Netherlands limited liability company and wholly owned subsidiary of our Sponsor (“Holdco”), Queen Cayman Merger LLC, a
Cayman Islands limited liability company (“Merger Sub”), and Lilium GmbH, a German limited liability company (
“Lilium”).The Business Combination Agreement provides for, among other things, the following transactions on closing
(collectively, the “Lilium Business Combination”):
●
After signing of the Business Combination Agreement, and prior to closing of the Lilium Business Combination, the
legal form of our Sponsor shall be changed from a private company with limited liability to a public limited liability
company;
●
The Company will merge with and into Merger Sub (the “Merger”), with Merger Sub as the surviving company (the
“Surviving Company”) in the merger and, after giving effect to such merger, becoming a wholly owned subsidiary of
the Company’ Sponsor;
●
In connection with the Merger, each issued and outstanding ordinary share of the Company will be converted into a
claim for a corresponding equity security in the Merger Sub, and such claim shall then be automatically contributed
into the Company’s Sponsor in exchange for one ordinary share in the share capital of Holdco (a “Holdco Ordinary
Share”);
●
Immediately following the Merger, Merger Sub and Holdco will cause Merger Sub to, commence winding up under
the Cayman LLC Act and distribute all of its tangible and intangible assets (including all cash) and transfer any and all
of its liabilities to Holdco (the “Liquidation Distribution and Assumption”);
●
Immediately following the Liquidation Distribution and Assumption, Holdco will take a series of actions including, but
not limited to, (i) consummation of the Lilium Private Placement (as defined below), (ii) appointment of Daniel
Wiegand as executive director to the board of directors of Holdco, and (iii) execution of the Holdco Board Agreements
(as defined in the Business Combination Agreement);
●
The shareholders of Lilium will exchange (the “Exchange”) their interests in Lilium for Holdco Ordinary Shares. All
Lilium shareholders, but for Daniel Wiegand, will receive Class A Holdco Ordinary Shares in the Exchange. Daniel
Weigand will receive Class B Holdco Ordinary Shares. Class B Holdco Ordinary Shares will rank pari passu with
Class A Holdco Ordinary Shares in all respects, provided they will be entitled to 3x super voting rights, subject to
customary sunset provisions; and
●
Each outstanding warrant to purchase a Class A ordinary share of Qell will, by its terms, convert into a warrant to
purchase one Holdco Ordinary Share, on the same contractual terms.
In accordance with the terms and subject to the conditions of the Business Combination Agreement, the consideration to be
received by the shareholders of Lilium in connection with the transactions contemplated under the Business Combination
Agreement shall be an aggregate number of Holdco Ordinary Shares equal to (a) $2,400,000,000, divided by (b) $10.00. Each
of our shareholders will receive one Holdco Ordinary Share per our ordinary share, as set forth above. Cash held in the trust
account net of redemptions and the proceeds of the Lilium Private Placement (as defined below), less the transaction costs of the
Lilium Business Combination, will be received by Holdco and used for general corporate purposes after the Lilium Business
Combination.
Concurrently with the execution of the Business Combination Agreement, the Company entered into Subscription
Agreements with certain investors (collectively, the “Private Placement Investors”) pursuant to which, among other things, such
investors agreed to subscribe for and purchase and Holdco agreed to issue and sell to such investors, 45,000,000 Holdco
Ordinary Shares (the “Private Placement Shares”), for an aggregate of $450,000,000 (the “Lilium Private Placement”) in
proceeds. The closing of the Lilium Private Placement is contingent upon, among other things, the substantially concurrent
consummation of the Lilium Business Combination and related transactions.
Note 2 — Summary of significant accounting policies
Use of Estimates
The preparation of financial statements in conformity with GAAP requires the Company’s management to make estimates
and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the
date of the




F-72
financial statements and the reported amounts of expenses during the reporting period. Actual results could differ from those
estimates.
It is at least reasonably possible that the estimate of the effect of a condition, situation or set of circumstances that existed at
the date of the financial statements, which management considered in formulating its estimate, could change in the near term
due to one or more future confirming events. One of the more significant accounting estimates included in these unaudited
condensed financial statements is the determination of the fair value of the derivative warrant liability. Such estimates may be
subject to change as more current information becomes available and accordingly the actual results could differ significantly
from those estimates.
Concentration of Credit Risk
Financial instruments that potentially subject the Company to concentrations of credit risk consist of cash accounts in a
financial institution, which, at times, may exceed the Federal Depository Insurance Coverage of $250,000. At June 30, 2021 and
December 31, 2020, the Company has not experienced losses on these accounts and management believes the Company is not
exposed to significant risks on such accounts.
Cash and Cash Equivalents
The Company considers all short-term investments with an original maturity of three months or less when purchased to be
cash equivalents. The Company had no cash equivalents as of June 30, 2021 and December 31, 2020.
Investments Held in Trust Account
The Company’s portfolio of investments is comprised of U.S. government securities, within the meaning set forth in
Section 2(a)(16) of the Investment Company Act, with a maturity of 185 days or less, or investments in money market funds
that invest in U.S. government securities and generally have a readily determinable fair value, or a combination thereof. When
the Company’s investments held in the Trust Account are comprised of U.S. government securities, the investments are
classified as trading securities. When the Company’s investments held in the Trust Account are comprised of money market
funds, the investments are recognized at fair value. Trading securities and investments in money market funds are presented on
the condensed balance sheets at fair value at the end of each reporting period. Gains and losses resulting from the change in fair
value of these securities is included in income from investments held in Trust Account in the accompanying unaudited
condensed statements of operations. The estimated fair values of investments held in the Trust Account are determined using
available market information.
Fair Value Measurement
Fair value is defined as the price that would be received for sale of an asset or paid for transfer of a liability, in an orderly
transaction between market participants at the measurement date. GAAP establishes a three-tier fair value hierarchy, which
prioritizes the inputs used in measuring fair value.
The hierarchy gives the highest priority to unadjusted quoted prices in active markets for identical assets or liabilities
(Level 1 measurements) and the lowest priority to unobservable inputs (Level 3 measurements). These consist of:
●
Level 1, defined as observable inputs such as quoted prices for identical instruments in active markets;
●
Level 2, defined as inputs other than quoted prices in active markets that are either directly or indirectly observable
such as quoted prices for similar instruments in active markets or quoted prices for identical or similar instruments in
markets that are not active; and
●
Level 3, defined as unobservable inputs in which little or no market data exists, therefore requiring an entity to develop
its own assumptions, such as valuations derived from valuation techniques in which one or more significant inputs or
significant value drivers are unobservable.
In some circumstances, the inputs used to measure fair value might be categorized within different levels of the fair value
hierarchy. In those instances, the fair value measurement is categorized in its entirety in the fair value hierarchy based on the
lowest level input that is significant to the fair value measurement.


F-73
Fair Value of Financial Instruments
The fair value of the Company’s assets and liabilities, which qualify as financial instruments under the FASB ASC Topic
820, “Fair Value Measurements,” equal or approximate the carrying amounts represented in the condensed balance sheets.
Derivative Warrant Liabilities
The Company does not use derivative instruments to hedge exposures to cash flow, market, or foreign currency risks. The
Company evaluates all of its financial instruments, including issued stock purchase warrants, to determine if such instruments
are derivatives or contain features that qualify as embedded derivatives, pursuant to ASC 480 and FASB ASC Topic 815,
“Derivatives and Hedging” (“ASC 815”). The classification of derivative instruments, including whether such instruments
should be classified as liabilities or as equity, is re-assessed at the end of each reporting period.
The Public Warrants and the Private Placement Warrants are recognized as derivative liabilities in accordance with ASC
815. Accordingly, the Company recognizes the warrant instruments as liabilities at fair value and adjusts the instruments to fair
value at each reporting period. The liabilities are subject to re-measurement at each balance sheet date until exercised, and any
change in fair value is recognized in the Company’s unaudited condensed statements of operations. The initial estimated fair
value of the Public Warrants was measured using a Monte Carlo simulation. The fair value of the Private Warrants was deemed
to be equal to the fair value of the Public Warrants. The Private Warrants are not subject to the redemption feature at $0.01 when
Class A ordinary share price is higher than $18 but are subject to the redemption pursuant to Section 6.2 when the Class A
ordinary share price is between $10 and $18. The redemption price pursuant to the make-whole table when the Class A ordinary
share price is $18 is equivalent to the intrinsic value of the warrant (0.361 Class A ordinary shares) making it optimal for the
issuer to redeem the Private Warrants when the Class A ordinary share price reaches $18. Therefore, the Private Warrants are
subject to substantially the same redemption features as the Public Warrants and hence their fair values are equal. Beginning in
November 2020, the estimated fair value of the Public Warrants is based on the listed price in an active market for such
warrants.
Offering Costs Associated with the Initial Public Offering
Offering costs consisted of legal, accounting, underwriting fees and other costs incurred in connection with the preparation
for the Initial Public Offering. Offering costs are allocated to the separable financial instruments issued in the Initial Public
Offering based on a relative fair value basis, compared to total proceeds received. Offering costs associated with derivative
warrant liabilities are expensed as incurred, presented as non-operating expenses in the unaudited condensed statements of
operations. Offering costs associated with the Public Shares were charged to shareholders’ equity upon the completion of the
Initial Public Offering.
Class A Ordinary Shares Subject to Possible Redemption
Class A ordinary shares subject to mandatory redemption (if any) are classified as liability instruments and are measured at
fair value. Conditionally redeemable Class A ordinary shares (including Class A ordinary shares that feature redemption rights
that are either within the control of the holder or subject to redemption upon the occurrence of uncertain events not solely within
the Company’s control) are classified as temporary equity. At all other times, Class A ordinary shares are classified as
shareholders’ equity. Our Class A ordinary shares feature certain redemption rights that are considered to be outside of our
control and subject to the occurrence of uncertain future events. Accordingly, at June 30, 2021 and December 31, 2020, an
aggregate of 32,531,686 and 30,212,716, respectively, of Class A ordinary shares subject to possible redemption are presented
as temporary equity, outside of the shareholders’ equity section of the Company’s condensed balance sheets.
Net Income (Loss) Per Ordinary Share
Net income (loss) per ordinary share is computed by dividing net income (loss) by the weighted-average number of
ordinary shares outstanding during the periods. The Company has not considered the effect of the warrants sold in the Initial
Public Offering and the Private Placement to purchase an aggregate of 19,710,000 of the Company’s Class A ordinary shares in
the calculation of diluted income (loss) per share, since their exercise is contingent upon future events and their inclusion would
be anti-dilutive.


F-74
The Company’s unaudited condensed statements of operations include a presentation of income (loss) per share for
ordinary shares subject to redemption in a manner similar to the two-class method of income per share. Net income per ordinary
share, basic and diluted for Class A ordinary shares is calculated by dividing the income earned on investments held in the Trust
Account, net of applicable taxes available to be withdrawn from the Trust Account, for the three and six months ended June 30,
2021, respectively, by the weighted average number of Class A ordinary shares outstanding for the period. Net income (loss) per
ordinary share, basic and diluted for Class B ordinary shares is calculated by dividing the net (loss) income, less income
attributable to Class A ordinary shares by the weighted average number of Class B ordinary shares outstanding for the period.
The following table reflects the calculation of basic and diluted net income (loss) per share of ordinary share:
    For the Three Months     For the Six Months
Ended June 30, 2021
Ended June 30, 2021
Class A ordinary shares
 
   
  
Numerator: Income allocable to Class A ordinary shares
 
   
  
Income from investments held in Trust Account
$
13,570
$
76,558
Less: Company's portion available to be withdrawn to pay taxes
 
—
 
—
Net income attributable to Class A ordinary shares
$
13,570
$
76,558
Denominator: Weighted average Class A ordinary shares
 
  
 
  
Basic and diluted weighted average shares outstanding, Class A ordinary shares
 
37,950,000
 
37,950,000
Basic and diluted net income per share, Class A ordinary shares
$
0.00
$
0.00
Class B ordinary shares
 
  
 
  
Numerator: Net income (loss) minus net income allocable to Class A ordinary shares
 
  
 
  
Net income (loss)
$
(401,743)
$
23,189,704
Net income allocable to Class A ordinary shares
 
(13,570)
 
(76,558)
Net income (loss) attributable to Class B ordinary shares
$
(415,313)
$
23,113,146
Denominator: weighted average Class B ordinary shares
 
  
 
  
Basic and diluted weighted average shares outstanding, Class B ordinary shares
 
9,487,500
 
9,487,500
Basic and diluted net income (loss) per share, Class B ordinary shares
$
(0.04)
$
2.44
Income Taxes
FASB ASC Topic 740, “Income Taxes” prescribes a recognition threshold and a measurement attribute for the financial
statement recognition and measurement of tax positions taken or expected to be taken in a tax return. For those benefits to be
recognized, a tax position must be more likely than not to be sustained upon examination by taxing authorities. There were no
unrecognized tax benefits as of June 30, 2021 and December 31, 2020. The Company’s management determined that the
Cayman Islands is the Company’s only major tax jurisdiction. The Company recognizes accrued interest and penalties related to
unrecognized tax benefits as income tax expense. No amounts were accrued for the payment of interest and penalties as of June
30,2021 and December 31, 2020. The Company is currently not aware of any issues under review that could result in significant
payments, accruals or material deviation from its position. The Company is subject to income tax examinations by major taxing
authorities since inception.
There is currently no taxation imposed on income by the Government of the Cayman Islands. In accordance with Cayman
income tax regulations, income taxes are not levied on the Company. Consequently, income taxes are not reflected in the
Company’s unaudited condensed financial statements. The Company’s management does not expect that the total amount of
unrecognized tax benefits will materially change over the next twelve months.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
In August 2020, the FASB issued Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) No. 2020-06, Debt — Debt with Conversion and
Other Options (Subtopic 470-20) and Derivatives and Hedging — Contracts in Entity’s Own Equity (Subtopic 815-40):
Accounting for Convertible Instruments and Contracts in an Entity’s Own Equity (“ASU 2020-06”), which simplifies
accounting for convertible instruments by removing major separation models required under current GAAP. The ASU also
removes certain settlement conditions that are required for equity-linked contracts to qualify for the derivative scope exception,
and it simplifies the diluted earnings per share calculation in certain areas. The Company adopted ASU 2020-06 on January 1,
2021. Adoption of the ASU did not impact the Company’s financial position, results of operations or cash flows.


F-75
The Company’s management does not believe that any other recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting standards if
currently adopted would have a material effect on the accompanying unaudited condensed financial statements.
Note 3 — Initial Public Offering
On October 2, 2020, the Company consummated its Initial Public Offering of 37,950,000 Units, including 4,950,000 Over-
Allotment Units, at $10.00 per Unit, generating gross proceeds of $379.5 million, and incurring offering costs of approximately
$21.1 million, inclusive of approximately $13.3 million in deferred underwriting commissions.
Each Unit consists of one Class A ordinary share, par value $0.0001 per share and one-third of one redeemable warrant
(each, a “Public Warrant”). Each whole Public Warrant entitles the holder to purchase one Class A ordinary share at a price of 
$11.50 per share, subject to adjustment (see Note 6).
Note 4 — Related party transactions
Founder Shares
On August 7, 2020, the Sponsor paid $25,000 to cover certain offering costs in consideration for 25,000 ordinary shares, par
value $1.00 per share, of which 3,261 ordinary shares were subject to forfeiture to the extent that the over-allotment option was
not exercised in full by the underwriters. On September 29, 2020, the Company amended its Memorandum and Articles of
Association to designate the 25,000 ordinary shares into 9,487,500 Class B ordinary shares, par value $0.0001 (the “Founder
Shares”). All shares and the associated amounts have been retroactively restated to reflect the aforementioned share
capitalization. Up to 1,237,500 Founder Shares were subject to forfeiture to the extent that the over-allotment option was not
exercised in full by the underwriters, so that the Founder Shares would represent 20.0% of the Company’s issued and
outstanding shares after the Initial Public Offering. The underwriters fully exercised the over-allotment option on October 2,
2020; thus, these Founder Shares were no longer subject to forfeiture.
The initial shareholders agreed, subject to limited exceptions, not to transfer, assign or sell any of their Founder Shares until
the earlier to occur of: (A) one year after the completion of the initial Business Combination and (B) subsequent to the initial
Business Combination, (x) if the closing price of the Class A ordinary shares equals or exceeds $12.00 per share (as adjusted for
share sub-divisions, share capitalizations, reorganizations, recapitalizations and the like) for any 20 trading days within any 30-
trading day period commencing at least 150 days after the initial Business Combination, or (y) the date on which the Company
completes a liquidation, merger, share exchange, reorganization or other similar transaction that results in all of the Public
Shareholders having the right to exchange their ordinary shares for cash, securities or other property.
Private Placement Warrants
Simultaneously with the closing of the Initial Public Offering, the Company consummated the Private Placement
of 7,060,000 Private Placement Warrants, at a price of $1.50 per Private Placement Warrant with the Sponsor, generating gross
proceeds of approximately $10.6 million. On September 30, 2020, the Company received an advance from the Sponsor for
Private Placement Warrants of approximately $9.9 million. Subsequent to September 30, 2020, the Company received the
remaining proceeds for the Private Placement Warrants for the total purchase price of $10.6 million.
Each warrant is exercisable to purchase one Class A ordinary share at $11.50 per share. A portion of the proceeds from the
Private Placement Warrants was added to the proceeds from the Initial Public Offering held in the Trust Account. If the
Company does not complete a Business Combination within the Combination Period, the Private Placement Warrants will
expire worthless.
The Sponsor and the Company’s officers and directors agreed, subject to limited exceptions, not to transfer, assign or sell
any of their Private Placement Warrants until 30 days after the completion of the initial Business Combination.
Sponsor loan
On August 7, 2020, the Sponsor agreed to loan the Company up to $300,000 to cover expenses related to the Initial Public
Offering pursuant to a promissory note (the “Note”). This loan is non-interest bearing and payable upon the completion of the
Initial Public Offering. As of September 30, 2020, the Company borrowed approximately $195,000 under the Note. The
Company fully repaid the Note on November 2, 2020. As of June 30, 2021, the Note was no longer available.


F-76
Working Capital Loans
In addition, in order to finance transaction costs in connection with a Business Combination, the Sponsor or an affiliate of
the Sponsor, or certain of the Company’s officers and directors may, but are not obligated to, loan the Company funds as may be
required (“Working Capital Loans”). If the Company completes a Business Combination, the Company would repay the
Working Capital Loans. In the event that a Business Combination does not close, the Company may use a portion of proceeds
held outside the Trust Account to repay the Working Capital Loans but no proceeds held in the Trust Account would be used to
repay the Working Capital Loans. The Working Capital Loans would either be repaid upon consummation of a Business
Combination, without interest, or, at the lender’s discretion, up to $1.5 million of such Working Capital Loans may be
convertible into private placement warrants at a price of $1.50 per warrant. Except for the foregoing, the terms of such Working
Capital Loans, if any, have not been determined and no written agreements exist with respect to such loans. As of June 30, 2021
and December 31, 2020, the Company had no borrowings under the Working Capital Loans.
Administrative Services Agreement
Commencing on the date the Company’s securities were first listed on Nasdaq, the Company agreed to pay the Sponsor a
total of $10,000 per month for office space, secretarial and administrative services. Upon completion of the initial Business
Combination or the Company’s liquidation, the Company will cease paying these monthly fees.
On January 28, 2021, the Company entered into an administrative services agreement (the “Administrative Services
Agreement”) with Qell Operational Holdings LLC (“Holdings”), an affiliate of Qell Partners LLC, pursuant to which Holdings
will provide certain administrative services to the Company and the Company will reimburse Holdings up to $50,000 a month,
subject to adjustment in accordance with the terms of the agreement. In connection therewith, the Company terminated the
Administrative Services Agreement between the Company and the Sponsor dated October 1, 2020. The Company incurred
approximately $85,000 and $163,000 in administrative expenses under the agreement, which is recognized in the accompanying
unaudited condensed statements of operations for the three and six months ended June 30, 2021, respectively, within general
and administrative expenses — related party. As of June 30, 2021 and December 31, 2020, there was no outstanding balance in
accounts payable — related party, as reflected in the accompanying unaudited condensed balance sheets.
Note 5 — Commitments & Contingencies
Registration Rights
The holders of Founder Shares, Private Placement Warrants, Class A ordinary shares underlying the Private Placement
Warrants and warrants that may be issued upon conversion of Working Capital Loans (and any Class A ordinary shares issuable
upon the exercise of the Private Placement Warrants and warrants that may be issued upon conversion of Working Capital
Loans) will be entitled to registration rights pursuant to a registration rights agreement to be signed upon consummation of the
Initial Public Offering. These holders will be entitled to make up to three demands, excluding short form demands, that the
Company registers such securities. In addition, these holders will have certain “piggy-back” registration rights with respect to
registration statements filed subsequent to the completion of the initial Business Combination. The Company will bear the
expenses incurred in connection with the filing of any such registration statements.
Underwriting Agreement
The Company granted the underwriters a 45-day option from the final prospectus relating to the Initial Public Offering to
purchase up to 4,950,000 additional Units to cover over-allotments, if any, at the Initial Public Offering price less the
underwriting discounts and commissions. The underwriters fully exercised the over-allotment option on October 2, 2020.
The underwriters were entitled to an underwriting discount of $0.20 per unit, or approximately $7.6 million in the
aggregate, paid upon the closing of the Initial Public Offering. The underwriters reimbursed $300,000 for certain offering costs
to the Company. In addition, $0.35 per unit, or approximately $13.3 million in the aggregate will be payable to certain of the
underwriters for deferred underwriting commissions. The deferred fee will become payable to the underwriters from the
amounts held in the Trust Account solely in the event that the Company completes a Business Combination, subject to the terms
of the underwriting agreement.


F-77
Risks and Uncertainties
Management continues to evaluate the impact of the COVID-19 outbreak on the industry and has concluded that while it is
reasonably possible that the virus could have a negative effect on the Company’s financial position, results of its operations
and/or search for a target company, the specific impact is not readily determinable as of the date of these unaudited condensed
financial statements. The unaudited condensed financial statement does not include any adjustments that might result from the
outcome of this uncertainty.
Note 6 — Shareholders’ deficit
Preference shares — The Company is authorized to issue 1,000,000 preference shares with a par value of $0.0001 per
share. As of June 30, 2021 and December 31, 2020, there were no preference shares issued or outstanding.
Class A ordinary shares — The Company is authorized to issue 200,000,000 Class A ordinary shares with a par value of
$0.0001 per share. As of June 30, 2021 and December 31, 2020, there were 5,418,314 and 7,737,284 Class A ordinary shares
issued and outstanding, excluding 32,531,686 and 30,212,716 Class A ordinary shares subject to possible redemption.
Class B ordinary shares — The Company is authorized to issue 20,000,000 Class B ordinary shares with a par value of
$0.0001 per share. As of June 30, 2021 and December 31, 2020, there were 9,487,500 Class B ordinary shares issued and
outstanding.
Ordinary shareholders of record are entitled to one vote for each share held on all matters to be voted on by shareholders.
Holders of Class A ordinary shares and holders of Class B ordinary shares will vote together as a single class on all matters
submitted to a vote of the shareholders except as required by law.
The Class B ordinary shares will automatically convert into Class A ordinary shares on the first business day following the
consummation of the initial Business Combination at a ratio such that the number of Class A ordinary shares issuable upon
conversion of all Founder Shares will equal, in the aggregate, on an as-converted basis, 20% of the sum of  (i) the total number
of ordinary shares issued and outstanding upon the consummation of the Initial Public Offering, plus the sum of the total
number of Class A ordinary shares issued or deemed issued or issuable upon conversion or exercise of any equity-linked
securities or rights issued or deemed issued, by the Company in connection with or in relation to the consummation of the initial
Business Combination (net of any redemptions of Class A ordinary shares by Public Shareholders), excluding any Class A
ordinary shares or equity-linked securities exercisable for or convertible into Class A ordinary shares issued, deemed issued, or
to be issued, to any seller in the initial Business Combination and any Private Placement Warrants issued to the Sponsor,
members of the Company’s founding team or any of their affiliates upon conversion of Working Capital Loans. In no event will
the Class B ordinary shares convert into Class A ordinary shares at a rate of less than one to one.
Note 7 — Warrants
As of June 30, 2021 and December 31, 2020, there was an aggregate of 12,650,000 Public Warrants and 7,060,000 Private
Placement Warrants outstanding. Public Warrants may only be exercised for a whole number of shares. No fractional Public
Warrants will be issued upon separation of the Units and only whole Public Warrants will trade. The Public Warrants will
become exercisable on the later of  (a) 30 days after the completion of a Business Combination or (b) 12 months from the
closing of the Initial Public Offering; provided in each case that the Company has an effective registration statement under the
Securities Act covering the Class A ordinary shares issuable upon exercise of the warrants and a current prospectus relating to
them is available (or the Company permits holders to exercise their warrants on a cashless basis and such cashless exercise is
exempt from registration under the Securities Act). The Company has agreed that as soon as practicable, but in no event later
than 20 business days after the closing of the initial Business Combination, the Company will use its commercially reasonable
efforts to file with the SEC a registration statement covering the Class A ordinary shares issuable upon exercise of the warrants,
and the Company will use its commercially reasonable efforts to cause the same to become effective within 60 business days
after the closing of the initial Business Combination, and to maintain the effectiveness of such registration statement and a
current prospectus relating to those Class A ordinary shares until the warrants expire or are redeemed; provided that if the
Class A ordinary shares are at the time of any exercise of a warrant not listed on a national securities exchange such that they
satisfy the definition of a “covered security” under Section 18(b)(1) of the Securities Act, the Company may, at its option,
require holders of Public Warrants who exercise their warrants to do so on a “cashless basis” in accordance with Section 3(a)
(9) of the Securities Act and, in the event the Company so elect, it will not be required to file or maintain in effect a registration
statement. If a registration statement covering the Class A ordinary shares issuable upon exercise of the warrants is not effective
by the 60th day after the closing of the initial Business Combination, warrant holders may, until such time as there is an
effective registration statement and during any period when the Company will have failed to maintain an effective registration
statement, exercise warrants on a “cashless basis” in accordance with Section 3(a)(9) of the Securities Act or another


F-78
exemption, but the Company will use its best efforts to register or qualify the shares under applicable blue sky laws to the extent
an exemption is not available.
The warrants have an exercise price of at $11.50 per share and will expire five years after the completion of a Business
Combination or earlier upon redemption or liquidation. In addition, if  (x) the Company issues additional Class A ordinary
shares or equity linked securities for capital raising purposes in connection with the closing of the initial Business Combination
at an issue price or effective issue price of less than $9.20 per Class A ordinary share (with such issue price or effective issue
price to be determined in good faith by the board of directors and, in the case of any such issuance to the Sponsor or its
affiliates, without taking into account any Founder Shares held by the Sponsor or such affiliates, as applicable, prior to such
issuance), or the “Newly Issued Price,” (y) the aggregate gross proceeds from such issuances represent more than 60% of the
total equity proceeds, and interest thereon, available for the funding of the initial Business Combination on the date of the
consummation of the initial Business Combination (net of redemptions), and (z) the volume-weighted average trading price of
the ordinary shares during the 20 trading day period starting on the trading day after the day on which the Company
consummates its initial Business Combination (such price, the “Market Value”) is below $9.20 per share, the exercise price of
the warrants will be adjusted (to the nearest cent) to be equal to 115% of the higher of the Market Value and the Newly Issued
Price, and the $10.00 and 18.00 per share redemption trigger prices described below under “Redemption of warrants for Class A
ordinary shares when the price per Class A ordinary share equal or exceed $10.00” and “Redemption of warrants for cash when
the price per Class A ordinary share equals or exceeds $18.00” will be adjusted (to the nearest cent) to be equal to 100% and
180% of the higher of the Market Value and the Newly Issued Price, respectively.
The Private Placement Warrants are identical to the Public Warrants underlying the Units sold in the Initial Public Offering,
except that the Private Placement Warrants will not be transferable, assignable or salable until 30 days after the completion of
the initial Business Combination and they will not be redeemable by the Company (except as described below) so long as they
are held by the Sponsor or its permitted transferees. The Sponsor, or its permitted transferees, has the option to exercise the
Private Placement Warrants on a cashless basis. If the Private Placement Warrants are held by holders other than the Sponsor or
its permitted transferees, the Private Placement Warrants will be redeemable by the Company in all redemption scenarios and
exercisable by the holders on the same basis as the warrants included in the units being sold in the Initial Public Offering.
Redemptions for warrants for cash when the price per Class A ordinary share equals or exceeds $18.00.
Once the warrants become exercisable, the Company may redeem the outstanding warrants (except with respect to the
Private Placement Warrants):
●
in whole and not in part;
●
at a price of $0.01 per warrant;
●
upon a minimum of 30 days’ prior written notice of redemption; and
●
if, and only if, the closing price of the Class A ordinary shares equals or exceeds $18.00 per share (as adjusted for share
sub-divisions, share capitalizations, reorganizations, recapitalizations and the like) for any 20 trading days within a 30-
trading day period ending on the third trading day prior to the date on which the Company sends the notice of
redemption to the warrant holders (the “Reference Value”).
The Company will not redeem the warrants as described above unless a registration statement under the Securities Act
covering the Class A ordinary shares issuable upon exercise of the warrants is effective and a current prospectus relating to those
Class A ordinary shares is available throughout the 30-day redemption period. If and when the warrants become redeemable by
the Company, it may exercise its redemption right even if it is unable to register or qualify the underlying securities for sale
under all applicable state securities laws.
Redemption of warrants for Class A ordinary shares when the price per Class A ordinary share equals or exceeds $10.00.
Once the warrants become exercisable, the Company may redeem the outstanding warrants (except as described herein with
respect to the Private Placement Warrants):
●
in whole and not in part;


F-79
●
at $0.10 per warrant upon a minimum of 30 days’ prior written notice of redemption provided that holders will be able
to exercise their warrants on a cashless basis prior to redemption and receive that number of shares determined by
reference to an agreed table based on the redemption date and the “fair market value” of our Class A ordinary shares;
●
if, and only if, the closing price of Class A ordinary shares equals or exceeds $10.00 per public share (as adjusted per
share subdivisions, share dividends, reorganizations, recapitalizations and the like) on the trading day before we send
the notice of redemption to the warrant holders; and
●
if the Reference Value is less than $18.00 per share (as adjusted for share splits, share dividends, rights issuances,
subdivisions, reorganizations, recapitalizations and the like), then the Private Placement Warrants must also
concurrently be called for redemption on the same terms (except as described herein with respect to a holder’s ability
to cashless exercise its warrants) as the outstanding Public Warrants as described above.
The “fair market value” of the Class A ordinary shares for the above purpose shall mean the volume weighted average price
of the Class A ordinary shares during the 10 trading days immediately following the date on which the notice of redemption is
sent to the holders of warrants. In no event will the warrants be exercisable in connection with this redemption feature for more
than 0.361 Class A ordinary shares per warrant (subject to adjustment).
In no event will the Company be required to net cash settle any Warrants. If the Company is unable to complete the initial
Business Combination within the Combination Period and the Company liquidates the funds held in the Trust Account, holders
of warrants will not receive any of such funds with respect to their warrants, nor will they receive any distribution from the
Company’s assets held outside of the Trust Account with the respect to such warrants. Accordingly, the warrants may expire
worthless.
Note 8 — Fair Value Measurements
The following table presents information about the Company’s financial assets and financial liabilities that are measured at fair
value on a recurring basis as of June 30, 2021 and December 31, 2020 by level within the fair value hierarchy:
Fair Value Measured as of June 30, 2021
    
Level 1
    
Level 2
    
Level 3
    
Total
Assets
 
      
      
      
  
Investments held in Trust Account – Money
market mutual fund
$ 379,656,050
$
—
$
—
$ 379,656,050
Liabilities:
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
Derivative warrant liabilities – Public warrants
 
20,240,000
 
—
 
—
 
20,240,000
Derivative warrant liabilities – Private warrants
—
 
11,296,000
 
—
 
11,296,000
Total fair value
$ 399,896,050
$
11,296,000
$
—
$ 411,192,050
Fair Value Measured as of December 31, 2020
    
Level 1
    
Level 2
    
Level 3
    
Total
Assets
 
   
   
   
  
Investments held in Trust Account – U.S.
Treasury Securities
$
379,579,492
$
—
$
—
$
379,579,492
Liabilities:
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
Derivative warrant liabilities – Public warrants
 
39,468,000
 
—
 
—
 
39,468,000
Derivative warrant liabilities – Private warrants
—
—
22,027,200
22,027,200
Total fair value
$
419,047,492
$
—
$
22,027,200
$
441,074,692
Transfers to/from Levels 1, 2, and 3 are recognized at the end of the reporting period. There were no transfers during the
three and six months ended June 30, 2021.
Level 1 assets include investments in government securities. The Company uses inputs such as actual trade data, benchmark
yields, quoted market prices from dealers or brokers, and other similar sources to determine the fair value of its investments.
The fair value of the Public Warrants issued in connection with the Public Offering was initially measured using a Monte
Carlo simulation model. The Company utilized a Monte Carlo simulation to estimate the fair value of the Private Warrants at
December 31, 2020, and used the quoted price of the Public Warrants on the Nasdaq Stock Market at June 30, 2021 to estimate
the fair value of both the Public Warrants and Private Placement Warrants at that date. For the three and six months ended June
30, 2021, the Company


F-80
recognized a gain in the unaudited condensed statements of operations resulting from a decrease in the fair value of derivative
warrant liabilities of approximately $2.4 and $30.0 million, respectively, presented as change in fair value of derivative warrant
liabilities in the accompanying unaudited condensed statements of operations.
The subsequent measurements of the Private Placement Warrants after the detachment of the Public Warrants from the
Units are classified as Level 2 due to the use of an observable market quote for a similar asset in an active market.
Note 9 — Subsequent events
Management has evaluated subsequent events and transactions that occurred after the balance sheet date through the date
the unaudited condensed financial statements were issued. Based upon this review, unless there were any, the Company did not
identify any subsequent events that would have required adjustment or disclosure in the unaudited condensed financial
statements.


II-1
PART II
Information Not Required in Prospectus
Indemnification of Directors and Officers
Under Dutch law, directors of a Dutch public company may be held jointly and severally liable to the Company for
damages in the event of improper performance of their duties. In addition, directors may be held liable to third parties for any
actions that may give rise to a tort. This applies equally to our managing directors, supervisory directors, non-executive directors
and executive directors.
Pursuant to our articles of association and unless Dutch law provides otherwise, the Company shall indemnify and hold
harmless any actual and former managing directors, supervisory directors, non-executive directors and executive directors, other
members of the executive committee and proxy holders (each of them an "Indemnified Person", against any and all liabilities,
claims, judgments, fines and penalties (the “Claims”) incurred by the Indemnified Person as a result of any threatened, pending
or completed action, investigation or other proceeding, whether civil, criminal or administrative (each, a “Legal Action”),
brought by any party other than the Company itself or any subsidiaries within the meaning of Section 2:24a of the Dutch Civil
Code (“Subsidiaries”), in relation to acts or omissions in or related to his capacity as an Indemnified Person.
Claims will include derivative actions brought on behalf of the Company or any Subsidiaries against the Indemnified
Person and Claims by the Company (or any Subsidiaries) itself for reimbursement for Claims by third parties on the ground that
the Indemnified Person was jointly liable toward that third party in addition to the Company.
The Indemnified Person will not be indemnified with respect to Claims insofar as they relate to the gaining in fact of
personal profits, advantages or compensation to which the Indemnified Person was not legally entitled, or if the Indemnified
Person shall have been adjudged to be liable for willful misconduct (opzet) or intentional recklessness (bewuste roekeloosheid).
Any expenses (including reasonable attorneys’ fees and litigation costs) (collectively, “Expenses”) incurred by the
Indemnified Person in connection with any Legal Action shall be settled or reimbursed by the Company, but only upon receipt
of a written undertaking by that Indemnified Person that they shall repay such Expenses if a competent court in an irrevocable
judgment has determined that they are not entitled to be indemnified. Expenses shall be deemed to include any tax liability
which the Indemnified Person may be subject to as a result of his indemnification.
In the case of a Legal Action against the Indemnified Person by the Company itself or any Subsidiary(s), the Company will
settle or reimburse to the Indemnified Person their reasonable attorneys’ fees and litigation costs, but only upon receipt of a
written undertaking by that Indemnified Person that they shall repay such fees and costs if a competent court in an irrevocable
judgment has resolved the Legal Action in favor of the Company or the relevant Subsidiary(s) rather than the Indemnified
Person.
Expenses incurred by the Indemnified Person in connection with any Legal Action will also be settled or reimbursed by the
Company in advance of the final disposition of such action, but only upon receipt of a written undertaking by that Indemnified
Person that they shall repay such Expenses if a competent court in an irrevocable judgment has determined that they are not
entitled to be indemnified. Such Expenses incurred by Indemnified Persons may be so advanced upon such terms and conditions
as the Board decides.
We have entered into indemnification agreement with each of our directors and executive officers.
Insofar as indemnification for liabilities arising under the Securities Act may be permitted to directors, officers or persons
controlling us pursuant to the foregoing provisions, we have been informed that in the opinion of the SEC such indemnification
is against public policy as expressed in the Securities Act and is theretofore unenforceable.


II-2
Item 7. Recent Sales of Unregistered Securities
Set forth below is information regarding all securities sold or granted by us within the past three years that were not
registered under the Securities Act and the consideration, if any, received by us for such securities:
●
In connection with the closing of the Business Combination, on September 14, 2021 we issued 7,060,000 Private
Warrants to the Sponsor in exchange for outstanding private placement warrants of Qell.
●
In connection with the closing of the PIPE Financing, on September 14, 2021, we issued 45,000,000 Class A Shares to
the PIPE Investors for gross proceeds of approximately $450,000,000.
●
On September 15, 2021, we issued 879,691 Class A Shares in connection with certain equity compensation
arrangements.
●
On October 22, 2021, we issued the Azul Warrants, exercisable for 1,800,000 Class A Shares at an exercise price of
€0.12 per Class A Share.
The foregoing securities issuances were made in reliance upon the exemption provided in Section 4(a)(2) of the Securities
Act and/or Regulation D or Regulation S promulgated thereunder.
Item 8. Exhibits and Financial Statement Schedules
(a) The following exhibits are included or incorporated by reference in this registration statement on Form F-1:
Exhibit Index
Exhibit
No.
    
Description
1.1
Deed of Incorporation of Lilium B.V. (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 3.1 to the Registration Statement on
Form F-4 (Reg. No. 333-255800), filed with the SEC on May 5, 2021).
1.2
Deed of Amendment of Lilium B.V. (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 3.2 to the Registration Statement on
Form F-4 (Reg. No. 333-255800), filed with the SEC on May 5, 2021).
1.3
Deed of Conversion and Amendment to the Articles of Association of Lilium B.V. into Lilium N.V (incorporated by
reference to Exhibit 1.3 to the Shell Company Report on Form 20-F (File No. 001-40736), filed with the SEC on
September 20, 2021).
2.1
Warrant Assignment, Assumption and Amendment Agreement, between Continental Stock Transfer & Trust
Company, Lilium B.V. and Qell Acquisition Corp. (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 4.1 to the Registration
Statement on Form F-4 (Reg. No. 333-255800), filed with the SEC on May 5, 2021).
4.1
Business Combination Agreement, dated as of March 30, 2021, by and among Qell Acquisition Corp., Lilium
GmbH, Lilium B.V. and Queen Cayman Merger LLC (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 2.1 to the Registration
Statement on Form F-4 (reg. No. 333-255800), filed with the SEC on May 5, 2021).
4.2
Amendment No. 1, dated as of July 14, 2021, to Business Combination Agreement, by and among Qell Acquisition
Corp., Lilium GmbH, Lilium B.V. and Queen Cayman Merger LLC (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 2.2 to the
Registration Statement on Form F-4 (Reg. No. 333-255800), filed with the SEC on July 14, 2021).
4.3
Plan of Merger(incorporated by reference to Exhibit 2.3 to the Registration Statement on
Form F-4 (Reg. No. 333-255800), filed with the SEC on May 5, 2021).
4.4
Form of Sponsor Letter Agreement (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.2 to the Registration Statement on
Form F-4 (Reg.No.333-255800),filed with the SEC on May 5, 2021).
4.5
Registration Rights Agreement (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 4.5 to the Shell Company Report on Form 20-
F (File No. 001-40736), filed with the SEC on September 20,2021).


II-3
4.6
Form of Subscription Agreement (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.1 to the Registration Statement on Form
F-4 (Reg. No. 333-255800), filed with the SEC on May 5, 2021).
4.7**
Form of Director and Officer Indemnity Agreement (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.3 to the Registration
Statement on Form F-4 (Reg. No. 333-255800), filed with the SEC on May 5, 2021).
4.8**
Lilium N.V. 2021 Equity Incentive Plan (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 4.8 to the Shell Company Report on
Form 20-F (File No. 001-40736), filed with the SEC on September 20, 2021).
4.9**
Lilium N.V.Employee Share Purchase Plan (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 4.9 to the Shell Company Report
on Form 20-F (File No. 001-40736), filed with the SEC on September 20, 2021).
5.1*
Opinion of Van Doorne N.V., regarding the (i) valid issue, (ii) paying up and (iii) non-assessability of Class A
Shares.
8.1*
Opinion of Orrick, Herrington & Sutcliffe LLP regarding certain U.S. tax matters.
8.2*
Opinion of Van Doorne N.V. regarding certain Dutch tax matters.
8.3*
Opinion of Orrick, Herrington & Sutcliffe LLP regarding certain German tax matters.
21.1
List of Subsidiaries of Lilium N.V. (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 21.1 to the Registration Statement on
Form F-4 (Reg. No. 333-255800), filed with the SEC on May 5, 2021).
23.1
Consent of Van Doorne N.V. (included in Exhibit 5.1 to this Registration Statement)
23.2
Consent of Orrick, Herrington & Sutcliffe LLP (included in Exhibit 8.1 to this Registration Statement)
23.3
Consent of Van Doorne N.V. (included in Exhibit 8.2 to this Registration Statement)
23.4
Consent of Orrick, Herrington & Sutcliffe LLP (included in Exhibit 8.3 to this Registration Statement)
23.5*
Consent of PricewaterhouseCoopers GmbH Wirtschaftsprüfungsgesellschaft, independent registered public
accounting firm of Lilium GmbH.
23.6*
Consent of WithumSmith+Brown, PC, independent registered accounting firm of Qell Acquisition Corp.
24.1***
Power of Attorney (included on the signature page to this Registration Statement)
*
Filed herewith
**
Indicates a management contract or any compensatory plan, contract or arrangement.
*** Previously filed
†
Certain information has been excluded from the exhibit because such information (i) is not material and (ii) would likely
cause competitive harm to the registrant if publicly disclosed.
(a) Financial Statement Schedules
All schedules have been omitted because they are not required, are not applicable or the information is otherwise set forth
in the financial statements or notes thereto.
Item 9.   Undertakings
(a)   The undersigned registrant hereby undertakes:
(1)   to file, during any period in which offers or sales are being made, a post-effective amendment to this registration
statement:
(i)   to include any prospectus required by Section 10(a)(3) of the Securities Act;


II-4
(ii)   to reflect in the prospectus any facts or events arising after the effective date of the registration statement (or
the most recent post-effective amendment thereof) which, individually or in the aggregate, represent a fundamental
change in the information set forth in the registration statement. Notwithstanding the foregoing, any increase or
decrease in volume of securities offered (if the total dollar value of securities offered would not exceed that which was
registered) and any deviation from the low or high end of the estimated maximum offering range may be reflected in
the form of prospectus filed with the Commission pursuant to Rule 424(b) (§ 230.424(b) of this chapter) if, in the
aggregate, the changes in volume and price represent no more than 20% change in the maximum aggregate offering
price set forth in the “Calculation of Registration Fee” table in the effective registration statement; and
(iii)   to include any material information with respect to the plan of distribution not previously disclosed in the
registration statement or any material change to such information in the registration statement;
provided, however, that: Paragraphs (i), (ii) and (iii) do not apply if the information required to be included in a
post-effective amendment by those paragraphs is contained in reports filed with or furnished to the SEC by the
registrant pursuant to Section 13 or Section 15(d) of the Securities and Exchange Act of 1934, as amended (the
“Exchange Act”), that are incorporated by reference in the registration statement, or is contained in a form of
prospectus filed pursuant to Rule 424(b) that is part of the registration statement.
(2)   That for the purpose of determining any liability under the Securities Act, each post-effective amendment that
contains a form of prospectus shall be deemed to be a new registration statement relating to the securities offered therein,
and the offering of such securities at that time shall be deemed to be the initial bona fide offering thereof.
(3)   To remove from registration by means of a post-effective amendment any of the securities being registered which
remain unsold at the termination of the offering.
(4)   To file a post-effective amendment to the registration statement to include any financial statements required by
“Item 8.A. of Form 20-F” at the start of any delayed offering or throughout a continuous offering. Financial statements and
information otherwise required by Section 10(a)(3) of the Securities Act need not be furnished, provided that the registrant
includes in the prospectus, by means of a post-effective amendment, financial statements required pursuant to this
paragraph (a)(4) and other information necessary to ensure that all other information in the prospectus is at least as current
as the date of those financial statements. Notwithstanding the foregoing, a post-effective amendment need not be filed to
include financial statements and information required by Section 10(a)(3) of the Securities Act or Item 8.A. of Form 20-F if
such financial statements and information are contained in periodic reports filed with or furnished to the SEC by the
registrant pursuant to Section 13 or Section 15(d) of the Exchange Act that are incorporated by reference in this registration
statement.
(5)   That, for the purpose of determining liability under the Securities Act to any purchaser:
(i)   If the registrant is relying on Rule 430B:
(A)   Each prospectus filed by the registrant pursuant to Rule 424(b)(3) shall be deemed to be part of the
registration statement as of the date the filed prospectus was deemed part of and included in the registration
statement; and
(B)   Each prospectus required to be filed pursuant to Rule 424(b)(2), (b)(5), or (b)(7) as part of a registration
statement in reliance on Rule 430B relating to an offering made pursuant to Rule 415(a)(1)(i), (vii), or (x) for the
purpose of providing the information required by section 10(a) of the Securities Act shall be deemed to be part of
and included in the registration statement as of the earlier of the date such form of prospectus is first used after
effectiveness or the date of the first contract of sale of securities in the offering described in the prospectus. As
provided in Rule 430B, for liability purposes of the issuer and any person that is at that date an underwriter, such
date shall be deemed to be a new effective date of the registration statement relating to the securities in the
registration statement to which that prospectus relates, and the offering of such securities at that time shall be
deemed to be the initial bona fide offering thereof. Provided, however, that no statement made in a registration
statement or prospectus that is part of the registration statement or made in a document incorporated or deemed
incorporated by reference into the registration statement or prospectus that is part of the registration statement will,
as to a purchaser with a time of contract of sale prior to such effective date, supersede or modify any statement that
was made in the registration statement or prospectus that was part of the registration statement or made in any such
document immediately prior to such effective date; or


II-5
(ii)   If the registrant is subject to Rule 430C, each prospectus filed pursuant to Rule 424(b) as part of a registration
statement relating to an offering, other than registration statements relying on Rule 430B or other than prospectuses
filed in reliance on Rule 430A, shall be deemed to be part of and included in the registration statement as of the date it
is first used after effectiveness. Provided, however, that no statement made in a registration statement or prospectus that
is part of the registration statement or made in a document incorporated or deemed incorporated by reference into the
registration statement or prospectus that is part of the registration statement will, as to a purchaser with a time of
contract of sale prior to such first use, supersede or modify any statement that was made in the registration statement or
prospectus that was part of the registration statement or made in any such document immediately prior to such date of
first use.
(b)   Insofar as indemnification for liabilities arising under the Securities Act may be permitted to directors, officers and
controlling persons of the registrant pursuant to the foregoing provisions, or otherwise, the registrant has been advised that
in the opinion of the SEC such indemnification is against public policy as expressed in the Securities Act and is, therefore,
unenforceable. In the event that a claim for indemnification against such liabilities (other than the payment by the
Registrant of expenses incurred or paid by a director, officer or controlling person of the Registrant in the successful
defense of any action, suit or proceeding) is asserted by such director, officer or controlling person in connection with the
securities being registered, the registrant will, unless in the opinion of its counsel the matter has been settled by controlling
precedent, submit to a court of appropriate jurisdiction the question whether such indemnification by it is against public
policy as expressed in the Securities Act and will be governed by the final adjudication of such issue.
(c)   The undersigned registrant hereby undertakes:
(1)   That for purposes of determining any liability under the Securities Act, the information omitted from the form
of prospectus filed as part of this registration statement in reliance upon Rule 430A and contained in a form of
prospectus filed by the registrant pursuant to Rule 424(b)(1) or (4) or 497(h) under the Securities Act shall be deemed
to be part of this registration statement as of the time it was declared effective.
(2)   For the purpose of determining any liability under the Securities Act, each post-effective amendment that
contains a form of prospectus shall be deemed to be a new registration statement relating to the securities offered
therein, and the offering of such securities at that time shall be deemed to be the initial bona fide offering thereof.


II-6
SIGNATURES
Pursuant to the requirements of the Securities Act, the registrant certifies that it has reasonable grounds to believe that it
meets all of the requirements for filing on Form F-1 and has duly caused this registration statement to be signed on its behalf by
the undersigned, thereunto duly authorized, in the city of Wessling, Germany on the 25th day of October, 2021.
LILIUM N.V.
By: /s/ Daniel Wiegand
Name: Daniel Wiegand
Title:
Chief Executive Officer and Executive Director
Pursuant to the requirements of the Securities Act, this registration statement has been signed by the following persons in
the capacities and on the dates indicated.
Signature
    
Capacity
    
Date
/s/ Daniel Wiegand
Chief Executive Officer and Executive Director
October 25, 2021
Daniel Wiegand
(Principal Executive Officer)
/s/ Geoffrey Richardson
Chief Financial Officer
October 25, 2021
Geoffrey Richardson
(Principal Financial and Accounting Officer)
*
Non-executive Director
October 25, 2021
Henri Courpron
*
Non-executive Director
October 25, 2021
Dr. Thomas Enders
*
Non-executive Director
October 25, 2021
Barry Engle
*
Non-executive Director
October 25, 2021
David Neeleman
*
Non-executive Director
October 25, 2021
Margaret M. Smyth
*
Non-executive Director
October 25, 2021
Gabrielle Toledano
*
Non-executive Director
October 25, 2021
David Wallerstein
*
Non-executive Director
October 25, 2021
Niklas Zennström
*By: /s/ Geoffrey Richardson
Geoffrey Richardson
Attorney-in-fact


II-7
AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE
Pursuant to the requirement of the Securities Act, the undersigned, the duly authorized representative in the United States of
Lilium N.V., has signed this registration statement on the 25th day of October, 2021.
LILIUM N.V.
By: /s/ Geoffrey Richardson
Name: Geoffrey Richardson
Title:
Chief Financial Officer


Table of Contents
As filed with the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission on October 7, 2021.
Registration No. 333-
UNITED STATES
SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION
Washington, D.C. 20549
FORM S-1
REGISTRATION STATEMENT
UNDER
THE SECURITIES ACT OF 1933
ARCHER AVIATION INC.
(Exact name of registrant as specified in its charter)
Delaware
    
3721
    
83-2292321
(State or other jurisdiction of
incorporation or organization)
 
(Primary Standard Industrial
Classification Code Number)
 
(I.R.S. Employer
Identification No.)
1880 Embarcadero Road
Palo Alto, CA 94303
(Address, including zip code, and telephone number, including area code, of registrant’s principal executive offices)
Brett Adcock
Adam Goldstein
Co-Chief Executive Officers and Co-Chairmen
Archer Aviation Inc.
1880 Embarcadero Road
Palo Alto, CA 94303
(650) 272-3233
(Name, address, including zip code, and telephone number, including area code, of agent for service)
Copies to:
Dave Peinsipp
John T. McKenna
Cooley LLP
3 Embarcadero Center, 20th Floor
San Francisco, California 94111
(415) 693-2000
Andy Missan
Eric Lentell
Archer Aviation Inc.
1880 Embarcadero Road
Palo Alto, CA 94303
(650) 272-3233


Approximate date of commencement of proposed sale to the public:
As soon as practicable after this Registration Statement is declared effective.
If any of the securities being registered on this Form are to be offered on a delayed or continuous basis pursuant to Rule 415 under the Securities Act of 1933, check the following box.  ☒
If this Form is filed to register additional securities for an offering pursuant to Rule 462(b) under the Securities Act, please check the following box and list the Securities Act registration statement
number of the earlier effective registration statement for the same offering.  ☐
If this Form is a post-effective amendment filed pursuant to Rule 462(c) under the Securities Act, check the following box and list the Securities Act registration statement number of the earlier effective
registration statement for the same offering.  ☐
If this Form is a post-effective amendment filed pursuant to Rule 462(d) under the Securities Act, check the following box and list the Securities Act registration statement number of the earlier effective
registration statement for the same offering.  ☐


Table of Contents
Indicate by check mark whether the registrant is a large accelerated filer, an accelerated filer, a non-accelerated filer, smaller reporting company, or an emerging growth company. See the definitions of
“large accelerated filer,” “accelerated filer,” “smaller reporting company,” and “emerging growth company” in Rule 12b-2 of the Exchange Act.
Large accelerated filer
☐
Accelerated filer
☐
Non-accelerated filer
⌧
Smaller reporting company
⌧
 
Emerging growth company
⌧
If an emerging growth company, indicate by check mark if the registrant has elected not to use the extended transition period for complying with any new or revised financial accounting standards
provided pursuant to Section 7(a)(2)(B) of the Securities Act.  ☒
CALCULATION OF REGISTRATION FEE
Title of Each Class of
Securities to be Registered
    
Amount to be
Registered(1)
    
Proposed
Maximum
Aggregate
Offering Price Per
Security
    
Proposed
Maximum
Aggregate
Offering Price
    
Amount of
Registration Fee
Primary Offering
Class A Common Stock, $0.0001 par value per share
 
25,398,947(2)
 
$7.92(3)
 
$201,159,660(4)
 
$18,648(3)
Secondary Offering
Class A Common Stock, $0.0001 par value per share
165,425,700(5)
$7.92(3)
 
$1,310,171,544(4)
 
$121,453(3)
Warrants to purchase Class A Common Stock
 
8,732,280
 
$—
 
$—
 
$—(4)
Total
 
 
 
$1,511,331,204
 
$140,101
(1)
In the event of a stock split, stock dividend or similar transaction involving the registrant’s Class A Common Stock, in order to prevent dilution, the number of shares of Class A Common Stock
registered hereby shall be automatically increased to cover the additional shares of Common Stock in accordance with Rule 416(a) of the Securities Act.
(2)
Consists of: (i) 8,732,280 shares of Class A Common Stock issuable upon the exercise of warrants (the “Private Warrants”), consisting of: (a) 8,000,000 warrants issued to Atlas Crest
Investment LLC (the “Sponsor”) in a private placement and (b) 732,280 warrants issued to a lender in connection with a certain loan and security agreement, and (ii) 16,666,667 shares of Class
A Common Stock issuable upon the exercise of 16,666,667 warrants (the “Public Warrants”) included in the publicly sold units to purchase Class A Common Stock, in each case at an exercise
price of $11.50 per share.
(3)
Estimated solely for the purpose of calculating the registration fee, based on the average of the high and low prices of the Class A Common Stock of Archer Aviation Inc. (on the New York
Stock Exchange on October 6, 2021 (such date being within five business days of the date that this registration statement was first filed with the SEC). This calculation is in accordance with
Rule 457(c) of the Securities Act.
(4)
In accordance with Rule 457(g), the entire registration fee for the warrants is allocated to the shares of Class A Common Stock underlying the warrants, and no separate fee is payable for the
warrants.
(5)
Represents the sum of: (i) 12,500,000 shares of Class A Common Stock issued in a private placement to the Sponsor in connection with the initial public offering of Atlas (the “Sponsor
Shares”), (ii) 61,512,500 shares of Class A Common Stock, consisting of 60,000,000 PIPE shares and 1,512,500 Class A Shares issued to satisfy certain fees related to the business combination
and PIPE financing, (iii) up to 8,732,280 shares of Class A Common Stock issuable upon the exercise of Private Warrants, and (iv) up to 82,680,920 shares of Class A Common Stock (including
shares of Class A Common Stock issuable on conversion of shares of Class B Common Stock, warrants, and other convertible securities), pursuant to that certain Amended and Restated
Registration Rights Agreement, dated September 16, 2021, between us and the selling securityholders granting such holders registration rights with respect to such shares.
The Registrant hereby amends this Registration Statement on such date or dates as may be necessary to delay its effective date until the Registrant shall file a further amendment which
specifically states that this Registration Statement shall thereafter become effective in accordance with Section 8(a) of the Securities Act of 1933 or until the Registration Statement shall
become effective on such date as the Securities and Exchange Commission, acting pursuant to said Section 8(a), may determine.


Table of Contents
Subject to Completion, Dated October 7, 2021
PRELIMINARY PROSPECTUS
Up to 165,425,700 Shares of Class A Common Stock
Up to 25,398,947 Shares of Class A Common Stock Issuable Upon Exercise of Warrants
Up to 8,732,280 Warrants to Purchase Class A Common Stock
This prospectus relates to the issuance by us of an aggregate of up to 25,398,947 shares of our Class A Common Stock, $0.0001 par value per share (the “Class A Common Stock”)
issuable upon exercise of warrants, which consists of: (i)  up to 8,732,280 shares of Class A Common Stock issuable upon the exercise of warrants (the “Private Warrants”),
consisting of: (a) 8,000,000 Private Warrants issued to Atlas Crest Investment LLC (the “Sponsor”) in connection with the initial public offering of Atlas Crest Investment Corp.
(“Atlas”) and (b) 732,280 Private Warrants issued to a lender in connection with a certain loan and security agreement, and (ii) up to 16,666,667 shares of Class A Common Stock
issuable upon the exercise of warrants (the “Public Warrants” and, together with the Private Warrants, the “Warrants”) originally issued in the initial public offering of Atlas. We
will receive the proceeds from any exercise of any Warrants for cash.
This prospectus also relates to the offer and sale from time to time by the selling securityholders named in this prospectus or their permitted transferees (the “selling securityholders”)
of (i) up to 165,425,700 shares of Class A Common Stock consisting of (a) up to 12,500,000 shares of Class A Common Stock issued in a private placement to the Sponsor in
connection with the initial public offering of Atlas (the “Sponsor Shares”), (b) up to 61,512,500 shares of Class A Common Stock, consisting of 60,000,000 PIPE Shares (as defined
below) and 1,512,500 Class A Shares issued to satisfy certain fees related to the Business Combination and PIPE financing, (c) up to 8,732,280 shares of Class A Common Stock
issuable upon the exercise of the Private Warrants, and (d)  up to 82,680,920 shares of Class A Common Stock (including shares of Class A Common Stock issuable upon the
conversion of shares of Class B Common Stock, warrants and other convertible securities) pursuant to that certain Amended and Restated Registration Rights Agreement, dated
September 16, 2021, between us and the selling securityholders, granting such holders registration rights with respect to such shares and (ii) up to 8,732,280 Private Warrants. We will
not receive any proceeds from the sale of shares of Class A Common Stock or Warrants by the selling securityholders pursuant to this prospectus.
The selling securityholders may offer, sell or distribute all or a portion of the securities hereby registered publicly or through private transactions at prevailing market prices or at
negotiated prices. We will not receive any of the proceeds from such sales of the shares of Class A Common Stock or Warrants, except with respect to amounts received by us upon
exercise of the Warrants. We will bear all costs, expenses and fees in connection with the registration of these securities, including with regard to compliance with state securities or
“blue sky” laws. The selling securityholders will bear all commissions and discounts, if any, attributable to their sale of shares of Class A Common Stock or Warrants. See the section
titled “Plan of Distribution.”
Our Class A Common Stock and Public Warrants are listed on the New York Stock Exchange (“NYSE”) under the symbols “ACHR” and “ACHR WS,” respectively. On October 6,
2021, the last reported sales price of our Class A Common Stock was $7.92 per share and the last reported sales price of our Public Warrants was $1.30 per warrant.
We are an “emerging growth company” and a “smaller reporting company” as defined under U.S. federal securities laws and, as such, have elected to comply with reduced public
company reporting requirements. See “Prospectus Summary — Implications of Being an Emerging Growth Company”. This prospectus complies with the requirements that apply to
an issuer that is an emerging growth company and a smaller reporting company.
Investing in our securities involves a high degree of risks. You should review carefully the risks and uncertainties described in the section titled “Risk Factors” beginning on
page 9 of this prospectus, and under similar headings in any amendments or supplements to this prospectus.
Neither the Securities and Exchange Commission nor any state securities commission has approved or disapproved of these securities, or passed upon the accuracy or
adequacy of this prospectus. Any representation to the contrary is a criminal offense.
Prospectus dated                  , 2021


nformation in this preliminary prospectus is not complete and may be changed. These securities may not be sold until the registration statement filed with the
ities and Exchange Commission is effective. This preliminary prospectus is not an offer to sell these securities nor does it seek an offer to buy these
ties in any jurisdiction where the offer or sale is not permitted.


Table of Contents
ABOUT THIS PROSPECTUS
This prospectus is part of a registration statement on Form S-1 that we filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission (the “SEC”) using the “shelf” registration process. Under
this shelf registration process, the selling securityholders may, from time to time, sell the securities offered by them described in this prospectus. We will not receive any proceeds
from the sale by such selling securityholders of the securities offered by them described in this prospectus. This prospectus also relates to the issuance by us of the shares of Class A
Common Stock issuable upon the exercise of any Warrants. We will not receive any proceeds from the sale of shares of Class A Common Stock underlying the Warrants pursuant to
this prospectus, except with respect to amounts received by us upon the exercise of the Warrants for cash.
Neither we nor the selling securityholders have authorized anyone to provide you with any information or to make any representations other than those contained in this prospectus or
any applicable prospectus supplement or any free writing prospectuses prepared by or on behalf of us or to which we have referred you. Neither we nor the selling securityholders take
responsibility for, and can provide no assurance as to the reliability of, any other information that others may give you. Neither we nor the selling securityholders will make an offer to
sell these securities in any jurisdiction where the offer or sale is not permitted.
We may also provide a prospectus supplement or post-effective amendment to the registration statement to add information to, or update or change information contained in, this
prospectus. You should read both this prospectus and any applicable prospectus supplement or post-effective amendment to the registration statement together with the additional
information to which we refer you in the section of this prospectus titled “Where You Can Find More Information.”
On September 16, 2021, Archer Aviation Inc., Atlas Crest Investment Corp. and Artemis Acquisition Sub Inc. consummated the closing of the transactions contemplated by the
Business Combination Agreement (as defined below), following the approval at the special meeting of stockholders held on September 14, 2021. Pursuant to the terms of the Business
Combination Agreement, a business combination of Archer Aviation Inc. and Atlas Crest Investment Corp. was effected by the merger of Artemis Acquisition Sub Inc. with and into
Archer Aviation Inc., with Archer Aviation Inc. surviving the Merger (as defined below) as a wholly-owned subsidiary of Atlas. Following the consummation of the Merger on the
Closing Date (as defined below), Atlas changed its name from Atlas Crest Investment Corp. to Archer Aviation Inc.
Unless the context indicates otherwise, references in this prospectus to the “Archer,” “we,” “us,” “our” and similar terms refer to Archer Aviation Inc. (f/k/a Atlas Crest Investment
Corp.) and its consolidated subsidiaries (including Legacy Archer). References to “Atlas” refer to the predecessor company prior to the consummation of the Business Combination.
The in
Securi
securit


Table of Contents
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Page
 
Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements
i
Frequently Used Terms
iii
Prospectus Summary
1
Risk Factors
9
Market and Industry Data
30
Use of Proceeds
31
Determination of Offering Price
32
Market Information for Securities and Dividend Policy
33
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
34
Business
43
Management
53
Executive Compensation
60
Transactions
72
Principal Stockholders
77
Selling Securityholders
79
Material U.S. Federal Income Tax Consequences
90
Description of Securities
95
Plan of Distribution
103
Legal Matters
106
Experts
106
Where You Can Find More Information
106
Unaudited Pro Forma Condensed Combined Financial Information
107
Index to Financial Statements
F-1
You should rely only on the information contained in this prospectus, any supplement to this prospectus or in any free writing prospectus, filed with the Securities and Exchange
Commission. Neither we nor the selling securityholders have authorized anyone to provide you with additional information or information different from that contained in this
prospectus filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission. We take no responsibility for, and can provide no assurance as to the reliability of, any other information that others
may give you. The selling securityholders are offering to sell, and seeking offers to buy, our securities only in jurisdictions where offers and sales are permitted. The information
contained in this prospectus is accurate only as of the date of this prospectus, regardless of the time of delivery of this prospectus or any sale of our securities. Our business, financial
condition, results of operations and prospects may have changed since that date.
For investors outside of the United States: Neither we nor the selling securityholders, have done anything that would permit this offering or possession or distribution of this
prospectus in any jurisdiction where action for that purpose is required, other than in the United States. Persons outside the United States who come into possession of this prospectus
must inform themselves about, and observe any restrictions relating to, the offering of our securities and the distribution of this prospectus outside the United States.


Table of Contents
SPECIAL NOTE REGARDING FORWARD-LOOKING STATEMENTS
This prospectus contains “forward-looking statements” that involve substantial risks and uncertainties. The forward-looking statements are contained principally in the sections titled
“Prospectus Summary” “Risk Factors,” “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations,” “Business” and elsewhere in this prospectus. In
some cases, you can identify forward-looking statements by terms such as “anticipate,” “believe,” “continue,” “could,” “estimate,” “expect,” “future,” “intend,” “may,” “might,”
“objective,” “ongoing,” “plan,” “possible,” “potential,” “predict,” “project,” “seek,” “should,” “will” and “would,” or the negative of these terms or other similar expressions intended
to identify statements about the future. These statements speak only as of the date of this prospectus and involve known and unknown risks, uncertainties and other important factors
that may cause our actual results, performance or achievements to be materially different from any future results, performance or achievements expressed or implied by the forward-
looking statements. We have based these forward-looking statements largely on our current expectations and projections about future events and financial trends that we believe may
affect our business, financial condition and results of operations. Some factors that could cause actual results to differ include:
●
we are an early-stage company with a history of losses and expectation of significant losses for the foreseeable future;
●
our ability to design, manufacture and deliver our aircraft to customers;
●
risks associated with the United Airlines order constituting all of the current orders for our aircraft and that the order is subject to conditions, further negotiation and reaching
mutual agreement on certain material terms;
●
our ability to remediate material weaknesses in internal control over financial reporting and ability to maintain an effective system of internal control;
●
our ability to realize operating and financial results forecasts which rely in large part upon assumptions and analyses that we have developed;
●
our ability to effectively market and sell air transportation as a substitute for conventional methods of transportation, following receipt of governmental operating authority;
●
our ability to compete effectively in the urban air mobility and electric vertical takeoff and landing industries;
●
our ability to obtain expected or required certifications, licenses, approvals, and authorizations from transportation authorities;
●
our ability to achieve expected business milestones or launch products on anticipated timelines;
●
risks associated with our reliance on our relationships with our suppliers and service providers for the parts and components in our aircraft;
●
our ability to successfully develop commercial-scale manufacturing capabilities;
●
our ability to successfully address obstacles outside of our control that slow market adoption of electric aircraft;
●
our ability to attract, integrate, manage, train and retain qualified senior management personnel or other key employees;
●
natural disasters, outbreaks and pandemics, economic, social, weather, growth constraints and regulatory conditions or other circumstances affecting metropolitan areas;
●
the potential for losses and adverse publicity stemming from any accident involving our lithium-ion battery cells or test flights of our prototype eVTOL aircraft;
●
risks associated with indexed price escalation clauses in customer contracts, which could subject us to losses if we have cost overruns or if increases in costs exceed the
applicable escalation rate;
●
our ability to address a wide variety of extensive and evolving laws and regulations, including data privacy and security laws;


i


Table of Contents
ii
●
our ability to realize the benefits of the Business Combination;
●
risks associated with a federal government investigation relating to one of our employees (who we have placed on paid administrative leave) as well as a lawsuit brought
against us by Wisk Aero LLC (“Wisk”);
●
our ability to protect our intellectual property rights from unauthorized use by third parties;
●
our ability to obtain additional capital to pursue our business objectives and respond to business opportunities, challenges or unforeseen circumstances;
●
cybersecurity risks to our various systems and software; and
●
risks associated with the dual-class structure of the Common Stock which has the effect of concentrating voting control with Adam Goldstein and Brett Adcock, Legacy
Archer’s co-founders and our co-Chief Executive Officers and co-Chairmen.
The foregoing list of risks is not exhaustive. Other sections of this prospectus may include additional factors that could harm our business and financial performance. Moreover, we
operate in an evolving environment. New risk factors and uncertainties may emerge from time to time, and it is not possible for management to predict all risk factors and
uncertainties. As a result of these factors, we cannot assure you that the forward-looking statements in this prospectus will prove to be accurate. Except as required by applicable law,
we do not plan to publicly update or revise any forward-looking statements contained herein, whether as a result of any new information, future events, changed circumstances or
otherwise, except as required by law.
Because forward-looking statements are inherently subject to risks and uncertainties, some of which cannot be predicted or quantified and some of which are beyond our control, you
should not rely on these forward-looking statements as predictions of future events. Although we believe that we have a reasonable basis for each forward-looking statement contained
in this prospectus, the events and circumstances reflected in our forward-looking statements may not be achieved or occur and actual results could differ materially from those
projected in the forward-looking statements. You should refer to the “Risk Factors” section of this prospectus for a discussion of important factors that may cause our actual results to
differ materially from those expressed or implied by our forward-looking statements.
You should read this prospectus and the documents that we reference in this prospectus and have filed as exhibits to the registration statement, of which this prospectus is a part,
completely and with the understanding that our actual future results may be materially different from what we expect. We qualify all of our forward-looking statements by these
cautionary statements.
In addition, statements that “we believe” and similar statements reflect our beliefs and opinions on the relevant subject. These statements are based upon information available to us as
of the date of this prospectus and while we believe such information forms a reasonable basis for such statements, such information may be limited or incomplete, and such statements
should not be read to indicate that we have conducted an exhaustive inquiry into, or review of, all potentially available relevant information. These statements are inherently uncertain,
and investors are cautioned not to unduly rely upon these statements.


Table of Contents
FREQUENTLY USED TERMS
“Archer Founders” means Brett Adcock and Adam Goldstein.
“Archer Founder Grants” and “Founder Grants” means the restricted stock units that were allocated to the Archer Founders immediately prior to the Closing.
“Atlas” means Atlas Crest Investment Corp. (which was renamed Archer Aviation Inc. in connection with the Business Combination).
“Atlas IPO” means Atlas’s initial public offering of units, consummated on October 30, 2020.
“Atlas Class A Shares” means shares of Atlas’ Class A common stock.
“Atlas Class B Shares” means shares of Atlas’ Class B common stock.
“Atlas Initial Stockholders” means the initial stockholders of Atlas, including Atlas’s officers and Atlas’s directors.
“Business Combination” means the transactions contemplated by the Business Combination Agreement, including among other things, the Merger.
“Business Combination Agreement” that certain business combination agreement dated as of February 10, 2021, by and among Atlas, the Merger Sub and Archer, as amended and
restated on July 29, 2021 and as it may be further amended, supplemented or otherwise modified from time to time.
“Class A Shares” and “Class A Common Stock” means the shares of Class A common stock of Archer, par value $0.0001 per share.
“Class B Shares” and “Class B Common Stock” means the shares of Class B common stock of Archer, par value $0.0001 per share.
“Closing” means the consummation of the Business Combination.
“Closing Date” means September 16, 2021, the date on which the Closing occurred.
“Closing Price” means, for each day that the Common Stock is trading on the NYSE, the closing price (based on such trading day) of shares of Common Stock on the NYSE.
“Code” means the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended.
“Common Stock” means the Class A Shares and Class B Shares, or any one of such shares.
“Legacy Archer” means Archer Aviation Operating Corp., a Delaware corporation (prior to the Merger, known as Archer Aviation Inc.), and, unless the context requires otherwise, its
consolidated subsidiaries.
“Merger” means the merger of Merger Sub with and into Legacy Archer with Legacy Archer being the surviving company in the merger.
“Merger Sub” means Artemis Acquisition Sub Inc., a Delaware corporation and wholly-owned subsidiary of Atlas.
“NYSE” means the New York Stock Exchange.
“PIPE Financing” means that certain private placement in the aggregate amount of $600 million, consummated substantially concurrently with the consummation of the Business
Combination, pursuant to those certain subscription agreements with Atlas, and subject to the conditions set forth therein, pursuant to which the subscribers purchased 60,000,000


- iii -
Class A Shares at a purchase price of $10.00 per share.
“PIPE Shares” means an aggregate of 60,000,000 Class A Shares issued to the subscribers in the PIPE Financing.


Table of Contents
- iv -
“Private Warrants” means an aggregate of 8,732,280 warrants to purchase Class A Shares, consisting of (i) 8,000,000 warrants to purchase Class A Shares issued to the Sponsor in a
private placement in connection with the Atlas IPO and (ii) 732,800 Class A Shares issued to a lender in connection with a loan and security agreement.
“Public Warrants” means the 16,666,667 warrants included as a component of the Atlas units sold in the Atlas IPO, each of which is exercisable for one share of Class A Common
Stock, in accordance with its terms.
“Registration Rights Agreement” means that certain amended and restated Registration Rights Agreement, dated September 16, 2021, between and among Archer and certain
securityholders who are parties thereto.
“Sponsor” means Atlas Crest Investment LLC.
“Sponsor Letter Agreement” means that certain amended and restated sponsor letter agreement dated as of July 29, 2021, by and among Atlas, the Sponsor and former directors
and/or officers of Atlas.
“Sponsor Shares” means the Atlas Class B Shares initially purchased by the Sponsor in a private placement, and the Class A Shares issued upon the conversion thereof.
“Warrants” means the Private Warrants and the Public Warrants, together.


Table of Contents
PROSPECTUS SUMMARY
This summary highlights information contained elsewhere in this prospectus and does not contain all of the information that you should consider in making your investment decision.
Before investing in our securities, you should carefully read this entire prospectus, including our financial statements and the related notes thereto and the information set forth in the
sections titled “Risk Factors” and “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.” Unless the context otherwise requires, we use the
terms “Archer,” “company,” “we,” “us” and “our” in this prospectus to refer to Archer Aviation Inc. and our wholly owned subsidiaries.
Overview
We were founded with the mission to advance the benefits of sustainable air mobility. Our goal is to move people throughout the world's cities in a quick, safe, sustainable, and cost-
effective manner. We are designing and developing an electric vertical takeoff and landing (“eVTOL”) aircraft for use in urban air mobility (“UAM”) that can carry passengers while
producing minimal noise and zero emissions during operations.
Our eVTOL aircraft uses advancements in key enabling technologies such as high-energy batteries, high-performance electric motors, an advanced fly-by-wire flight control system,
and a lightweight and efficient aircraft structure. As a fully electric vehicle, the aircraft will have zero emissions during operations. The goal of our eVTOL design is to maximize
safety and convenience while minimizing noise and time spent traveling. We look to accomplish that through the use of a distributed electric propulsion system with inherent
redundancy and far fewer parts than a typical internal combustion propulsion system found in similarly sized aircraft or rotorcraft today. The reduced number of parts not only
translates into fewer critical parts on the aircraft from a safety perspective but will also significantly reduce the maintenance requirements compared to the internal combustion
propulsion systems found in similarly sized aircraft or rotorcraft today.
The development of an eVTOL aircraft that meets our business requirements demands significant design and development efforts on all facets of the aircraft. We believe that by
bringing together a mix of talent with both eVTOL and traditional commercial aerospace backgrounds, we are building a team that will allow us to move through the design,
development and certification of our eVTOL aircraft with the Federal Aviation Administration (“FAA”) in an efficient manner, thus allowing us to achieve our end goal of producing
eVTOL aircraft for sale and operating a UAM network.
Our Development Stage
We are an early-stage company that was incorporated in 2018. While we have developed several prototype eVTOL aircraft over the years, our current eVTOL aircraft prototype (the
Maker aircraft) is proposed to conduct its first test flight later this year. We have devoted substantial capital resources to our development and incurred a history of losses. Our
management has addressed our capital needs through the Business Combination, including the PIPE Financing. Our audit report for the year ended December 31, 2020 includes an
explanatory paragraph stating that our recurring losses and cash outflows from operating activities raise substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern.
Our Platform
Our technology enables a holistic eVTOL aircraft design with high performance, low operating costs, zero local emissions, small acoustic footprint, and a high level of safety. Our
aircraft configuration has the right mix of tilting and fixed rotors to provide a high level of propulsion redundancy and efficiency throughout the flight envelope. The hover efficiency
is enabled by having sufficient rotor disk area. Cruise efficiency is achieved by tilting half the rotors for use in cruise flight while stopping the other rotors and aligning them in a low
drag position. This configuration is enabled by our battery, electric powertrain, low noise rotor, and fly-by-wire flight control technologies.
Our Competitive Strengths
Our competitive strengths are that our aircraft are designed for manufacturing with vertical integration for key enabling technologies, our aircraft are designed for FAA certification,
we have entered into strategic and commercial agreements with United Airlines Inc. (“United Airlines”) and FCA US LLC (now known as “Stellantis”), and we have built a deep
and experienced engineering team.


- 1 -


Table of Contents
Our Growth Strategies
We are pursuing the following growth strategies: develop a reliable, certifiable aircraft; continue building out a world-class team; construct manufacturing facilities; build out our
flight operations infrastructure; develop autonomous flight capabilities; and optimize our demand modeling and operations simulation tool.
Our Intellectual Property
We rely upon a combination of protections afforded to owners of patents, copyrights, trade secrets, and trademarks, along with employee and third-party non-disclosure agreements
and other contractual restrictions to establish and protect our intellectual property rights. In particular, unpatented trade secrets in the fields of research, development and engineering
are an important aspect of our business and ensure that our technology remains confidential.
Background
We were originally known as Atlas Crest Investment Corp. On September 16, 2021, Legacy Archer, Atlas and Merger Sub consummated the transactions contemplated under the
Business Combination Agreement, following the approval at the special meeting of the stockholders of Legacy Archer held September 14, 2021. Pursuant to the terms of the Business
Combination Agreement, a business combination of Legacy Archer and Atlas was effected by the merger of Merger Sub with and into Legacy Archer, with Legacy Archer surviving
the Merger as a wholly-owned subsidiary of Atlas. In connection with the consummation of the Merger on the Closing Date, the surviving company changed its name to Archer
Aviation Operating Corp. and Atlas changed its name from Atlas Crest Investment Corp. to Archer Aviation Inc.
After the prospectus and definitive proxy statement, dated August 11, 2021, as amended and supplemented on August 30, 2021 filed by Atlas was declared effective under the
Securities Act, Legacy Archer obtained and delivered to Atlas a written consent approving and adopting the Business Combination Agreement and the ancillary documents thereto to
which Legacy Archer was a party or would be a party and the transactions contemplated therein (including the Merger) that was duly executed by Legacy Archer stockholders that
held at least the requisite number of issued and outstanding shares of Legacy Archer common stock required to approve and adopt such matters in accordance with the Delaware
General Corporation Law (the “DGCL”) and Legacy Archer’s governing documents and Legacy Archer’s stockholders agreements (the “Legacy Archer Stockholder Written
Consent”). Promptly following the receipt of the Legacy Archer Stockholder Written Consent, Legacy Archer prepared and delivered to each Legacy Archer stockholder who did not
execute and deliver the Legacy Archer Stockholder Written Consent an information statement, in the form and substance required under the DGCL in connection with the Merger and
otherwise reasonably satisfactory to Atlas.
Immediately prior to the effective time of the Merger (the “Effective Time”), each share of Legacy Archer preferred stock, par value $0.0001 per share (“Legacy Archer Preferred
Stock”) that was then issued and outstanding was converted shares of Legacy Archer common stock, par value $0.0001 per share (“Legacy Archer Common Stock”).
In connection with the Merger, we filed an amended and restated certificate of incorporation (the “Certificate of Incorporation”) to implement a new dual-class capital structure
with: (i) shares of Class A common stock, par value $0.0001 per share (the “Class A Shares”) carrying voting rights in the form of one vote per share, and (ii) shares of Class B
common stock, par value $0.0001 per share (the “Class B Shares”) carrying voting rights in the form of ten votes per share. Pursuant to the Certificate of Incorporation, the former
Legacy Archer equityholders have the right to convert their Class B Shares received (or to be received, following exercise of the applicable options, restricted stock unit awards or
warrants) as a result of the Business Combination into Class A Shares.
In connection with the Merger:
●
each then issued and outstanding share of Class B Common Stock, par value $0.0001 per share, of Atlas converted automatically into one share of Atlas Class A Common
Stock;
●
each then issued and outstanding share of Atlas Class A Common Stock converted automatically into one Class A Share;


- 2 -
●
each share of Legacy Archer Common Stock outstanding immediately prior to the Effective Time (including shares of Legacy Archer Common Stock resulting from the
Legacy Archer Preferred Conversion, but excluding any shares of Legacy Archer Common Stock held by Legacy Archer as treasury stock) was converted into a right to
receive a number of Class B Shares determined on the basis of an exchange ratio (the “Exchange Ratio”) equal to: (A) (I) (a) $1,480,000,000, plus (b) the aggregate


Table of Contents
exercise price that would have been paid to Legacy Archer in respect of all options to purchase shares of Legacy Archer Common Stock (whether vested or unvested) if all
such options were exercised in full immediately prior to the Effective Time, plus (c) the aggregate exercise price that would have been paid to Legacy Archer in respect of all
warrants to purchase equity securities of Legacy Archer (whether vested or unvested) if all such warrants were exercised in full immediately prior to the Effective Time,
minus (d) the product of (x) 732,280, multiplied by (y) $1.56 (being the trading price of the warrants to purchase Atlas Class A Common Stock on the date prior to the
Closing Date), divided by (II) the fully diluted shares of Legacy Archer Common Stock (including shares of Legacy Archer Common Stock resulting from the Legacy
Archer Preferred Conversion, but excluding any shares of Legacy Archer Common Stock held by Legacy Archer as treasury stock and further excluding any restricted stock
unit awards), divided by (B) $10.00, it being understood that the shares of Legacy Archer Common Stock outstanding immediately prior to the Effective Time that were
restricted shares subject to certain vesting conditions or were subject to a repurchase option or a risk of forfeiture, then the number of Class B Shares issued in exchange for
such restricted shares have the same terms and conditions as were applicable to such restricted shares immediately prior to the Effective Time (including with respect to
vesting and termination-related provisions);
●
each option (whether vested or unvested) to purchase shares of Legacy Archer Common Stock that was outstanding as of immediately prior to the Effective Time was
converted into an option to purchase a number of Class B Shares based on the Exchange Ratio (no fractional shares will be issuable upon exercise of such options);
●
each restricted stock unit award (whether vested or unvested) that was outstanding as of immediately prior to the Effective Time with respect to shares of Legacy Archer
Common Stock was converted into a restricted stock unit award with respect to a number of Class B Shares based on the Exchange Ratio; and
●
each outstanding warrant (whether vested or unvested) to purchase Legacy Archer Common Stock was converted into a warrant to purchase a number of Class A Shares or
Class B Shares, as applicable, in accordance with the terms of such warrant (no fractional shares are issuable upon exercise of such warrants).
In connection with the Business Combination and substantially concurrent with the execution of the Business Combination Agreement, Atlas entered into subscription agreements
(each, a “Subscription Agreement”) with each of the investors in the PIPE Financing (including with certain of Atlas’ directors and officers, as well as certain employees of
Moelis & Company LLC, an affiliate of Atlas and Atlas Crest Investment LLC (the “Sponsor”) and certain affiliates of Legacy Archer) (the “PIPE Investors”)), pursuant to which
the PIPE Investors agreed to subscribe for and purchase, and Atlas agreed to issue and sell to the PIPE Investors, an aggregate of 60,000,000 Class A Shares at a price of $10.00 per
share, for aggregate gross proceeds of $600,000,000. Atlas granted the PIPE Investors certain registration rights in connection with the PIPE Financing. The sale of the PIPE Shares
was consummated concurrently with the Closing. In addition, an aggregate of 1,512,500 Class A Shares (based on the assumed price of $10.00 per share) were issued to satisfy fees
related to the Business Combination and PIPE Financing.
Implications of Being an Emerging Growth Company
We are an “emerging growth company,” as defined in the Jumpstart Our Business Startups Act of 2012 (the “JOBS Act”). As an emerging growth company, we are exempt from
certain requirements related to executive compensation, including the requirements to hold a nonbinding advisory vote on executive compensation and to provide information relating
to the ratio of total compensation of our President and Co-Chief Executive Officers to the median of the annual total compensation of all of our employees, each as required by the
Investor Protection and Securities Reform Act of 2010, which is part of the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act of 2010 (the “Dodd-Frank Act”).
Section 102(b)(1) of the JOBS Act exempts emerging growth companies from being required to comply with new or revised financial accounting standards until private companies
are required to comply with the new or revised financial accounting standards. The JOBS Act provides that a company can choose not to take advantage of the extended transition
period and comply with the requirements that apply to non-emerging growth companies, and any such election to not take advantage of the extended transition period is irrevocable.
We will be an emerging growth company at least until December 31, 2021 and will take advantage of the benefits of the extended transition period emerging growth company status
permits. During the extended transition period, it may be difficult or impossible to compare our financial results with the financial results of another public company that complies
with public company effective dates for accounting standard updates because of the potential differences in accounting standards used.
We will remain an emerging growth company under the JOBS Act until the earliest of (i) the last day of the fiscal year (a) following October 30, 2025, (b) in which we have total
annual gross revenue of at least $1.07 billion, or (c) in which we are deemed to be a “large


- 3 -


Table of Contents
accelerated filer”, which means the market value of its common stock that is held by non-affiliates exceeds $700 million as of the prior June 30th, and (ii) the date on which we have
issued more than $1.0 billion in non-convertible debt securities during the prior three year period. Even after we no longer qualify as an emerging growth company, we may still
qualify as a “smaller reporting company,” which would allow us to take advantage of many of the same exemptions from disclosure requirements including reduced disclosure
obligations regarding executive compensation in this prospectus and our periodic reports and proxy statements.
Summary of Risk Factors
Investing in our securities involves a high degree of risk. You should carefully consider the risks and uncertainties described below together with all of the other information
contained in this prospectus. The occurrence of one or more of the events or circumstances described in the section titled “Risk Factors,” alone or in combination with other events or
circumstances, may harm our business, financial condition and operating results. Such risks include, but are not limited to:
●
We are an early-stage company with a history of losses and expect to incur significant losses for the foreseeable future.
●
We have not designed, manufactured or delivered our aircraft to customers in commercial quantities.
●
Our business is currently dependent on United Airlines, which constitutes all of the current orders for our aircraft, and the order is subject to conditions, further negotiation
and reaching mutual agreement on certain material terms.
●
Our business plans require a significant amount of capital and our future capital needs may require us to sell additional equity or debt securities that may dilute our
stockholders or introduce covenants that may restrict our operations.
●
We have identified a material weakness in our internal control over financial reporting. If we are unable to remediate this material weakness, or if we identify additional
material weaknesses in the future or otherwise fail to maintain an effective system of internal control over financial reporting, this may result in material misstatements of
our financial statements or cause us to fail to meet our periodic reporting obligations or cause our access to the capital markets to be impaired.
●
Our operating and financial results forecast relies in large part upon assumptions and analyses we developed. If these assumptions or analyses prove to be incorrect, our
actual operating results may be materially different from our forecasted results.
●
If we are not able to effectively market and sell air transportation as a substitute for conventional methods of transportation, following receipt of governmental operating
authority, then the market for our offerings may not further develop, may develop more slowly than we expect or may not achieve the growth potential we expect, any of
which could harm our business, financial condition and results of operations.
●
The urban air mobility and electric vertical takeoff and landing industries are competitive on a global scale and we may not be successful in competing in this industry or
establishing and maintaining confidence in our long-term business prospects among current and future partners and customers.
●
If we fail to obtain expected or required certifications, licenses, approvals, and authorizations from transportation authorities, this may delay the timelines for the production
and commercial use of our aircrafts and impact our ability to establish and expand into the market.
●
Our ability to achieve expected business milestones or launch products on anticipated timelines is susceptible to adverse economic, regulatory, political, weather and other
conditions, which may affect our ability to operate or increase our operating expenses and adversely affect our business, financial condition and operating results.
●
We rely on suppliers and service providers for the parts and components in our aircraft. Should these suppliers and service providers experience work stoppages, strikes by
organized unions and/or delays in production, then our business, financial condition or operating results may be adversely affected.


- 4 -
●
We may not be able to scale our business quickly enough to meet customer and market demand, which could result in lower profitability or cause us to fail to execute on our
business strategies.


Table of Contents
- 5 -
●
Our estimates of market opportunity and forecasts of market growth may prove to be inaccurate.
●
Our ability to attract, integrate, manage and train qualified senior management personnel or other key employees is critical to our success. If we fail to retain such personnel
or employees, such failure could negatively impact our business.
●
Natural disasters, outbreaks and pandemics, economic, social, weather, growth constraints and regulatory conditions or other circumstances affecting metropolitan areas,
which may render it difficult or impossible for us to manufacture our aircraft for some period of time, may result in the loss of customers or harm our reputation.
●
While we have taken measures to enhance the safety and reduce the potential for losses and adverse publicity stemming from any accident involving our lithium-ion battery
cells or test flights of our prototype eVTOL aircraft, any field or testing failure of our aircraft could subject us to lawsuits, product recalls, or redesign efforts, all of which
would be time-consuming and expensive.
●
Our customer contracts include indexed price escalation clauses that may subject us to losses if we have cost overruns or if increases in costs exceed the applicable
escalation rate.
●
Our ability to address a wide variety of extensive and evolving laws and regulations, including data privacy and security laws, may cause us to expend resources on
updating, changing or eliminating some of our privacy and data protection practices.
●
The risks associated with a federal government investigation relating to one of our employees (who has placed on paid administrative leave) as well as a lawsuit brought
against us by Wisk may have a negative result, which could have an adverse effect on our financial position, liquidity, operations, and cash flows.
●
Our intellectual property rights are of critical importance to our business. Failure to adequately protect our intellectual property rights could result in our competitors offering
similar products or services, potentially resulting in the loss of some of our competitive advantage and a decrease in our revenue, which could adversely affect our business,
prospects, financial condition and operating results.
●
Breaches of our security systems and customer data processed by us or third-party vendors could disrupt our operations, which may damage our reputation and adversely
affect our business.
●
A small number of stockholders will continue to have substantial control over us after this offering, which may limit other stockholders’ ability to influence corporate matters
and delay or prevent a third party from acquiring control over us.
Corporate Information
Our principal executive offices are located at 1880 Embarcadero Road, Palo Alto, California 94303, and our telephone number is 650-272-3233. Our corporate website address is
www.archer.com. Information contained on or accessible through our website is not a part of this prospectus, and the inclusion of our website address in this prospectus is an inactive
textual reference only.
“Archer” and our other registered and common law trade names, trademarks and service marks are property of Archer Aviation Inc. This prospectus contains additional trade names,
trademarks and service marks of others, which are the property of their respective owners. Solely for convenience, trademarks and trade names referred to in this prospectus may
appear without the ® or ™ symbols.




Table of Contents
The Offering
Issuance of Common Stock
    
Shares of Class A Common Stock offered by us
Up to 25,398,947 shares of Class A Common Stock, consisting of (i) 8,732,280 shares of
Class A Common Stock that are issuable upon the exercise of Private Warrants and (ii)
16,666,667 shares of Class A Common Stock that are issuable upon the exercise upon the
exercise of the Public Warrants.
Shares of Class A Common Stock outstanding prior to the exercise of all Warrants and of
any shares of Class B Common Stock
156,991,960 shares (as of September 16, 2021).
Shares of Class A Common Stock outstanding assuming exercise of all Warrants and
conversion of all shares of Class B Common Stock
266,032,501 shares (as of September 16, 2021).
Exercise price of Warrants
$11.50 per share, subject to adjustment as described herein.
Use of proceeds
We will receive up to an aggregate of approximately $292.1 million from the exercise of
the Warrants, assuming the exercise in full of all of the Warrants for cash. We expect to
use the net proceeds from the exercise of the Warrants for general corporate purposes.
See “Use of Proceeds.”
Resale of Common Stock and Warrants
Shares of Class A Common Stock offered by the selling securityholders
We are registering the resale by the selling securityholders named in this prospectus, or
their permitted transferees, an aggregate of 165,425,700 shares of Class A Common
Stock, consisting of:
●
up to 12,500,000 Sponsor Shares;1
●
 up to 61,512,500 Class A Shares, consisting of 60,000,000 PIPE Shares and
1,512,500 Class A Shares issued to satisfy fees related to the Business
Combination and PIPE Financing;
●
up to 8,732,280 Class A Shares issuable upon the exercise of Private Warrants;
and
●
up to 82,680,920 Class A Shares pursuant to the Registration Rights Agreement.
Warrants offered by the selling securityholders
Up to 8,732,280 Private Warrants, each having an exercise price of $11.50 per share
(subject to adjustment).
Redemption
The Public Warrants are redeemable in certain circumstances. See “Description of
Securities — Warrants.”


- 6 -


Table of Contents
Sponsor Earn-Out and Lock-Up
1,875,000 shares of the 12,500,000 Sponsor Shares remain subject to certain vesting and
forfeiture conditions, set forth in the Sponsor Letter Agreement. These 1,875,000
Sponsor Shares shall vest (and shall not be subject to forfeiture) upon the occurrence of
the Sponsor Earn Out Trigger Event, which is defined as the first date on which the
volume weighted average price of the Class A Common Stock over any 10 trading days
within the preceding 20 trading day period within three years from the Closing Date is
greater than or equal to $12.00. If this trigger event does not occur during the period
beginning on the Closing Date and ending on the three year anniversary of the Closing
Date, then these 1,875,000 Sponsor Shares will not vest and shall be deemed transferred
by the forfeiting holder to us and shall be cancelled and cease to exist. All of the shares
beneficially owned by the Sponsor are subject to lock-up restrictions.
The Sponsor has agreed not to transfer any of the Sponsor Shares until the earlier of (i)
180 days after the completion of the Business Combination, and (ii) the date subsequent
to the Business Combination on which we complete a liquidation, merger, capital stock
exchange, reorganization or other similar transaction that results in all of our
stockholders having the right to exchange their shares of Common Stock for cash,
securities or other property. The Sponsor has also agreed not to transfer any of its Private
Warrants (or any shares issued or issuable upon the exercise of such Private Warrants)
until 30 days after Closing.
Lock-Up Restrictions
Certain of our Securityholders are subject to certain restrictions on transfer as described
below until the termination of applicable lock-up periods.
Pursuant to the Registration Rights Agreement executed in connection with the Closing,
securityholders, including the Sponsor, that beneficially own an aggregate of
137,695,820 shares of Class A Common Stock have agreed not to transfer these shares
until the earlier of (i) 180 days after the completion of the Business Combination, and (ii)
the date subsequent to the Business Combination on which we complete a liquidation,
merger, capital stock exchange, reorganization or other similar transaction that results in
all of our stockholders having the right to exchange their shares of Common Stock for
cash, securities or other property.
See the section titled “Certain Relationships and Related Party Transactions — Archer
Related Agreements — Registration Rights Agreements.”
Terms of the offering
The selling securityholders will determine when and how they will dispose of the
securities registered for resale under this prospectus.
Use of proceeds
We will not receive any proceeds from the sale of shares of Class A Common Stock or
Warrants by the selling securityholders.
Risk factors
Before investing in our securities, you should carefully read and consider the information
set forth in “Risk Factors”.


- 7 -


Table of Contents
- 8 -
NYSE ticker symbols
“ACHR” and “ACHR WS”
For additional information concerning the offering, see “Plan of Distribution”.


Table of Contents
RISK FACTORS
Investing in our securities involves a high degree of risk. You should carefully consider the risks and uncertainties described below together with all of the other information contained
in this prospectus, including our financial statements and related notes appearing at the end of this prospectus and in the section titled “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of
Financial Condition and Results of Operations,” before deciding to invest in our securities. If any of the events or developments described below were to occur, our business,
prospects, operating results and financial condition could suffer materially, the trading price of our securities could decline, and you could lose all or part of your investment. The
risks and uncertainties described below are not the only ones we face. Additional risks and uncertainties not presently known to us or that we currently believe to be immaterial may
also adversely affect our business.
Risks Related to our Business and Industry
We are an early-stage company with a history of losses and expect to incur significant expenses and continuing losses for the foreseeable future.
As of June 30, 2021, we incurred a year-to-date net loss of $127.8 million and had an accumulated deficit of $153.6 million since inception through June 30, 2021. We believe that we
will continue to incur operating and net losses each quarter until at least the time we begin significant deliveries of our eVTOL aircraft. Even if we are able to successfully develop
and sell our aircraft, there can be no assurance that they will be financially successful. Our potential profitability is dependent upon the successful development and successful
commercial introduction and acceptance of our aircraft, which may not occur.
We expect the rate at which we will incur losses to be significantly higher in future periods as we:
●
continue to design, develop, manufacture and market our aircraft;
●
continue to utilize our third-party partners for design, supply and manufacturing;
●
expand our production capabilities, including costs associated with outsourcing the manufacturing of our aircraft;
●
build up inventories of parts and components for our aircraft;
●
manufacture an inventory of our aircraft;
●
expand our design, development and servicing capabilities;
●
increase our sales and marketing activities and develops our distribution infrastructure;
●
work with third party partners to develop pilot training programs; and
●
increase our general and administrative functions to support our growing operations and to operate as a public company.
Because we will incur the costs and expenses from these efforts before we receive any incremental revenues with respect thereto, our losses in future periods will be significant. In
addition, we may find that these efforts are more expensive than we currently anticipate or that these efforts may not result in revenues, which would further increase our losses.
We are still developing a fully operational prototype of our demonstrator aircraft, have not yet obtained FAA type certification of our eVTOL aircraft under development and have
yet to manufacture or deliver any aircraft to customers, which makes evaluating our business and future prospects difficult and increases the risk of investment.
We were incorporated in October 2018 and have a limited operating history in the urban air mobility industry, which is continuously evolving. Our aircraft are in the development
stage. We are still working to obtain FAA type certification of our eVTOL aircraft. Our current eVTOL aircraft prototype (the Maker aircraft) has not yet flown and is not scheduled to


- 9 -
conduct its first test flight until later this year. As a result, we have no experience as an organization in high volume manufacturing of the planned aircraft. Many of our current and
potential competitors are larger and have substantially greater resources than we have and expect to have in the future. They may also be able to devote greater resources to the
development of their current and future technologies or the promotion and sale of their


Table of Contents
offerings, or offer lower prices. In particular, our competitors may be able to receive airworthiness certificates or production certificates for their aircraft prior to us receiving such
certificates. Our current and potential competitors may also establish cooperative or strategic relationships amongst themselves or with third parties that may further enhance their
resources and offerings. Further, it is possible that domestic or foreign companies or governments, some with greater experience in the aerospace industry or greater financial
resources than we possess, will seek to provide products or services that compete directly or indirectly with ours in the future. Any such foreign competitor, for example, could benefit
from subsidies from, or other protective measures by, its home country.
We cannot assure you that we or our partners will be able to develop efficient, automated, cost-efficient manufacturing capability and processes, and reliable sources of component
supplies that will enable us to meet the quality, price, engineering, design and production standards, as well as the production volumes, required to successfully mass market our
aircraft. You should consider our business and prospects in light of the risks and significant challenges we face as a new entrant into our industry, including, among other things, with
respect to our ability to:
●
design and produce safe, reliable and quality aircraft on an ongoing basis;
●
obtain the necessary regulatory approvals in a timely manner, including receipt of governmental authority for manufacturing the equipment and, in turn, marketing, selling
and operating our UAM service;
●
build a well-recognized and respected brand;
●
establish and expand our customer base;
●
successfully market not just our aircraft but also the other services we intend to provide, such as aerial ride sharing services;
●
successfully service our aircraft after sales and maintain a good flow of spare parts and customer goodwill;
●
improve and maintain our operational efficiency;
●
successfully execute our manufacturing and production model and maintain a reliable, secure, high-performance and scalable technology infrastructure;
●
predict our future revenues and appropriately budget for our expenses;
●
attract, retain and motivate talented employees;
●
anticipate trends that may emerge and affect our business;
●
anticipate and adapt to changing market conditions, including technological developments and changes in competitive landscape; and
●
navigate an evolving and complex regulatory environment.
If we fail to adequately address any or all of these risks and challenges, our business may be harmed.
The purchase agreement with United Airlines has a conditional purchase order which constitutes all of the current orders for our aircraft. If the conditions to United Airlines’
order are not met, or if this order is cancelled, modified or delayed, our prospects, results of operations, liquidity and cash flow will be harmed.
On January 29, 2021, we entered into an aircraft purchase agreement (the “Purchase Agreement”) with United Airlines related to the purchase of an Archer eVTOL model (the
“Aircraft”), and a collaboration agreement (the “Collaboration Agreement”) with United Airlines related to the development of the Aircraft and certain material terms regarding the
Aircraft and the related purchase obligations. The Purchase Agreement has a conditional purchase order which constitutes all of the current orders for the Aircraft. This order and the


- 10 -
Purchase Agreement are subject to certain conditions, including certification of our aircraft by the FAA and obligations to further negotiate and mutually agree on certain material
terms including, among others, aircraft specifications, warranties, usage and transfer of the aircraft, performance guarantees, delivery periods, most favored nation provisions, the type
and extent of assistance to be provided


Table of Contents
- 11 -
by United Airlines in obtaining certification of our aircraft, territorial restrictions, rights to jointly developed intellectual property and escalation adjustments. The obligations of
United Airlines to consummate the order arise only after all material terms are agreed upon, in the discretion of each party. Further, and in addition to other termination rights set forth
in the Purchase Agreement and the Collaboration Agreement, if the parties do not agree on such material terms, either party will have the right to terminate the agreements if such
party determines in its discretion that it is not likely that the material terms will be agreed to in a manner consistent with such party’s business and operational interests (as those
interests may change from time to time). If this order is cancelled, modified or delayed, or otherwise not consummated, or if we are otherwise unable to convert our strategic
relationships or collaborations into sales revenue, our prospects, results of operations, liquidity and cash flow will be affected.
Our business plans require a significant amount of capital. In addition, our future capital needs may require us to sell additional equity or debt securities that may dilute our
stockholders or introduce covenants that may restrict our operations or our ability to pay dividends.
Our business and our future plans for expansion, including the aircraft certification process and projected customer demand, are capital-intensive. We also expect to continue incurring
expenses relating to ongoing litigation, the significance of which is difficult to predict. Based on current projections, we expect that we will have sufficient capital to fund our planned
operations and future investments in our business, including development of our aircraft and investments in our brand, but our operating plan may change. These investments and
expenses may be greater than currently anticipated due to factors unforeseen. We may not succeed in acquiring sufficient capital to offset higher expenses and achieving positive
revenue generation. Our limited operating history means that we have limited historical data on the demand for our aircraft. As a result, our future capital requirements may be
uncertain and actual capital requirements may be different from those we currently anticipate. We may need to seek equity or debt financing to finance a portion of our future
investments or expenses. Such financing might not be available to us in a timely manner or on terms that are acceptable, or at all.
Our ability to obtain the necessary financing to carry out our business plan is subject to a number of factors, including general market conditions and investor acceptance of our
business model. These factors may make the timing, amount, terms and conditions of such financing unattractive or unavailable to us. If we are unable to raise sufficient funds, we
will have to significantly reduce our spending, delay or cancel our planned activities or substantially change our corporate structure. We might not be able to obtain any funding, and
we might not have sufficient resources to conduct our business as projected, both of which could force us to curtail or discontinue our operations.
In addition, our future capital needs and other business reasons could require us to sell additional equity or debt securities or obtain a credit facility. The sale of additional equity or
equity-linked securities could dilute our stockholders. The incurrence of indebtedness would result in increased debt service obligations and could result in operating and financing
covenants that would restrict our operations or our ability to pay dividends to our stockholders.
If we cannot raise additional funds when we need or want them, our operations and prospects could be negatively affected.
We identified material weaknesses in our internal control over financial reporting. If we are unable to remediate these material weaknesses, or if we identify additional material
weaknesses in the future or otherwise fail to maintain an effective system of internal controls, we may not be able to accurately or timely report our financial condition or results
of operations, which may adversely affect our business and stock price.
In connection with the preparation and audit of our financial statements for the year ended December 31, 2020, material weaknesses were identified in our internal control over
financial reporting. A material weakness is a deficiency, or a combination of deficiencies, in internal control over financial reporting such that there is a reasonable possibility that a
material misstatement of our annual or interim financial statements will not be prevented or detected on a timely basis.
Material weaknesses were identified in our control environment. Specifically:
●
We did not design and maintain an effective control environment commensurate with our financial reporting requirements.
●
We lack a sufficient number of trained professionals with (i) an appropriate level of accounting knowledge, training and experience to appropriately analyze, record and
disclose accounting matters timely and accurately, and (ii) an appropriate level of knowledge and experience to establish effective processes and controls.




Table of Contents
●
The limited personnel also resulted in an inability to consistently establish appropriate authorities and responsibilities in pursuit of financial reporting objectives, as
demonstrated by, among other things, insufficient segregation of duties in our finance and accounting functions.
The material weaknesses in the control environment contributed to the following additional material weaknesses:
●
We did not design and maintain an effective risk assessment process at a precise enough level to identify new and evolving risks of material misstatement in our financial
statements. Specifically, changes to existing controls or the implementation of new controls have not been sufficient to respond to changes to the risks of material
misstatement to financial reporting.
●
We did not design and maintain formal accounting policies, procedures and controls to achieve complete, accurate and timely financial accounting, reporting and disclosures,
including controls over the preparation and review of business performance reviews, account reconciliations and journal entries.
●
We did not design and maintain effective controls over information technology (“IT”) general controls for information systems that are relevant to the preparation of our
financial statements. Specifically, we did not design and maintain:
●
user access controls to ensure appropriate segregation of duties and that adequately restrict user and privileged access to financial applications, programs, and data to
appropriate company personnel;
●
program change management controls to ensure that IT program and data changes affecting financial IT applications and underlying accounting records are identified,
tested, authorized, and implemented appropriately; and
●
computer operations controls to ensure that data backups are authorized and monitored.
These material weaknesses resulted in immaterial audit adjustments to the research and development expense and property and equipment line items in our financial statements and
related disclosures for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, and a revision to our condensed financial statements for the period ended March 31, 2021 to reclassify certain
costs within operating expenses from research and development expense to other warrant expense. Additionally, each of these material weaknesses could result in a misstatement of
substantially all of our accounts or disclosures that would result in a material misstatement to the annual or interim financial statements that would not be prevented or detected.
We have begun implementation of a plan to remediate the material weaknesses described above. Such remediation measures are ongoing and include the following:
●
hiring additional accounting and IT personnel during 2021, including a new chief financial officer and other accounting personnel to bolster its accounting and IT capabilities
and capacity, and to establish and maintain our internal controls;
●
designing and implementing controls to formalize roles and review responsibilities to align with our team’s skills and experience and designing and implementing formal
controls over segregation of duties;
●
designing and implementing a formal risk assessment process to identify and evaluate changes in our business and the impact on our internal controls;
●
designing and implementing formal processes, policies and procedures supporting our financial close process, including completion of business performance reviews and
creation of standard balance sheet reconciliation templates and journal entry controls; and
●
designing and implementing IT general controls, including controls over the review and update of user access rights and privileges, change management processes and
procedures, and data backup authorization and monitoring.
While we believe these efforts will remediate the material weaknesses, we may not be able to complete our evaluation, testing or any required remediation in a timely fashion, or at
all. We cannot assure you that the measures we have taken to date and may take in the future, will be sufficient to remediate the control deficiencies that led to our material


- 12 -
weaknesses in internal control over financial reporting or that they will prevent or avoid potential future material weaknesses. The effectiveness of our internal control over financial


Table of Contents
reporting is subject to various inherent limitations, including cost limitations, judgments used in decision making, assumptions about the likelihood of future events, the possibility of
human error and the risk of fraud. Any failure to design or maintain effective internal controls over financial reporting or any difficulties encountered in their implementation or
improvement could increase compliance costs, negatively impact share trading prices, or otherwise harm our operating results or cause us to fail to meet our reporting obligations.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, our independent registered public accounting firm included an explanatory paragraph relating to our ability to continue as a going
concern in its report on our audited financial statements included in this prospectus.
Our report from our independent registered public accounting firm for the year ended December 31, 2020 includes an explanatory paragraph stating that our recurring losses from
operations and cash outflows from operating activities raise substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern. If we are unable to continue as a going concern, we may
have to liquidate our assets and may receive less than the value at which those assets are carried on our audited financial statements, and it is likely that investors would lose part or all
of their investment. Future reports from our independent registered public accounting firm may also contain statements expressing substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a
going concern. If there remains substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern, investors or other financing sources may be unwilling to provide additional funding
to us on commercially reasonable terms, or at all, and our business may be harmed.
If we experience harm to our reputation and brand, our business, financial condition and results of operations could be adversely affected.
Continuing to increase the strength of our reputation and brand for high-performing, sustainable, safe and cost-effective urban air mobility is critical to our ability to attract and retain
customers and partners. In addition, our growth strategy includes international expansion through joint ventures, minority investments or other partnerships with local companies as
well as event activations and cross-marketing with other established brands, all of which benefit from our reputation and brand recognition. The successful development of our
reputation and brand will depend on a number of factors, many of which are outside our control. Negative perception of our platform or company may harm our reputation and brand,
including as a result of:
●
complaints or negative publicity or reviews about us, independent third-party aircraft operators or fliers, our air mobility services or other brands or events we associate with,
even if factually incorrect or based on isolated incidents;
●
changes to our operations, safety and security, privacy or other policies that users or others perceive as overly restrictive, unclear or inconsistent with our values;
●
illegal, negligent, reckless or otherwise inappropriate behavior by fliers, independent or other third parties involved in the operation of our business or by our management
team or other employees;
●
actual or perceived disruptions or defects in our flight control software or aerial ride sharing platform, such as data security incidents, platform outages, payment processing
disruptions or other incidents that impact the availability, reliability or security of our offerings;
●
litigation over, or investigations by regulators into, our operations or those of our independent third-party aircraft operators;
●
a failure to operate our business in a way that is consistent with our values;
●
negative responses by independent third-party aircraft operators or fliers to new mobility offerings;
●
perception of our treatment of employees, contractors or independent third-party aircraft operators and our response to their sentiment related to political or social causes or
actions of management; or
●
any of the foregoing with respect to our competitors, to the extent such resulting negative perception affects the public’s perception of us or our industry as a whole.
In addition, changes we may make to enhance and improve our offerings and balance the needs and interests of our independent third-party aircraft operators and fliers may be viewed
positively from one group’s perspective (such as fliers) but negatively from another’s perspective (such as independent third-party aircraft operators), or may not be viewed positively


- 13 -
by either independent third-party


Table of Contents
aircraft operators or fliers. If we fail to balance the interests of independent third-party aircraft operators and fliers or make changes that they view negatively, independent third-party
aircraft operators and fliers may stop purchasing our aircraft or stop using our platform or take fewer flights, any of which could adversely affect our reputation, brand, business,
financial condition and results of operations.
The markets for our offerings are still in relatively early stages of growth, and if such markets do not continue to grow, grow more slowly than we expect or fail to grow as large
as we expect, our business, financial condition and results of operations could be harmed.
The markets for our eVTOL aircraft are still in relatively early stages of growth, and our success in these markets is dependent upon our ability to effectively market and sell air urban
air mobility as a substitute for conventional methods of transportation and the effectiveness of our other marketing and growth strategies. If the public does not perceive urban air
mobility as beneficial or chooses not to adopt urban air mobility as a result of concerns regarding safety, affordability or for other reasons, then the market for our offerings may not
further develop, may develop more slowly than we expect or may not achieve the growth potential we expect, any of which could harm our business, financial condition and results of
operations.
Growth of our business will require significant investments in our Vertiport infrastructure, technology and marketing and sales efforts. If our business does not generate the level of
available cash flow required to support these investments, our results of operations will be negatively affected. Further, our ability to effectively manage growth and expansion of its
operations will also require us to enhance our operational systems, internal controls and infrastructure, human resources policies and reporting systems. These enhancements will
require significant capital expenditures and allocation of valuable management and employee resources.
The eVTOL aircraft industry may not continue to develop, eVTOL aircraft may not be adopted by the market or our independent third-party aircraft operators, eVTOL aircraft
may not be certified by transportation authorities or eVTOL aircraft may not deliver the expected reduction in operating costs, any of which could adversely affect our prospects,
business, financial condition and results of operations.
eVTOL aircraft involve a complex set of technologies, which we must continue to further develop and rely on our independent third-party aircraft operators to adopt. However, before
eVTOL aircraft can fly passengers, we must receive requisite approvals from federal transportation authorities. No eVTOL aircraft are currently certified by the FAA for commercial
operations in the United States, and there is no assurance that our research and development will result in government-certified aircraft that are market-viable or commercially
successful in a timely manner or at all. In order to gain government certification, the performance, reliability and safety of eVTOL aircraft must be proven, none of which can be
assured. In particular, there is a risk that we will not obtain approval for one or more of the type certification from the FAA that are required for ultimate certification and commercial
use of our aircraft or will experience delays in receiving one or more of the type certifications from the FAA. Even if eVTOL aircraft are certified, individual operators must conform
eVTOL aircraft to their licenses, which requires FAA approval, and individual pilots also must be licensed and approved by the FAA to fly eVTOL aircraft, which could contribute to
delays in any widespread use of eVTOL aircraft and potentially limit the number of eVTOL aircraft operators available to partner with us.
Additional challenges to the adoption of eVTOL aircraft, all of which are outside of our control, include:
●
market acceptance of eVTOL aircraft;
●
state, federal or municipal licensing requirements and other regulatory measures;
●
necessary changes to Vertiport infrastructure to enable adoption, including installation of necessary charging equipment; and
●
public perception regarding the safety of eVTOL aircraft.
There are a number of existing laws, regulations and standards that may apply to eVTOL aircraft, including standards that were not originally intended to apply to electric aircraft.
Regulatory changes that address eVTOL aircraft more specifically could delay our ability to receive type certification by transportation authorities and thus delay our independent
third-party aircraft operators’ ability to utilize eVTOL aircraft for their flights. In addition, there can be no assurance that the market will accept eVTOL aircraft, that we will be able to
execute on our business strategy, or that our offerings utilizing eVTOL aircraft will obtain the necessary government operating authority or be successful in the market. There may be


- 14 -
heightened public skepticism of this nascent technology and its adopters. In particular, there could be negative public perception surrounding eVTOL aircraft, including the overall
safety and the potential for injuries or death occurring as a result of accidents involving eVTOL aircraft, regardless of whether any such safety incidents occur


Table of Contents
involving us. Any of the foregoing risks and challenges could adversely affect our prospects, business, financial condition and results of operations.
We may be unable to manage our future growth effectively, which could make it difficult to execute our business strategy.
If our operations continue to grow as planned, of which there can be no assurance, we will need to expand our sales, marketing, operations, and the number of partners with whom we
do business. Our continued growth could increase the strain on our resources, and we could experience operating difficulties, including difficulties in hiring, training and managing an
increasing number of employees. These difficulties may result in the erosion of our brand image, divert the attention of management and key employees and impact financial and
operational results. The continued expansion of our business may also require additional space for administrative support. If we are unable to drive commensurate growth, these costs,
which include lease commitments, marketing costs and headcount, could result in decreased margins, which could have an adverse effect on our business, financial condition and
results of operations.
Operation of aircraft involves a degree of inherent risk. We could suffer losses and adverse publicity stemming from any accident involving small aircraft, helicopters or charter
flights and in particular from any accident involving our independent third-party aircraft operators.
The operation of aircraft is subject to various risks, and demand for air transportation, including our urban air mobility offerings, has and may in the future be impacted by accidents or
other safety issues regardless of whether such accidents or issues involve our flights, our independent third-party aircraft operators or aircraft flown by our independent third-party
aircraft operators. Air transportation hazards, such as adverse weather conditions and fire and mechanical failures, may result in death or injury to personnel and passengers and which
could impact client or passenger confidence in a particular aircraft type or the air transportation services industry as a whole and could lead to a reduction in passenger volume,
particularly if such accidents or disasters were due to a safety fault. Safety statistics for air travel are reported by multiple parties, including the Department of Transportation (“DOT”)
and National Transportation Safety Board, and are often separated into categories of transportation. Because our urban air mobility offerings may include a variety of transportation
methods, fliers may have a hard time determining how safe urban air mobility services are and their confidence in urban air mobility may be impacted by, among other things, the
classification of accidents in ways that reflect poorly on urban air mobility services or the transportation methods urban air mobility services utilize.
We believe that safety and reliability are two of the primary attributes fliers consider when selecting air transportation services. Our failure to maintain standards of safety and
reliability that are satisfactory to fliers may adversely impact our ability to retain current customers and attract new customers. We are at risk of adverse publicity stemming from any
public incident involving us, our people or our brand. Such an incident could involve the actual or alleged behavior of any of our employees or independent third-party aircraft
operators. Further, if our personnel, one of our independent third-party aircraft operators’ aircraft, one of our independent third-party aircraft operators’ Archer-branded aircraft, or a
type of aircraft in our independent third-party aircraft operators’ fleet that is used by us is involved in a public incident, accident, catastrophe or regulatory enforcement action, we
could be exposed to significant reputational harm and potential legal liability. The insurance we carry may be inapplicable or inadequate to cover any such incident, accident,
catastrophe or action. In the event that our insurance is inapplicable or inadequate, we may be forced to bear substantial losses from an incident or accident. In addition, any such
incident, accident, catastrophe or action involving our employees, one of the Archer-branded aircraft used by us belonging to our independent third-party aircraft operators’ fleet (or
personnel and aircraft of our independent third-party aircraft operators), or the same type of aircraft could create an adverse public perception, which could harm our reputation, result
in air travelers being reluctant to use our services, and adversely impact our business, results of operations and financial condition. If one or more of our independent third-party
aircraft operators were to suffer an accident or lose the ability to fly certain aircraft due to safety concerns or investigations, we may be required to cancel or delay certain flights until
replacement aircraft and personnel are obtained.
Our operations may also be negatively impacted by accidents or other safety-related events or investigations that occur in or near the airports and heliports we plan to utilize for our
urban air mobility services. For example, if an accident were to occur at a heliport we rely on for certain flights in the future (assuming we are granted government operating authority
to do so), we may be unable to fly into or out of that heliport until the accident has been cleared, any damage to the facilities have been repaired and any insurance, regulatory or other
investigations have been completed.
Additionally, the battery packs in our aircraft are expected to use lithium-ion cells. On rare occasions, lithium-ion cells can rapidly release the energy they contain by venting smoke
and flames in a manner that can ignite nearby materials as well as other lithium-ion cells. While we have taken measures to enhance the safety of our battery designs, a field or testing
failure of our aircraft could occur in the future, which could subject us to lawsuits, product recalls, or redesign efforts, all of which would be time-consuming and expensive.


- 15 -


Table of Contents
Also, negative public perceptions regarding the suitability of lithium-ion cells for aerospace applications or any future incident involving lithium-ion cells such as an aircraft or other
fire, even if such incident does not involve our aircraft, could seriously harm our business.
From time to time, we are expected to store varying amounts of lithium-ion cells at our facilities. In addition, our manufacturing partners and suppliers are expected to store a
significant number of lithium-ion cells at their facilities. Any mishandling of battery cells may cause disruption to the operation of our facilities or our manufacturers. A safety issue or
fire related to the cells could disrupt operations or cause manufacturing delays. Such damage or injury could lead to adverse publicity and potentially a safety recall. Moreover, any
failure of a competitor’s eVTOL aircraft or energy storage product may cause indirect adverse publicity for us and our aircraft. Such adverse publicity could negatively affect our
brand and harm our business, prospects, financial condition and operating results.
We are highly dependent on our senior management team and other highly skilled personnel, and if we are not successful in attracting or retaining highly qualified personnel, we
may not be able to successfully implement our business strategy.
Our success depends, in significant part, on the continued services of our senior management team and on our ability to attract, motivate, develop and retain a sufficient number of
other highly skilled personnel, including finance, marketing, sales, and technology and support personnel. We believe that the breadth and depth of our senior management team’s
experience across multiple industries will be instrumental to our success. The loss of any one or more members of our senior management team, for any reason, including resignation
or retirement, could impair our ability to execute our business strategy and harm our business, financial condition and results of operations. Additionally, our financial condition and
results of operations may be adversely affected if we are unable to attract and retain skilled employees to support our operations and growth.
Our business may be adversely affected by labor and union activities.
Although none of our employees are currently represented by a labor union, it is common throughout the aerospace industry generally for many employees at aerospace companies to
belong to a union, which can result in higher employee costs and increased risk of work stoppages. We may also directly and indirectly depend upon other companies with unionized
work forces, such as parts suppliers and trucking and freight companies, and work stoppages or strikes organized by such unions could harm our business, financial condition or
operating results.
We expect that our United Airlines purchase agreement and future purchase orders will be subject to indexed price escalation clauses which could expose us to losses if we have
cost overruns or if increases in our costs exceed the applicable escalation rate.
Commercial aircraft sales contracts are often entered into years before the aircraft are delivered. In order to help account for economic fluctuations between the contract date and
delivery date, aircraft pricing generally consists of a fixed amount as modified by price escalation formulas derived from labor, commodity and other price indices. Our revenue
estimates are based on current expectations with respect to these escalation formulas, but the actual escalation amounts are outside of our control. Escalation factors can fluctuate
significantly from period to period and changes in escalation amounts can significantly impact revenues and operating margins in our eVTOL business. We can make no assurance that
any customer, current or future, will exercise purchase options, fulfill existing purchase commitments or purchase additional products or services from us. The terms and conditions of
the United Airlines purchase agreement regarding price escalation clauses are yet to be determined, and there is no assurance that they will be determined in a manner that will
mitigate the risks described above.
We currently rely and will continue to rely on third-party partners to provide and store the parts and components required to manufacture our aircraft, and to supply critical
components and systems, which exposes us to a number of risks and uncertainties outside our control.
We are substantially reliant on our relationships with our suppliers and service providers for the parts and components in our aircraft. If any of these suppliers or service partners were
to experience delays, disruptions, capacity constraints or quality control problems in their manufacturing operations, or if they choose not to do business with us, we would have
significant difficulty procuring and producing our aircraft, and our business prospects would be significantly harmed. These disruptions would negatively impact our revenues,
competitive position and reputation. In addition, our suppliers or service partners may rely on certain state tax incentives that may be subject to change or elimination in the future,
which could result in additional costs and delays in production if a new manufacturing site must be obtained. Further, if we are unable to successfully manage our relationship with
our suppliers or service partners, the quality and availability of our aircraft may be harmed. Our suppliers or service partners could, under some circumstances, decline to accept new
purchase orders from or otherwise reduce their business with us. If our suppliers or service partners stopped manufacturing our aircraft


- 16 -


Table of Contents
- 17 -
components for any reason or reduced manufacturing capacity, we may be unable to replace the lost manufacturing capacity on a timely and comparatively cost-effective basis, which
would adversely impact our operations.
The manufacturing facilities of our suppliers or service partners and the equipment used to manufacture the components for our aircraft would be costly to replace and could require
substantial lead time to replace and qualify for use. The manufacturing facilities of our suppliers or service partners may be harmed or rendered inoperable by natural or man-made
disasters, including earthquakes, flooding, fire and power outages, or by health epidemics, such as the recent COVID-19 pandemic, which may render it difficult or impossible for us
to manufacture our aircraft for some period of time. The inability to manufacture our aircraft components or the backlog that could develop if the manufacturing facilities of our
suppliers or service partners are inoperable for even a short period of time may result in the loss of customers or harm our reputation.
We do not control our suppliers or service partners or such parties’ labor and other legal compliance practices, including their environmental, health and safety practices. If our current
suppliers or service partners, or any other suppliers or service partners we may use in the future, violate U.S. or foreign laws or regulations, we may be subjected to extra duties,
significant monetary penalties, adverse publicity, the seizure and forfeiture of products that we are attempting to import or the loss of our import privileges. The effects of these factors
could render the conduct of our business in a particular country undesirable or impractical and have a negative impact on our operating results.
We have been, and may in the future be, adversely affected by health epidemics and pandemics, including the ongoing global COVID-19 pandemic, the duration and economic,
governmental and social impact of which is difficult to predict, which may significantly harm our business, prospects, financial condition and operating results.
We face various risks related to public health issues, including epidemics, pandemics and other outbreaks, including the recent pandemic of respiratory illness known as COVID-19
caused by a novel coronavirus. The impact of COVID-19, including changes in consumer and business behavior, pandemic fears and market downturns and restrictions on business
and individual activities, has created significant volatility in the global economy and led to reduced economic activity. The spread of COVID-19 has also created a disruption in the
manufacturing, delivery and overall supply chain of aircraft manufacturers and suppliers and has led to a global decrease in aircraft sales and usage in markets around the world. The
duration and long-term impact of COVID-19 on our business is currently unknown.
The pandemic has resulted in government authorities implementing numerous measures to try to contain the virus, such as travel bans and restrictions, quarantines, stay-at-home or
shelter-in-place orders, and business shutdowns. These measures may adversely impact our employees and operations and the operations of our suppliers, vendors and business
partners, and may negatively impact our sales and marketing activities and the production schedule of our aircraft. In addition, various aspects of our business cannot be conducted
remotely, including the testing and manufacturing of our aircraft. These measures by government authorities may remain in place for a significant period of time and they are likely to
continue to adversely affect our testing, manufacturing and building plans, sales and marketing activities, business and results of operations.
The spread of COVID-19 has caused us and many of our contractors and service providers to modify their business practices (including employee travel, recommending that all non-
essential personnel work from home and cancellation or reduction of physical participation in meetings, events and conferences), and we and our contractors and service providers
may be required to take further actions as may be required by government authorities or that we determine are in the best interests of our employees, customers, suppliers, vendors and
business partners. There is no certainty that such actions will be sufficient to mitigate the risks posed by the virus or otherwise be satisfactory to government authorities. If significant
portions of our workforce or contractors and service providers are unable to work effectively, including due to illness, quarantines, social distancing, government actions or other
restrictions in connection with the COVID-19 pandemic, our operations will be impacted.
The extent to which the COVID-19 pandemic impacts our business, prospects and results of operations will depend on future developments, which are highly uncertain and cannot be
predicted, including, but not limited to, the duration and spread of the pandemic, its severity, the actions to contain the virus or treat its impact and how quickly and to what extent
normal economic and operating activities can resume. The COVID-19 pandemic could limit the ability of our customers, suppliers, vendors and business partners to perform,
including third-party suppliers’ ability to provide components and materials used in our aircraft. We may also experience an increase in the cost of raw materials used in our
commercial production of our aircraft. Even after the COVID-19 pandemic has subsided, we may continue to experience an adverse impact to our business as a result of COVID-19’s
global economic impact, including any recession that has occurred or may occur in the future.




Table of Contents
- 18 -
There are no comparable recent events which may provide guidance as to the effect of the spread of COVID-19 and a pandemic, and, as a result, the ultimate impact of the COVID-19
pandemic or a similar health epidemic is highly uncertain and subject to change. We do not yet know the full extent of COVID-19’s impact on our business, operations, or the global
economy as a whole. However, the effects could have a material impact on our results of operations, and we will continue to monitor the situation closely.
Our long-term success and ability to significantly grow our revenue will depend, in part, on our ability to establish and expand into international markets and/or expand market
segments.
Our future results will depend, in part, on our ability to establish and expand our presence within international markets and into the market segments of defense or logistics/cargo. Our
ability to expand into these markets will depend upon our ability to obtain the necessary international regulatory approvals and certifications, adapt to international markets,
understand the broader customer base, and address any unique technological requirements. Our ability to expand internationally involves various risks, including, but not limited to,
the need to invest significant resources in such expansion, and the possibility that returns on such investments will not be achieved in the near future or at all in these less familiar
competitive environments. We may also choose to conduct our international business through joint ventures, minority investments or other partnerships with local companies as well
as event activations and cross-marketing with other established brands. If we are unable to identify partners or negotiate favorable terms, our international growth may be limited. In
addition, we may incur significant expenses in advance of generating material revenue as we attempt to establish our presence in particular international markets or market segments
outside of passenger traffic.
We are subject to cybersecurity risks to our operational systems, security systems, infrastructure, integrated software in our aircraft and customer data processed by us or third-
party vendors.
We are at risk for interruptions, outages and breaches of our: (i) operational systems, including business, financial, accounting, product development, data processing or production
processes, owned by us or our third-party vendors or suppliers; (ii) facility security systems, owned by us or our third-party vendors or suppliers; (iii) aircraft technology including
powertrain and avionics and flight control software, owned by us or our third-party vendors or suppliers; (v) the integrated software in our aircraft; or (iv) customer data that we
process or our third-party vendors or suppliers process on our behalf. Such incidents could: disrupt our operational systems; result in loss of intellectual property, trade secrets or other
proprietary or competitively sensitive information; compromise certain information of customers, employees, suppliers, or others; jeopardize the security of our facilities; or affect the
performance of in-product technology and the integrated software in our aircraft.
We plan to include avionics and flight control software services and functionality that utilize data connectivity to monitor aircraft performance and to enhance safety and enable cost-
saving preventative maintenance. The availability and effectiveness of our services depend on the continued operation of information technology and communications systems. Our
systems will be vulnerable to damage or interruption from, among others, physical theft, fire, terrorist attacks, natural disasters, power loss, war, telecommunications failures, viruses,
denial or degradation of service attacks, ransomware, social engineering schemes, insider theft or misuse or other attempts to harm our systems. We intend to use our avionics and
flight control software and functionality to log information about each aircraft’s use in order to aid us in aircraft diagnostics and servicing. Our customers may object to the use of this
data, which may increase our vehicle maintenance costs and harm our business prospects.
Moreover, there are inherent risks associated with developing, improving, expanding and updating our current systems, such as the disruption of our data management, procurement,
production execution, finance, supply chain and sales and service processes. These risks may affect our ability to manage our data and inventory, procure parts or supplies or
manufacture, deploy, deliver and service our aircraft, adequately protect our intellectual property or achieve and maintain compliance with, or realize available benefits under,
applicable laws, regulations and contracts. We cannot be sure that these systems upon which we rely, including those of our third-party vendors or suppliers, will be effectively
implemented, maintained or expanded as planned. If we do not successfully implement, maintain or expand these systems as planned, our operations may be disrupted and our ability
to accurately and timely report our financial results could be impaired. Moreover, our proprietary information or intellectual property could be compromised or misappropriated, and
our reputation may be adversely affected. If these systems do not operate as we expect them to, we may be required to expend significant resources to make corrections or find
alternative sources for performing these functions.


Table of Contents
- 19 -
Failure to comply with federal, state and foreign laws and regulations relating to privacy, data protection and consumer protection, or the expansion of current laws and
regulations or the enactment of new laws or regulations in these areas, could adversely affect our business and our financial condition.
We are subjected to or affected by a number of federal, state and local laws and regulations, as well as contractual obligations and industry standards, that impose certain obligations
and restrictions with respect to data privacy and security, and govern our collection, storage, retention, protection, use, processing, transmission, sharing and disclosure of personal
information including that of our employees, customers and others. Most jurisdictions have enacted laws requiring companies to notify individuals, regulatory authorities and others of
security breaches involving certain types of data. Such laws may be inconsistent or may change or additional laws may be adopted. In addition, our agreements with certain customers
may require us to notify them in the event of a security breach. Such mandatory disclosures are costly, could lead to negative publicity, result in penalties or fines, result in litigation,
may cause our customers to lose confidence in the effectiveness of our security measures and require us to expend significant capital and other resources to respond to and/or alleviate
problems caused by the actual or perceived security breach.
The global data protection landscape is rapidly evolving, and implementation standards and enforcement practices are likely to remain uncertain for the foreseeable future. We may
not be able to monitor and react to all developments in a timely manner. For example, California adopted the California Consumer Privacy Act (the “CCPA”), which became effective
in January 2020. The CCPA establishes a privacy framework for covered businesses, including an expansive definition of personal information and data privacy rights for California
residents. The CCPA includes a framework with potentially severe statutory damages and private rights of action. The CCPA requires covered businesses to provide new disclosures to
California residents, provide them new ways to opt-out of certain disclosures of personal information, and allow for a new cause of action for data breaches. As we expand our
operations, the CCPA may increase our compliance costs and potential liability. Some observers have noted that the CCPA could mark the beginning of a trend toward more stringent
privacy legislation in the United States. Other states have begun to propose similar laws. Compliance with any applicable privacy and data security laws and regulations is a rigorous
and time-intensive process, and we may be required to put in place additional mechanisms to comply with such laws and regulations.
We publish privacy policies and other documentation regarding our collection, processing, use and disclosure of personal information and/or other confidential information. Although
we endeavor to comply with our published policies and other documentation, we may at times fail to do so or may be perceived to have failed to do so. Moreover, despite our efforts,
we may not be successful in achieving compliance if our employees, contractors, service providers or vendors fail to comply with our published policies and documentation. Such
failures can subject us to potential local, state and federal action if they are found to be deceptive, unfair, or misrepresentative of our actual practices. Claims that we have violated
individuals’ privacy rights or failed to comply with data protection laws or applicable privacy notices even if we are not found liable, could be expensive and time-consuming to
defend and could result in adverse publicity that could harm our business.
We are subject to risks associated with climate change, including the potential increased impacts of severe weather events on our operations and infrastructure.
The potential physical effects of climate change, such as increased frequency and severity of storms, floods, fires, fog, mist, freezing conditions, sea-level rise and other climate-
related events, could affect our operations, infrastructure and financial results. Certain of the airports where our terminal facilities are expected to initially be located in connection
with our aerial ride sharing operations are susceptible to the impacts of storm-related flooding and sea-level rise, which could result in costs and loss of revenue. We could incur
significant costs to improve the climate resiliency of our infrastructure and otherwise prepare for, respond to, and mitigate such physical effects of climate change. We are not able to
accurately predict the materiality of any potential losses or costs associated with the physical effects of climate change.
We intend to retain certain personal information about our aircraft, customers, employees or others that, if compromised, could harm our financial performance and results of
operations or prospects.
We are subject to a wide variety of laws in the United States and other jurisdictions related to privacy, data protection and consumer protection that are often complex and subject to
varying interpretations. As a result, these privacy, data protection and consumer protection laws may change or develop over time through judicial decisions or as new guidance or
interpretations are provided by regulatory and governing bodies and such changes or developments may be contrary to our existing practices. This may cause us to expend resources
on updating, changing or eliminating some of our privacy and data protection practices.




Table of Contents
We plan to collect, store, transmit and otherwise process data from aircraft, customers, employees and others as part of our business and operations, which may include personal data
or confidential or proprietary information. We also work with partners and third-party service providers or vendors that collect, store and process such data on our behalf and in
connection with our aircraft. There can be no assurance that any security measures that we or our third-party service providers or vendors have implemented will be effective against
current or future security threats. If a compromise of data were to occur, we may become liable under our contracts with other parties and under applicable law for damages and incur
penalties and other costs to respond to, investigate and remedy such an incident. Our systems, networks and physical facilities could be breached, or personal information could
otherwise be compromised due to employee error or malfeasance, if, for example, third parties attempt to fraudulently induce our employees or our customers to disclose information
or user names and/or passwords. Third parties may also exploit vulnerabilities in, or obtain unauthorized access to, platforms, systems, networks and/or physical facilities utilized by
our service providers and vendors.
Our aircraft contain complex information technology systems and built-in data connectivity to share aircraft data with ground operations infrastructure. We plan to design, implement
and test security measures intended to prevent unauthorized access to our information technology networks, our aircraft and related systems. However, hackers may attempt to gain
unauthorized access to modify, alter and use such networks, aircraft and systems to gain control of or to change our aircraft’s functionality, performance characteristics, or to gain
access to data stored in or generated by the aircraft. A significant breach of our third-party service providers’ or vendors’ or our own network security and systems could have serious
negative consequences for our business and future prospects, including possible fines, penalties and damages, reduced customer demand for our aircraft or urban aerial ride sharing
services and harm to our reputation and brand.
We may not have adequate insurance coverage. The successful assertion of one or more large claims against us that exceeds our available insurance coverage, or results in changes to
our insurance policies (including premium increases or the imposition of large deductible or co-insurance requirements), could have an adverse effect on our business. In addition, we
cannot be sure that our existing insurance coverage will continue to be available on acceptable terms or that our insurers will not deny coverage as to any future claim.
We will incur increased costs as a public company, and our management will devote substantial time to new compliance initiatives.
We face increased legal, accounting and other expenses that we did not incur as a private company, and these expenses may increase even more after we are no longer an emerging
growth company, as defined in Section 2(a) of the Securities Act. As a public company, we are subject to the reporting requirements of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 (the
“Exchange Act”), The Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002 (“Sarbanes-Oxley”), the Dodd-Frank Act as well as rules adopted, and to be adopted, by the SEC and NYSE. Our management
and other personnel need to devote a substantial amount of time to these compliance initiatives. Moreover, we expect these rules and regulations to substantially increase our legal and
financial compliance costs and make some activities more time-consuming and costly. The increased costs will increase our net loss. For example, we expect these rules and
regulations to make it more difficult and more expensive for us to obtain director and officer liability insurance and we may be forced to accept reduced policy limits or incur
substantially higher costs to maintain the same or similar coverage. We cannot predict or estimate the amount or timing of additional costs we may incur to respond to these
requirements. The impact of these requirements could also make it more difficult for us to attract and retain qualified persons to serve on our board of directors, our board committees
or as executive officers.
We are or may be subject to risks associated with strategic alliances or acquisitions and may not be able to identify adequate strategic relationship opportunities, or form strategic
relationships, in the future.
We have entered into strategic alliances and may in the future enter into additional strategic alliances or joint ventures or minority equity investments, in each case with various third
parties for the production of our aircraft as well as with other collaborators with capabilities on data and analytics and engineering. These alliances subject us to a number of risks,
including risks associated with sharing proprietary information, non-performance by the third-party and increased expenses in establishing new strategic alliances, any of which may
adversely affect our business. We may have limited ability to monitor or control the actions of these third parties and, to the extent any of these strategic third parties suffer negative
publicity or harm to their reputation from events relating to their business, we may also suffer negative publicity or harm to our reputation by virtue of our association with any such
third-party.
Strategic business relationships are an important factor in the growth and success of our business. However, there are no assurances that we will be able to continue to identify or
secure suitable business relationship opportunities in the future or our competitors may capitalize on such opportunities before we do. Moreover, identifying such opportunities could
require substantial management time and resources, and negotiating and financing relationships involves significant costs and uncertainties. If we are unable to successfully source


- 20 -
and execute on strategic relationship opportunities in the future, our overall growth could be impaired, and our business, prospects, financial condition and operating results could be
adversely affected.


Table of Contents
When appropriate opportunities arise, we may acquire additional assets, products, technologies or businesses that are complementary to our existing business. In addition to possible
stockholder approval, we may need approvals and licenses from relevant government authorities for the acquisitions and to comply with any applicable laws and regulations, which
could result in increased delay and costs, and may disrupt our business strategy if we fail to do so. Furthermore, acquisitions and the subsequent integration of new assets and
businesses into our own require significant attention from our management and could result in a diversion of resources from our existing business, which in turn could have an adverse
effect on our operations. Acquired assets or businesses may not generate the financial results we expect. Acquisitions could result in the use of substantial amounts of cash, potentially
dilutive issuances of equity securities, the occurrence of significant goodwill impairment charges, amortization expenses for other intangible assets and exposure to potential unknown
liabilities of the acquired business. Moreover, the costs of identifying and consummating acquisitions may be significant.
We have been named in civil litigation alleging misappropriation by us of a competitor’s trade secrets and infringement by us of certain of the competitor’s patents. Additionally,
one of our employees was the subject of a search warrant relating to a federal government investigation, and we as well as three of our employees have been served with grand
jury subpoenas in connection with such investigation. These civil and criminal proceedings and similar allegations or legal actions in the future may be time-consuming and
expensive and, if adversely determined, could delay, limit or prevent our ability to commercialize our aircraft or otherwise execute on our business plan.
We are currently involved in the following legal actions:
●
On March 30, 2021, one of our employees, who is a former employee of Wisk, had a search warrant executed at his home in connection with a federal investigation. In
addition, we and three of our employees, who are also former Wisk employees, received grand jury subpoenas from the United States Attorney’s Office for the Northern
District of California in relation to the same investigation. The grand jury subpoenas seek documents and information about our business, including our hiring practices and
intellectual property, as well as documents and information relating to the employment of such employees at Wisk, including Wisk’s intellectual property, business plans, and
information relating to Wisk’s aircraft design. As of October 6, 2021, the investigation is ongoing.
●
On April 6, 2021, Wisk brought a lawsuit against us in the United States District Court for the Northern District of California (the “District Court”), alleging
misappropriation of trade secrets and patent infringement. We have placed an employee on paid administrative leave in connection with a government investigation and a
search warrant issued to the employee, which we believe is focused on conduct prior to the employee joining us. We, along with three other Archer employees with whom
the individual worked, have received subpoenas relating to this investigation. We are cooperating with the investigation of the employee.
●
On May 19, 2021, Wisk filed a motion for preliminary injunction and expedited discovery.
●
On June 1, 2021, we filed a motion to dismiss the trade secret claims and filed counterclaims.
●
On June 15, 2021, Wisk amended its complaint, and the following day we filed a motion to dismiss the amended complaint.
●
On June 23, 2021, we filed an opposition to the motion for preliminary injunction.
●
On July 13, 2021, we filed amended counterclaims.
●
On July 22, 2021, the District Court denied Wisk’s motion for preliminary injunction.
●
On July 27, 2021, Wisk filed a motion to strike and dismiss certain of our amended counterclaims.
●
On August 10, 2021, we filed an opposition to Wisk’s motion to strike and dismiss certain of our amended counterclaims.
●
On August 20, 2021, Wisk filed a notice of appeal of the District Court’s denial of the motion for preliminary injunction.
●
On August 24, 2021, the District Court denied our motion to dismiss the trade secret claims.


- 21 -
●
On September 14, 2021, the District Court denied Wisk’s motion to strike and dismiss certain of our amended counterclaims.


Table of Contents
●
On September 30, 2021, Wisk withdrew its notice of appeal of the District Court’s denial of the motion for preliminary injunction.
We cannot predict the timing or outcome of the litigation or government investigation or range of reasonably possible loss, if any, from either but a negative result could have a
material adverse effect on our financial position, liquidity, operations, and cash flows. With respect to the federal investigation of the former Wisk employee, there can be no assurance
that we ourselves will not be named as a subject or target of the pending investigation or other government investigations in the future. We have incurred and expect to continue to
incur costs in responding to the proceedings. Our business plan does not include the cost of any meaningful award of damages or settlement with Wisk.
In addition, other holders of intellectual property rights relating to battery packs, electric motors, aircraft configurations, fly-by-wire flight control software, electronic power
management systems or any other technology relevant to our business may initiate legal proceedings alleging infringement or misappropriation of such rights by us and our
employees, either with respect to our own intellectual property or intellectual property we license from third parties.
Our pending proceedings and other future legal proceedings against us or our employees, regardless of outcome or merit, could be time consuming and expensive to defend or resolve,
result in substantial diversion of management and technical resources, delay, limit or prevent our ability to make, develop, commercialize or deploy our aircraft and aerial ride sharing
services and deteriorate our reputation and our business relationships, any of which could make it more difficult or impossible for us to operate our business or otherwise execute on
our business plan and significantly adversely affect our business, financial condition, or results of operations. In the event of an adverse outcome of the litigation, we may have to
cease developing and/or using the asserted intellectual property, which could significantly adversely impact our business, financial condition, or results of operation.
In response to a determination or resolution that we or any of our employees have infringed upon or misappropriated a third party’s intellectual property rights, we may be required to
take certain actions, including (without limitation) one or more of the following:
●
cease development, sales or use of our aircraft or other products;
●
pay substantial damages, interest, attorneys’ fees, costs and other amounts;
●
transfer intellectual property rights to a competitor;
●
obtain a license from the owner of the asserted intellectual property right, which license may not be available on reasonable terms or available at all;
●
terminate the employment of key employees;
●
develop or re-develop an alternative design of our aircraft; or
●
re-develop one or more other aspects or systems of its aircraft or other offerings.
A successful claim of infringement or misappropriation against us or any of our employees could delay, limit or prevent our ability to commercialize our aircraft and could
significantly adversely affect our business, prospects, financial condition or operating results. Even if we are successful in defending against these claims, litigation could result in
substantial costs and distraction to the company and our management over many years.
Our business may be adversely affected if we are unable to protect our intellectual property rights from unauthorized use by third parties.
Failure to adequately protect our intellectual property rights could result in our competitors offering similar products or services, potentially resulting in the loss of some of our
competitive advantage and a decrease in our revenue, which could adversely affect our business, prospects, financial condition and operating results. Our success depends, at least in
part, on our ability to protect our core technology and intellectual property. To accomplish this, we will rely on a combination of patents, trade secrets (including know-how),
employee and third-party nondisclosure agreements, copyrights, trademarks, intellectual property licenses and other contractual rights to establish and protect our rights in our
technology.


- 22 -


Table of Contents
The protection of our intellectual property rights will be important to our future business opportunities. However, the measures we take to protect our intellectual property from
unauthorized use by others may not be effective for various reasons, including the following:
●
as noted below, any patent applications we submit may not result in the issuance of patents (and patents have not yet issued to us based on our pending applications);
●
the scope of our patents that may subsequently issue may not be broad enough to protect our proprietary rights;
●
our issued patents may be challenged or invalidated by third parties;
●
our employees or business partners may breach their confidentiality, non-disclosure and non-use obligations to us;
●
third parties may independently develop technologies that are the same or similar to ours;
●
the costs associated with enforcing patents, confidentiality and invention agreements or other intellectual property rights may make enforcement impracticable; and
●
current and future competitors may circumvent or otherwise design around our patents.
Patent, trademark, copyright, and trade secret laws vary throughout the world. Some foreign countries do not protect intellectual property rights to the same extent as do the laws of
the United States. Further, policing the unauthorized use of our intellectual property rights in foreign jurisdictions may be difficult. Therefore, our intellectual property rights may not
be as strong or as easily enforced outside of the U.S.
Also, while we have registered and applied for trademarks in an effort to protect our investment in our brand and goodwill with customers, competitors may challenge the validity of
those trademarks and other brand names in which we have invested. Such challenges can be expensive and may adversely affect our ability to maintain the goodwill gained in
connection with a particular trademark.
To the extent we expand our international activities, our exposure to unauthorized use of our technologies and proprietary information may increase. We may also fail to detect
unauthorized use of our intellectual property or be required to expend significant resources to monitor and protect our intellectual property rights, including engaging in litigation,
which may be costly, time-consuming, and divert the attention of management and resources, and may not ultimately be successful. If we fail to meaningfully establish, maintain,
protect and enforce our intellectual property rights internationally, our business, financial condition and results of operations could be adversely affected.
Our aerial ride sharing operations will initially be concentrated in a small number of metropolitan areas and airports which makes our business particularly susceptible to
natural disasters, outbreaks and pandemics, economic, social, weather, growth constraints and regulatory conditions or other circumstances affecting these metropolitan areas.
We expect to initially launch our aerial ride sharing offering in limited jurisdictions subject to receipt of the necessary operating authority. Accordingly, our business and results of
operations are particularly susceptible to adverse economic, regulatory, political, weather and other conditions in other markets that may become similarly concentrated. As a result of
our geographic concentration, our business and financial results relating to our aerial ride sharing operations will be particularly susceptible to natural disasters, outbreaks and
pandemics, economic, social, weather, growth constraints and regulatory conditions or other circumstances in each of these metropolitan areas. In addition, any changes to local laws
or regulations within these key metropolitan areas that affect our ability to operate or increase our operating expenses in these markets would have an adverse effect on our business,
financial condition and operating results.
Disruption of operations at the airports where our terminal facilities are expected to initially be located, whether caused by labor relations, utility or communications issues or fuel
shortages, could harm our business. Certain airports may regulate flight operations, such as limiting the number of landings per year, which could reduce our aerial ride sharing
operations. Bans on our airport operations or the introduction of any new permitting requirements would significantly disrupt our operations. In addition, demand for our urban air
mobility services could be impacted if drop-offs or pick-ups of fliers become inconvenient because of airport rules or regulations, or more expensive for fliers because of airport-
imposed fees, which would adversely affect our business, financial condition and operating results.


- 23 -


Table of Contents
Our expected concentration in large metropolitan areas and heavily trafficked airports also makes our business susceptible to an outbreak of a contagious disease, such as the Ebola
virus, Middle East Respiratory Syndrome, Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome, H1N1 influenza virus, avian flu, Zika virus, COVID-19 or any other similar illness, both due to the
risk of a contagious disease being introduced into the metropolitan area through the high volume of travelers flying into and out of such airports and the ease at which contagious
diseases can spread through densely populated areas, as seen with the spread of COVID-19 in Los Angeles, California and New York, New York.
Natural disasters, including tornados, hurricanes, floods and earthquakes, and severe weather conditions, such as heavy rains, strong winds, dense fog, blizzards or snowstorms, may
damage our facilities, those of independent third-party aircraft operators or otherwise disrupt flights into or out of the airports from which our aircraft arrive or depart.
Major metropolitan areas, including those in which we expect to operate in, are also at risk of terrorist attacks, actual or threatened acts of war, political disruptions and other
disruptions. The occurrence of one or more natural disasters, severe weather events, epidemic or pandemic outbreaks, terrorist attacks or disruptive political events in regions where
our facilities are or will be located, or where our independent third-party aircraft operators’ facilities are located, could adversely affect our business.
The dual-class structure of our Common Stock has the effect of concentrating voting power with our co-Chief Executive Officers and co-founders, which limits an investor’s
ability to influence the outcome of important transactions, including a change in control.
Class B Shares have ten votes per share, while Class A Shares have one vote per share. Brett Adcock and Adam Goldstein, Legacy Archer’s co-founders, co-Chairmen of our board of
directors and co-Chief Executive Officers, hold approximately 88.3% of the issued and outstanding Class B Shares and approximately 74.0% of the voting power of our capital stock
on an outstanding basis and are able to control matters submitted to our stockholders for approval, including the election of directors, amendments of our organizational documents
and any merger, consolidation, sale of all or substantially all of our assets or other major corporate transactions. Messrs. Adcock and Goldstein may have interests that differ from
other stockholders and may vote in a way with which may be adverse to other stockholders or with which they may disagree. This concentrated control may have the effect of
delaying, preventing or deterring a change in control, could deprive our stockholders of an opportunity to receive a premium for their capital stock as part of a sale, and might
ultimately affect the market price of the Class A Shares.
We cannot predict the impact that our dual-class structure may have on the stock price of our Class A Common Stock.
We cannot predict whether our dual-class structure will result in a lower or more volatile market price of Class A Common Stock or in adverse publicity or other adverse
consequences. For example, certain index providers have announced restrictions on including companies with multiple-class share structures in certain of their indexes. In July 2017,
FTSE Russell and S&P Dow Jones announced that they would cease to allow most newly public companies utilizing dual or multi-class capital structures to be included in their
indices. Affected indices include the Russell 2000 and the S&P 500, S&P MidCap 400 and S&P SmallCap 600, which together make up the S&P Composite 1500. Beginning in 2017,
MSCI, a leading stock index provider, opened public consultations on their treatment of no-vote and multi-class structures and temporarily barred new multi-class listings from certain
of its indices; however, in October 2018, MSCI announced its decision to include equity securities “with unequal voting structures” in its indices and to launch a new index that
specifically includes voting rights in its eligibility criteria. Under the announced policies, our dual-class capital structure makes us ineligible for inclusion in certain indices, and as a
result, mutual funds, exchange-traded funds and other investment vehicles that attempt to passively track those indices will not be investing in our stock. These policies are still new,
and it remains unclear what effect, if any, they will have on the valuations of publicly-traded companies excluded from such indices, but it is possible that they may depress these
valuations compared to those of other similar companies that are included. Because of our dual-class structure, we are likely excluded from certain of these indexes and we cannot
assure you that other stock indexes will not take similar actions. Given the sustained flow of investment funds into passive strategies that seek to track certain indexes, exclusion from
stock indexes likely precludes investment by many of these funds and could make Class A Shares less attractive to other investors. As a result, the market price of the Class A Shares
could be adversely affected.
Our failure to timely and effectively implement controls and procedures required by Section 404(a) of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act could harm our business.
As a public company, we are required to provide management’s attestation on internal controls commencing with our annual report for the year ending December 31, 2021 in
accordance with applicable SEC guidance. Our standards as a public company under Section 404(a) of Sarbanes-Oxley are significantly more stringent than those we faced as a
privately-held company. Management may not be able to effectively and timely implement controls and procedures that adequately respond to the increased regulatory compliance
and


- 24 -


Table of Contents
reporting requirements. If we are not able to implement the additional requirements of Section 404(a) in a timely manner or with adequate compliance, we may not be able to assess
whether our internal controls over financial reporting are effective, which may subject us to adverse regulatory consequences and could harm investor confidence and the market price
of our securities.
We may be required to take write-downs or write-offs, or may be subject to restructuring, impairment or other charges that could have a significant negative effect on our
financial condition, results of operations and the price of Common Stock, which could cause you to lose some or all of your investment.
Factors outside of our control may, at any time, arise. As a result of these factors, we may be forced to later write-down or write-off assets, restructure operations, or incur impairment
or other charges that could result in reporting losses. Unexpected risks may arise, and previously known risks may materialize. Even though these charges may be non-cash items and
therefore not have an immediate impact on our liquidity, we must report charges of this nature which could contribute to negative market perceptions about us or our securities. In
addition, charges of this nature may cause us to be unable to obtain future financing on favorable terms or at all.
We qualify as an “emerging growth company” within the meaning of the Securities Act and take advantage of certain exemptions from disclosure requirements available to
emerging growth companies that could make our securities less attractive to investors and may make it more difficult to compare our performance to the performance of other
public companies.
We qualify as an “emerging growth company” as defined in Section 2(a)(19) of the Securities Act and as modified by the JOBS Act. As such, we take advantage of certain exemptions
from various reporting requirements applicable to other public companies that are not emerging growth companies for as long as we continue to be an emerging growth company,
including, but not limited to, (i) not being required to comply with the auditor attestation requirements of Section 404 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act, (ii) reduced disclosure obligations
regarding executive compensation in our periodic reports and proxy statements, and (c) exemptions from the requirements of holding a nonbinding advisory vote on executive
compensation and stockholder approval of any golden parachute payments not previously approved. As a result, our stockholders may not have access to certain information they may
deem important. We will remain an emerging growth company until the earliest of (i) the last day of the fiscal year (a) following October 30, 2025, (b) in which we have total annual
gross revenue of at least $1.07 billion, or (c) in which we are deemed to be a large accelerated filer, which means the market value of our Common Stock that is held by non-affiliates
exceeds $700 million as of the prior June 30th, and (ii) the date on which we have issued more than $1.0 billion in non-convertible debt securities during the prior three year period. If
some investors find our securities less attractive as a result of our reliance on these exemptions, the trading prices of our securities may be lower than they otherwise would be, there
may be a less active trading market for our securities and the trading prices of our securities may be more volatile.
Section 102(b)(1) of the JOBS Act exempts emerging growth companies from compliance with new or revised financial accounting standards until private companies (that is, those
that have not had a Securities Act registration statement declared effective or do not have a class of securities registered under the Exchange Act) are required to comply with the new
or revised financial accounting standards. The JOBS Act provides that a company can elect to opt out of the extended transition period and comply with the requirements that apply to
non-emerging growth companies but any such an election to opt out is irrevocable. We have elected not to opt out of such extended transition period, which means that when a
standard is issued or revised and it has different application dates for public or private companies, we, as an emerging growth company, can adopt the new or revised standard at the
time private companies adopt the new or revised standard. This may make comparison of our financial statements with another public company which is neither an emerging growth
company nor an emerging growth company which has opted out of using the extended transition period difficult or impossible because of the potential differences in accounting
standards used.
There can be no assurance that we will be able to comply with the continued listing standards of the NYSE. The NYSE may delist our securities from trading on its exchange,
which could limit investors’ ability to make transactions in our securities and subject us to additional trading restrictions.
Our Class A Shares and Public Warrants are listed on the NYSE under the symbols “ACHR” and “ACHR WS,” respectively. We cannot assure you that our securities will continue to
be listed on the NYSE. We are required to demonstrate compliance with the NYSE’s continued listing requirements in order to continue to maintain the listing of our securities on the
NYSE.  If the NYSE delists our securities from trading on its exchange and we are not able to list our securities on another national securities exchange, our securities could be quoted
on an over-the-counter market. If this were to occur, we could face significant adverse consequences, including:
●
a limited availability of market quotations for our securities;


- 25 -


Table of Contents
●
reduced liquidity for our securities;
●
a determination that our Class A Common Stock is a “penny stock” which will require brokers trading in our Class A Common Stock to adhere to more stringent rules and
possibly result in a reduced level of trading activity in the secondary trading market for our securities;
●
a limited amount of news and analyst coverage; and
●
a decreased ability to issue additional securities or obtain additional financing in the future.
The National Securities Markets Improvement Act of 1996, which is a federal statute, prevents or preempts the states from regulating the sale of certain securities, which are referred
to as “covered securities.” Because our Class A Shares and Public Warrants are listed on the NYSE, our Class A Shares and Public Warrants qualify as covered securities. Although
states are preempted from regulating the sale of our securities, the federal statute does allow states to investigate companies if there is a suspicion of fraud. If there is a finding of
fraudulent activity, then states can regulate or bar the sale of covered securities in a particular case. Further, if we were no longer listed on the NYSE, our securities would not be
covered securities and we would be subject to regulation in each state in which we offer our securities.
A significant portion of our total outstanding shares of Common Stock are restricted from immediate resale but may be sold into the market in the near future. This could cause
the market price of our Class A Common Stock to drop significantly.
Shares of our Common Stock that are currently restricted from immediate resale may be sold into the market in the near future. These sales, or the perception in the market that the
holders of a large number of shares intend to sell shares, could reduce the market price of our Class A Common Stock. We are unable to predict the effect that sales may have on the
prevailing market price of Class A Common Stock and Public Warrants.
To the extent our Warrants are exercised, additional shares of Class A Common Stock will be issued, which will result in dilution to the holders of our Class A Shares and increase the
number of shares eligible for resale in the public market. Sales, or the potential sales, of substantial numbers of shares in the public market by the selling securityholders, subject to
certain restrictions on transfer until the termination of applicable lock-up periods, could increase the volatility or adversely affect the market price of our Class A Common Stock.
Our stock price may change significantly and you could lose all or part of your investment as a result.
The trading price of our Common Stock is likely to be volatile. The stock market recently has experienced extreme volatility. This volatility often has been unrelated or
disproportionate to the operating performance of particular companies. You may not be able to resell your shares at an attractive price due to a number of factors such as those listed in
“Risks Related to Our Business and Industry” and the following:
●
results of operations that vary from the expectations of securities analysts and investors;
●
results of operations that vary from those of our competitors;
●
the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic and its effect on our business and financial conditions;
●
changes in expectations as to our future financial performance, including financial estimates and investment recommendations by securities analysts and investors;
●
declines in the market prices of stocks generally;
●
strategic actions by us or our competitors;
●
announcements by us or our competitors of significant contracts, acquisitions, joint ventures, other strategic relationships or capital commitments;


- 26 -


Table of Contents
●
any significant change in our management;
●
changes in general economic or market conditions or trends in our industry or markets, such as recessions, interest rates, local and national elections, international currency
fluctuations, corruption, political instability and acts of war or terrorism;
●
future sales of our Common Stock or other securities;
●
investor perceptions or the investment opportunity associated with our Class A Common Stock relative to other investment alternatives;
●
the public’s response to press releases or other public announcements by us or third parties, including our filings with the SEC;
●
litigation involving us, our industry, or both, or investigations by regulators into our operations or those of our competitors;
●
guidance, if any, that we provide to the public, any changes in this guidance or our failure to meet this guidance;
●
the development and sustainability of an active trading market for our stock;
●
actions by institutional or activist stockholders;
●
changes in accounting standards, policies, guidelines, interpretations or principles; and
●
other events or factors, including those resulting from natural disasters, war, acts of terrorism or responses to these events.
These broad market and industry fluctuations may adversely affect the market price of our Class A Common Stock, regardless of our actual operating performance. In addition, price
volatility may be greater if the public float and trading volume of our Class A Common Stock is low.
In the past, following periods of market volatility, stockholders have instituted securities class action litigation. If we become involved in securities litigation, it could have a
substantial cost and divert resources and the attention of executive management from our business regardless of the outcome of such litigation.
Because there are no current plans to pay cash dividends on our Common Stock for the foreseeable future, you may not receive any return on investment unless you sell your
Common Stock for a price greater than that which you paid for it.
We intend to retain future earnings, if any, for future operations, expansion and debt repayment and there are no current plans to pay any cash dividends for the foreseeable future. The
declaration, amount and payment of any future dividends on shares of Common Stock will be at the sole discretion of our board of directors. Our board of directors may take into
account general and economic conditions, our financial condition and results of operations, our available cash and current and anticipated cash needs, capital requirements,
contractual, legal, tax, and regulatory restrictions, implications on the payment of dividends by us to our stockholders or by our subsidiaries to us and such other factors as our board
of directors may deem relevant. In addition, our ability to pay dividends is limited by covenants of our existing and outstanding indebtedness and may be limited by covenants of any
future indebtedness we incur. As a result, you may not receive any return on an investment in our Common Stock unless you sell our Common Stock for a price greater than that
which you paid for it.
If securities analysts do not publish research or reports about our business or if they downgrade our stock or our sector, our stock price and trading volume could decline.
The trading market for our Common Stock will rely in part on the research and reports that industry or financial analysts publish about us or our business. We will not control these
analysts. In addition, some financial analysts may have limited expertise with our model and operations. Furthermore, if one or more of the analysts who do cover us downgrade our
stock or industry, or the stock of any of our competitors, or publish inaccurate or unfavorable research about our business, the price of our stock could decline. If one or more of these


- 27 -
analysts ceases coverage of us or fails initiate coverage or to publish reports on us regularly, we could lose visibility in the market, which in turn could cause our stock price or trading
volume to decline.


Table of Contents
Anti-takeover provisions in our governing documents could delay or prevent a change of control.
Certain provisions of our Certificate of Incorporation and our amended and restated bylaws (“Bylaws”) may have an anti-takeover effect and may delay, defer or prevent a merger,
acquisition, tender offer, takeover attempt or other change of control transaction that a stockholder might consider in its best interest, including those attempts that might result in a
premium over the market price for the shares held by our stockholders.
These provisions provide for, among other things:
●
the ability of our board of directors to issue one or more series of preferred stock;
●
a classified board;
●
a dual-class share structure;
●
advance notice for nominations of directors by stockholders and for stockholders to include matters to be considered at our annual meetings;
●
certain limitations on convening special stockholder meetings;
●
limiting the ability of stockholders to act by written consent; and
●
the express authority given to our board of directors to make, alter or repeal our Bylaws.
These anti-takeover provisions could make it more difficult for a third party to acquire us, even if the third party’s offer may be considered beneficial by many of our stockholders. As
a result, our stockholders may be limited in their ability to obtain a premium for their shares. These provisions could also discourage proxy contests and make it more difficult for you
and other stockholders to elect directors of your choosing and cause us to take other corporate actions you desire.
Our Certificate of Incorporation designates the Court of Chancery of the State of Delaware as the sole and exclusive forum for certain types of actions and proceedings that may
be initiated by our stockholders, which could limit our stockholders’ ability to obtain a favorable judicial forum for disputes with us or our directors, officers, employees or
stockholders.
Our Certificate of Incorporation provides that, subject to limited exceptions, any
●
derivative action or proceeding brought on behalf of us,
●
action or proceeding asserting a claim of breach of a fiduciary duty owed by any current or former director, officer or other employee of us or any stockholder to us or our
stockholders,
●
action or proceeding asserting a claim against us or any current or former director, officer or other employee of us or any stockholder arising pursuant to any provision of the
DGCL, our Certificate of Incorporation or our Bylaws (as each may be amended from time to time),
●
action or proceeding to interpret, apply, enforce or determine the validity of our Certificate of Incorporation or our Bylaws (including any right, obligation or remedy
thereunder),
●
action or proceeding as to which the DGCL confers jurisdiction to the Court of Chancery of the State of Delaware, and


- 28 -
●
action asserting a claim against us or any director, officer or other employee of us or any stockholder, governed by the internal affairs doctrine shall, to the fullest extent
permitted by law, be exclusively brought in the Court of Chancery of the State of Delaware or, if such court does not have subject matter jurisdiction thereof, another state or
federal court located within the State of Delaware.


Table of Contents
- 29 -
Any person or entity purchasing or otherwise acquiring any interest in shares of our capital stock shall be deemed to have notice of and to have consented to the provisions of our
Certificate of Incorporation described above. This choice of forum provision may limit a stockholder’s ability to bring a claim in a judicial forum that it finds favorable for disputes
with us or our directors, officers or other employees, which may discourage such lawsuits against us and our directors, officers and employees. Alternatively, if a court were to find
these provisions of our Certificate of Incorporation inapplicable to, or unenforceable in respect of, one or more of the specified types of actions or proceedings, we may incur
additional costs associated with resolving such matters in other jurisdictions, which could adversely affect our business and financial condition.


Table of Contents
- 30 -
MARKET AND INDUSTRY DATA
Certain industry data and market data included in this prospectus were obtained from independent third-party surveys, market research, publicly available information, reports of
governmental agencies and industry publications and surveys. All of management’s estimates presented herein are based upon management’s review of independent third-party
surveys and industry publications prepared by a number of sources and other publicly available information. All of the market data used in this prospectus involves a number of
assumptions and limitations, and you are cautioned not to give undue weight to such estimates. We believe that the information from these industry publications and surveys included
in this prospectus is reliable. The industry in which we operate is subject to a high degree of uncertainty and risk due to a variety of factors, including those described in the sections
titled “Risk Factors” and “Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements.” These and other factors could cause results to differ materially from those expressed in the estimates
made by the independent parties and by us.


Table of Contents
- 31 -
USE OF PROCEEDS
All of the Class A Shares and Warrants offered by the selling securityholders pursuant to this prospectus will be sold by the selling securityholders for their respective accounts. We
will not receive any of the proceeds from these sales.
We will receive up to an aggregate of approximately $292.1 million from the exercise of the Warrants, assuming the exercise in full of all of the Warrants for cash. We expect to use
the net proceeds from the exercise of the Warrants for general corporate purposes. We have broad discretion over the use of proceeds from the exercise of the Warrants. There is no
assurance that the holders of the Warrants will elect to exercise any or all of such Warrants. To the extent that the Warrants are exercised on a “cashless basis,” the amount of cash we
would receive from the exercise of the Warrants will decrease.


Table of Contents
- 32 -
DETERMINATION OF OFFERING PRICE
The offering price of the Class A Shares underlying the Warrants offered hereby is determined by reference to the exercise price of the Warrants of $11.50 per share. The Public
Warrants are listed on the NYSE under the symbol “ACHR WS.”
We cannot currently determine the price or prices at which the Class A Shares or the Warrants may be sold by the selling securityholders under this prospectus.


Table of Contents
- 33 -
MARKET INFORMATION FOR SECURITIES AND DIVIDEND POLICY
Market Information
Our Class A Common Stock and Public Warrants are currently listed on the NYSE under the symbols “ACHR” and “ACHR WS,” respectively. Prior to the Closing, our Class A
Common Stock and Public Warrants were listed on the NYSE under the symbols “ACIC” and “ACIC W,” respectively. Upon the Closing on September 16, 2021, there were 142
holders of record of Class A Common Stock and two holders of record of our Warrants. We currently do not intend to list the Private Warrants on any stock exchange or stock market.
Dividend Policy
We have never declared or paid any dividends on shares of our Common Stock. We anticipate that we will retain all of our future earnings, if any, for use in the operation and
expansion of our business and do not anticipate paying cash dividends in the foreseeable future. Any decision to declare and pay dividends in the future will be made at the sole
discretion of our board of directors and will depend on, among other things, our results of operations, cash requirements, financial condition, contractual restrictions and other factors
that our board of directors may deem relevant.


Table of Contents
MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our condensed financial statements and related notes
and other information included elsewhere in this prospectus. In addition to historical data, this discussion contains forward-looking statements about our business, results of
operations, cash flows, financial condition, and prospects based on current expectations that involve risks, uncertainties, and assumptions. Our actual results could differ materially
from such forward-looking statements. Factors that could cause or contribute to those differences include, but are not limited to, those identified in the sections entitled “Risk
Factors” and “Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements” included in this prospectus. Additionally, our historical results are not necessarily indicative of the results that
may be expected for any period in the future.
Overview
We were founded with the mission to advance the benefits of sustainable air mobility. Our goal is to move people throughout the world's cities in a quick, safe, sustainable, and cost-
effective manner. We are designing and developing an eVTOL aircraft for use in UAM that can carry passengers while producing minimal noise and zero emissions during operations.
Our eVTOL aircraft uses advancements in key enabling technologies such as high-energy batteries, high-performance electric motors, an advanced fly-by-wire flight control system,
and a lightweight and efficient aircraft structure. As a fully electric vehicle, the aircraft will have zero emissions during operations. The goal of our eVTOL design is to maximize
safety and convenience while minimizing noise and time spent traveling. We look to accomplish that through the use of a distributed electric propulsion system with inherent
redundancy and far fewer parts than a typical internal combustion propulsion system found in similarly sized aircraft or rotorcraft today. The reduced number of parts not only
translates into fewer critical parts on the aircraft from a safety perspective but will also significantly reduce the maintenance requirements compared to the internal combustion
propulsion systems found in similarly sized aircraft or rotorcraft today.
The development of an eVTOL aircraft that meets our business requirements demands significant design and development efforts on all facets of the aircraft. We believe that by
bringing together a mix of talent with both eVTOL and traditional commercial aerospace backgrounds, we are building a team that will allow us to move through the design,
development and certification of our eVTOL aircraft with the FAA in an efficient manner, thus allowing us to achieve our end goal of producing eVTOL aircraft for sale and operating
a UAM network.
Our Business Model
We intend to operate our own UAM network in select cities (“Archer UAM”) and to sell our eVTOL aircraft to third parties (“Archer Direct”). We believe that these dual revenue
streams have the potential to reinforce each other and catalyze the full ecosystem. We have entered into a purchase agreement with United Airlines for the conditional purchase of up
to $1 billion worth of aircraft, with an option for another $500 million worth of aircraft. We plan to build our UAM business using the eVTOL aircraft fleet that we will manufacture.
We project that the cost to manufacture and operate our aircraft will be such that we will be able to enter the UAM ride-sharing market at a price point that is competitive with
vehicular ride sharing services. Upon receipt of all necessary FAA certifications and any other government approvals necessary for us to manufacture and operate our aircraft, we
expect to initially begin our UAM network operations in certain major U.S. cities, such as Los Angeles and Miami. We will continue to evaluate our go-to-market strategy based on,
among other things, estimated demand, readiness of the required infrastructure and the scale of our UAM aircraft fleet.
To date, we have not generated any revenue, as we continue to design and develop our eVTOL aircraft. The Business Combination generated gross proceeds of $857.6 million as
described below, and we will use the net proceeds to design and develop our eVTOL aircraft and fund operations for the foreseeable future. The amount and timing of future capital
requirements will depend on many factors, including the pace and results of the design and development of our aircraft and manufacturing operations, as well as our progress in
obtaining necessary FAA certifications and other government approvals. Any significant delays in that regard will likely require us to raise additional capital above our existing cash
on hand and delay our generation of revenues.
Impact of COVID-19 on Our Business
In March 2020, the World Health Organization declared the outbreak of COVID-19, a disease caused by the SARS-CoV-2 virus, as a pandemic, which continues to spread throughout
the world. The rapid spread of COVID-19 has caused volatility and disruption in financial markets and prompted governments and businesses to take unprecedented measures such as


- 34 -
travel restrictions, quarantines,


Table of Contents
- 35 -
shelter-in-place orders, and business shutdowns. The COVID-19 pandemic may negatively impact the Company’s ability to design, develop and begin the production of our eVTOL
aircraft. Furthermore, the COVID-19 pandemic could limit the ability of suppliers and business partners to perform, including causing third party component and material suppliers to
increase the prices they may charge us or experience limited or no availability of their components and materials for some period of time.
The impact of the COVID-19 pandemic continues to evolve. As such, the full magnitude of the pandemic’s effect on our financial condition, liquidity, and future results of operations
is uncertain. Management continues to actively monitor our financial condition, liquidity, operations, suppliers, industry, and workforce but currently does not anticipate any material
impairments as a result of COVID-19 and will continue to evaluate on an ongoing basis.
Business Combination
On the Closing Date, Legacy Archer, Atlas and Merger Sub entered in the Business Combination Agreement, following approval at a special meeting of the stockholders of Atlas held
on September 14, 2021. Pursuant to the terms of the Business Combination Agreement, a business combination of Legacy Archer and Atlas was effected by the merger of Merger Sub
with and into Legacy Archer, with Legacy Archer continuing as the surviving company, as a wholly-owned subsidiary of Atlas. In connection with the consummation of the Merger on
the Closing Date, the surviving company changed its name from Archer Aviation Inc. to Archer Aviation Operating Corp. and Atlas changed its name from Atlas Crest Investment
Corp. to Archer Aviation Inc.
While the legal acquirer in the Business Combination Agreement is Atlas, for financial accounting and reporting purposes under GAAP, Legacy Archer is the accounting acquirer and
the Business Combination is accounted for as a “reverse recapitalization.” A reverse recapitalization does not result in a new basis of accounting, and the financial statements of the
combined entity represent the continuation of the financial statements of Legacy Archer in many respects. Under this method of accounting, Atlas is treated as the “acquired” company
for financial reporting purposes. For accounting purposes, Legacy Archer is deemed to be the accounting acquirer in the transaction and, consequently, the transaction is treated as a
recapitalization of Legacy Archer (i.e., a capital transaction involving the issuance of stock by Atlas for the stock of Legacy Archer). Accordingly, the consolidated assets, liabilities
and results of operations of Legacy Archer are now the historical financial statements of Archer, and Atlas’ assets, liabilities and results of operations are consolidated with Legacy
Archer beginning on the acquisition date. Operations prior to the Business Combination will be presented as those of Legacy Archer in future reports. The net assets of Atlas are
recognized at historical cost (which is expected to be consistent with carrying value), with no goodwill or other intangible assets recorded.
The Business Combination generated gross cash proceeds of $857.6 million, including $600.0 million proceeds from the PIPE Financing. Total direct and incremental transaction
costs of Atlas and Legacy Archer were $71.8 million, a portion of which was paid in Atlas Class A Shares, of which $14.5 million was expensed as part of the Business Combination
and recorded in accumulated deficit, and the remaining $57.3 million was an offset to additional paid-in capital as costs related to the reverse recapitalization, which excludes the
$15.1 million in Atlas Class A Shares issued to satisfy fees related to the Business Combination and PIPE Financing.
As a result of the Business Combination, Archer Aviation Inc. became the successor registrant with the SEC and listed on the NYSE. We intend to continue to hire personnel and
implement additional processes and procedures to address public company regulatory requirements and customary practices. We also expect to incur additional expenses customary
for a publicly-traded company, such as directors’ and officers’ liability insurance, director fees, and additional internal and external accounting and legal fees and expenses.
Components of Results of Operations
Revenue
We are a development stage company and have not generated any revenues from our planned Archer Direct and Archer UAM business lines. We do not expect to begin generating
significant revenues until we are able to complete development and manufacturing of our eVTOL aircraft and obtain the FAA certifications and other government approvals necessary
to allow us to sell our eVTOL aircraft to third parties and utilize such aircraft as a part of our UAM network.


Table of Contents
- 36 -
Operating Expenses
Research and Development
Research and development activities represent a significant part of our business. Our research and development efforts focus on the design and development of our eVTOL aircraft,
including certain of the systems that are used in it. As part of those activities, we continue to work closely with the FAA towards our goal of achieving Type Certification of our
eVTOL aircraft on an efficient timeline. Research and development expenses consist of personnel-related costs (including salaries, bonuses, benefits, and stock-based compensation)
for employees focused on research and development activities, costs associated with building prototype aircraft, other related costs, depreciation, and an allocation of general
overhead. We expect research and development expenses to increase significantly as we progress towards the launch of our first eVTOL aircraft.
We cannot determine with certainty the timing, duration or the costs necessary to complete the design, development and certification of our first eVTOL aircraft due to the inherently
unpredictable nature of our research and development activities. Development timelines, the probability of success, and development costs may differ materially from expectations.
General and Administrative
General and administrative expenses consist primarily of personnel-related costs (including salaries, bonuses, benefits, and stock-based compensation) for employees associated with
administrative services such as legal, human resources, information technology, accounting and finance, other related costs, depreciation and an allocation of our general overhead.
These expenses also include certain third-party consulting services, certain facilities costs, and any corporate overhead costs not allocated to other expense categories. We expects our
general and administrative expenses to increase in absolute dollars as a result of operating as a publicly-traded company, including expenses to comply with the rules and regulations
applicable to companies listed on a national securities exchange, expenses related to compliance and reporting obligations pursuant to the rules and regulations of the SEC, as well as
additional expenses customary for a publicly-traded company, such as directors’ and officers’ liability insurance, director fees, and additional internal and external accounting and
legal fees and expenses.
At this time, we are unable to estimate the costs of defending the Wisk Aero LLC (“Wisk”) litigation or any related settlement or award of damages and thus, we have not established
any related legal reserves. Through June 30, 2021, we estimate that we have incurred legal expense associated with the Wisk litigation of approximately $10 million.
Other Warrant Expense
Other warrant expense consists entirely of non-cash expense related to the vesting of warrants issued in conjunction with the execution of the purchase and warrant agreements with
United Airlines. We expect to incur additional expense as these warrants vest upon satisfaction of the second milestone outlined in the applicable agreements.
Other Expense, Net
Other expense, net primarily consists of miscellaneous income and expense items. Interest expense primarily consists of interest on notes payable net of interest income from money
market accounts.
Our net loss was driven primarily by expenses associated with research and development and general and administrative for the three and six months ended June 30, 2021 and a non-
cash expense of $78.2 million related to the vesting of warrants issued in connection with the execution of the purchase and warrant agreements with United Airlines for the six
months ended June 30, 2021.


Table of Contents
Results of Operations
The following table sets forth our statements of operations for the periods indicated:
Six Months Ended
June 30,
Year Ended
December 31,
    
2021
    
2020
    
2020
    
2019
(in thousands)
Operating expenses:
 
Research and development
$
21,514
$
6,974
$
21,097
$
769
General and administrative
28,987
1,686
3,491
122
Other warrant expense
78,208
—
—
—
Total operating expenses
128,709
8,660
24,588
23,697
Loss from operations
(128,709)
(8,660)
(24,588)
(23,697)
Gain on forgiveness of PPP loan
912
—
—
—
Other expense, net
1
(229)
(235)
(182)
Loss before income taxes
(127,796)
(8,889)
(24,823)
(944)
Income tax expense
(2)
—
—
—
Net loss
$
(127,798)
$
(8,889)
$
(24,823)
$
(944)
Comparison of the Three and Six Months Ended June 30, 2021 and 2020
Research and Development
Research and development expenses increased by $7.3 million for the three months ended June 30, 2021, compared to the same period ended June 30, 2020. The increase was
primarily due to an increase of $4.2 million in personnel-related expenses and allocated facilities expenses due to significantly increasing our workforce from the prior period. The
increase was also due to increases of $2.5 million and $0.6 million pertaining to third-party consultant expenses and tools and materials, respectively, to support our increased research
and development activities.
Research and development expenses increased by $14.5 million for the six months ended June 30, 2021, compared to the same period ended June 30, 2020. The increase was
primarily due to an increase of $6.9 million in personnel-related expenses and allocated facilities expenses due to significantly increasing our workforce in the first six months of
2021. The increase was also due to increases of $5.9 million and $1.7 million pertaining to third-party consultant expenses and tools and materials, respectively, to support our
increased research and development activities.
General and Administrative
General and administrative expenses increased by $21.7 million for the three months ended June 30, 2021, compared to the same period ended June 30, 2020. This increase was
primarily due to increased legal and professional service expenses of $15.3 million pertaining to costs associated with the Business Combination and company readiness for going
public, as well as legal costs related to the Wisk litigation, as described in detail in Note 7 of the footnotes to the financial statements. An increase of $3.7 million was due to
advertising and marketing expenses, and the remaining increase of approximately $2.7 million resulted from an increase in personnel-related expenses and allocated facilities costs
due to a significant increase in our workforce.
General and administrative expenses increased by $27.3 million for the six months ended June 30, 2021, compared to the same period ended June 30, 2020. This increase was
primarily due to increased legal and professional service expenses of $18.8 million pertaining to costs associated with the Business Combination and our readiness for going public, as
well as legal costs related to the Wisk litigation. An increase of $4.3 million was due to advertising and marketing expenses, and the remaining increase of approximately $4.2 million
resulted from personnel-related expenses and allocated facilities costs due to a significant increase in our workforce.
Other Warrant Expense


- 37 -
Other warrant expense increased by $78.2 million for the six months ended June 30, 2021, compared to the same period ended June 30, 2020. This increase was due to $78.2 million
of non-cash expense in the first quarter of 2021 related to the vesting of warrants associated with the execution of the purchase and warrant agreements with United Airlines, in
satisfaction of a specific milestone.


Table of Contents
Gain on Forgiveness of PPP Loan
For the three and six months ended June 30, 2021, compared to the same periods ended June 30, 2020, our Paycheck Protection Program loan and interest was forgiven, resulting in an
increase of $0.9 million in gain on extinguishment of the loan and interest.
Other Expense, Net
Other expense, net, decreased by $0.1 million and $0.2 million for the three and six months ended June 30, 2021, respectively, compared to the same periods ended June 30, 2020. The
decrease in both of these periods primarily was due to decreased interest expense related to convertible notes, which were cancelled and converted into preferred stock.
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
Research and Development
Research and development expenses increased by $20.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. This increase was primarily
due to increased personnel-related expenses and third-party consultant expenses of $11.5 million and $6.2 million, respectively, to support our increased research and development
activities. In addition, there was an increase in tools and material consumed in development activities of $2.5 million related to engineering, design, and testing activities.
General and Administrative
General and administrative expenses increased by $3.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. This increase was primarily
due to increased personnel-related expenses and legal and professional services expenses of $1.0 million and $1.4 million, respectively. In addition, there was an increase in other
general and administrative expenses of $1.0 million in related rent and utility expenses, depreciation expense, and other miscellaneous expenses.
Other Expense, Net
Other expense, net, increased by $182,000 for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. This increase was primarily due to increased
interest expense related to convertible notes of $200,000 and to the PPP loan of $6,000, offset primarily by $26,000 in interest income earned from money market accounts.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
We have incurred net losses since our inception and to date have not generated any revenue from the design, development, manufacturing, engineering and sale or distribution of
electric aircraft. To  date, we has funded our operations primarily through the private placement of convertible promissory notes and preferred stock and has raised gross proceeds of
$61.4 million from such activities. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we had an accumulated deficit of $25.8 million, incurred net losses of $24.8 million and recognized
cash outflows from operating activities of $22.9 million. We expect to incur additional losses and higher operating expenses for the foreseeable future.
As of June 30, 2021, our principal sources of liquidity were cash and cash equivalents of $5.9 million.
The Business Combination generated gross cash proceeds of $857.6 million. We expect that the net cash proceeds from the Business Combination along with our cash balances held
prior to the Closing Date will be sufficient to fund our current operating plan for at least the next 12 months from the date the condensed financial statements were available to be
issued.
Our future capital requirements will depend on many factors, including:
●
the level of research and development expenses we incur as we continue to develop our eVTOL aircraft;


- 38 -
●
capital expenditures needed to bring up our aircraft manufacturing capabilities, including for both the build out of our manufacturing facilities and component purchases
necessary to build our aircraft;
●
capital expenditures needed to support the infrastructure required to launch our UAM network;


Table of Contents
●
general and administrative expenses as we scale our operations;
●
interest expense from any remaining debt financing; and
●
sales, marketing and distribution expenses as we build, brand and market our eVTOL aircraft and UAM network.
Until such time as we can generate significant revenue from Archer Direct or Archer UAM, we expect to finance our cash needs primarily through existing cash on hand, public or
private equity or debt financings or other capital sources, including potential collaborations and other similar commercial arrangements. However, we may be unable to raise
additional capital or enter into such other commercial arrangements when needed, on favorable terms or at all. To the extent that we raise additional capital through the sale of equity
or convertible debt securities, the ownership interest of our stockholders will be or could be diluted, and the terms of these securities may include liquidation or other preferences that
adversely affect the rights of our current stockholders. Debt financing and equity financing, if available, may involve agreements that include covenants limiting or restricting our
ability to take specific actions, such as incurring additional debt, making capital expenditures, or declaring dividends. If we raise funds through collaborations or other similar
commercial arrangements with third parties, we may have to relinquish valuable rights to our eVTOL aircraft or UAM network which in turn may reduce the value of our Common
Stock. If we are unable to raise additional funds through equity or debt financings or commercial arrangements when needed, we may be required to delay, limit, reduce or terminate
our research and development efforts.
On July 9, 2021, we entered into a Loan and Security Agreement, as borrower, with Silicon Valley Bank (“SVB”) and SVB Innovation Credit Fund VIII, L.P. (“SVB Innovation”) as
the lenders, and SVB as the collateral agent. The total principal amount of the loans is $20 million (the “Term Loans”), and all obligations due under the Term Loans are
collateralized by all of our right, title and interest in and to our specified personal property in favor of the collateral agent. The interest rate on the loans is a floating rate per annum
equal to the greater of (i) 8.5% and (ii) the Prime Rate plus the Prime Rate Margin, which increases by 2% per annum upon the occurrence of an event of default. The proceeds are to
be used solely for the working capital or to fund our general business purpose. The Term Loans are subject to a final payment fee ranging between zero and 5.5% of the original
aggregate principal amount depending on the timing of repayment.
Cash Flows
The following table summarizes our cash flows for the period indicated:
Six Months Ended
June 30,
Year Ended
December 31,
    
2021
2020
2020
2019
(in thousands)
Net cash used in operating activities
$
(28,770)
$
(7,480)
$
(22,896)
$
(809) 
Net cash used in investing activities
(1,919)
(315)
(1,900)
(4)
Net cash provided by financing activities
62
825
51,211
10,931
Cash Flows Used in Operating Activities
We continue to experience negative cash flows from operations as we design and develop our eVTOL aircraft and builds the infrastructure necessary to support those efforts in the
United States. Our cash flows from operating activities are significantly affected by our cash investments to support the growth of our research and development activities related to
our eVTOL aircraft, as well as the general and administrative functions necessary to support those activities and operations as a publicly traded company. Our operating cash flows are
also impacted by the working capital requirements to support growth and fluctuations in personnel-related expenditures, accounts payable, accrued interest and other current liabilities,
and other current assets.
Net cash used in operating activities during the six months ended June 30, 2021 was $28.8 million, resulting from net loss of $127.8 million, adjusted for non-cash items consisting
mainly of $78.2 million in other warrant expense and $1.9 million in stock-based compensation. The net cash provided by changes in our net operating assets and liabilities of $18.8


- 39 -
million was primarily related to a $19.2 million increase in accounts payable. Cash used in operating activities was primarily used to fund our current expenses related to research and
development activities and administrative changes.
Net cash used in operating activities during the six months ended June 30, 2020 was $7.5 million, resulting from net loss of $8.9 million, adjusted for non-cash items consisting of
primarily $0.2 million in non-cash interest. The net cash provided by changes in our net


Table of Contents
- 40 -
operating assets and liabilities of $1.1 million was primarily related to a $0.6 million increase in other current liabilities related to accrual of payroll costs and a $0.8 million increase
in accounts payable. Cash used in operating activities was primarily used to fund our current expenses related to research and development activities and administrative changes.
Net cash used in operating activities during the year ended December 31, 2020 was $22.9 million, primarily to fund our current expenses related to research and development
activities and administrative changes, adjusted for non-cash items consisting of $253,000 in non-cash interest, $39,000 of non-cash lease expense, $175,000 in stock-based
compensation, and $142,000 in depreciation and amortization. The net cash provided by changes in our net operating assets and liabilities of $1.3 million was primarily related to a
$1.6 million increase in accounts payable, $235,000 increase in other current liabilities, and $268,000 increase in other long-term liabilities, offset by a $791,000 decrease in other
current assets and prepaid expenses and a $38,000 decrease in operating lease liability.
Net cash used in operating activities during the year ended December 31, 2019 was $809,000, primarily to fund our current expenses related to research and development activities
and administrative changes, adjusted for non-cash items consisting of primarily a $43,000 adjustment to bonus accrual. The net cash provided by changes in our net operating assets
and liabilities of $82,000 was primarily related to a $109,000 increase in accounts payable.
Cash Flows Used by Investing Activities
Net cash used in investing activities during the six months ended June 30, 2021 and 2020 was $1.9 million and $0.3 million, respectively, driven by purchases of property and
equipment within those respective periods.
Net cash used in investing activities during the year ended December 31, 2020 was $1.9 million, driven by $1.4 million purchases of property and equipment and purchase of domain
names.
Net cash used in investing activities during the year ended December 31, 2019 was $4,000, driven by the purchases of property and equipment.
Cash Flows Provided by Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities during the six months ended June 30, 2021 was $0.1 million, consisting of the net proceeds from the exercise of stock options.
Net cash provided by financing activities during the six months ended June 30, 2020 was $0.8 million, consisting primarily of proceeds received from the Paycheck Protection
Program loan.
Net cash provided by financing activities during the year ended December 31, 2020 was $51.2 million, consisting primarily of the net proceeds from the issuance of preferred stock of
$50.3 million, $905,000 in proceeds from issuance of debt, and $11,000 in proceeds from the exercise of stock options.
Net cash provided by financing activities during the year ended December 31, 2019 was $10.9 million, consisting primarily of the net proceeds from the issuance of convertible
promissory notes in the amount of $5.6 million and the net proceeds from issuance of preferred stock of $5.3 million.


Table of Contents
Contractual Obligations and Commitments
The following table summarizes our contractual obligations and commitments as of December 31, 2020 and June 30, 2021 , and the years in which these obligations are due:
As of June 30, 2021
    
Payments Due by Period
 
    
    
Less than
    
1 to 3
Total
1 year
years
(in thousands)
Operating lease obligation (1)
$
3,008
$
1,554
$
1,454
Total
3,008
1,554
1,454
(1) For further information, refer to Note 7 - Commitments and Contingencies to the condensed financial statements included elsewhere in this prospectus.
As of December 31, 2020
    
Payments Due by Period
 
    
    
Less than
    
1 to 3
Total
1 year
years
(in thousands)
Operating lease obligation (1)
$
2,624
$
1,043
$
1,581
Note payable
905
645
260
Note payable accrued interest
11
11
$
-
Total
$
3,540
$
1,699
$
1,841
(1) Operating lease obligation is primarily related to the corporate headquarters lease expiring on June 30, 2023.
(2) Note payable is related to the PPP Loan due on April 9, 2022 at a rate of 0.98% per annum.
The commitment amounts in the table above are associated with contracts that are enforceable and legally binding and that specify all significant terms, including fixed or minimum
services to be used, fixed, minimum or variable price provisions, and the approximate timing of the actions under the contracts. The table does not include obligations under
agreements that we can cancel without a significant penalty.
Paycheck Protection Program
In April 2020, we obtained a loan of approximately $0.9 million pursuant to the Paycheck Protection Program under Division A, Title I of the CARES Act (the “PPP Loan”), with
interest accruing on the PPP Loan at a rate of 0.98% per annum. The Paycheck Protection Program was established as part of the CARES Act and provides for loans to qualifying
businesses for amounts up to 2.5 times the average monthly payroll expenses of the business, subject to certain limitations. The loan and accrued interest are forgivable after 24 weeks
so long as the borrower uses the loan proceeds for eligible purposes, including payroll, benefits, rent, and utilities. We applied for loan forgiveness under the CARES Act and received
forgiveness of the loan and accrued interest in full from the Small Business Administration in June 2021.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
As of December 31, 2020 and June 30, 2021, we did not have any off-balance sheet arrangements.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates


- 41 -
Our condensed financial statements and accompanying notes have been prepared in accordance with U.S. GAAP. The preparation of these condensed financial statements requires us
to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, and expenses, and related disclosures. We base our estimates on historical experience and on
various other assumptions that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances. We evaluate our estimates and assumptions on an ongoing basis. Actual results may differ from


Table of Contents
these estimates. To the extent that there are material differences between these estimates and our actual results, our future financial statements will be affected.
For additional information about our critical accounting policies and estimates, see the disclosure included elsewhere in this prospectus as well as Note 3 - Summary of Significant
Accounting Policies in the notes to the condensed financial statements included elsewhere in this prospectus.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 3 – Summary of Significant Accounting Policies to the condensed financial statements included elsewhere in this prospectus for a discussion about accounting
pronouncements recently adopted and recently issued not yet adopted.
Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosures about Market Risk
We are exposed to market risks in the ordinary course of our business. Market risk represents the risk of loss that may impact our financial position due to adverse changes in financial
market prices and rates. Our market risk exposure is primarily the result of fluctuations in interest rates.
As of December 31, 2020 and June 30, 2021, we did not have any debt or notes outstanding in which fluctuations in the interest rates would affect us.
Credit Risk
Financial instruments, which subjects us to concentrations of credit risk, consist primarily of cash, cash equivalents, and deposits. Our cash and cash equivalents are held at major
financial institutions located in the United States of America. At times, cash account balances with any one financial institution may exceed Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation
insurance limits ($250,000 per depositor per institution). Management believes the financial institutions that hold our cash and cash equivalents are financially sound and, accordingly,
minimal credit risk exists with respect to cash and cash equivalents.
Provision for Income Taxes
We use the asset-and-liability method for income taxes. Under this method, deferred tax assets and liabilities are determined based on differences between the consolidated financial
statement carrying amounts and tax bases of assets and liabilities and operating loss and tax credit carryforwards and are measured using the enacted tax rates that are expected to be
in effect when the differences reverse. The effect on deferred tax assets and liabilities of a change in tax rates is recognized in income in the period that includes the enactment date.
Valuation allowances are established when necessary to reduce deferred tax assets to an amount that, in the opinion of management, is more likely than not to be realized.
Emerging Growth Company Status
Section 107(b) of the JOBS Act provides that an emerging growth company can take advantage of an extended transition period for complying with new or revised accounting
standards. Thus, an emerging growth company can delay the adoption of certain accounting standards until those standards would otherwise apply to private companies. Atlas initially
elected, and now we have elected to take advantage of the extended transition period to comply with new or revised accounting standards and to adopt certain of the reduced
disclosure requirements available to emerging growth companies. As a result of the accounting standards election, we are not subject to the same implementation timeline for new or
revised accounting standards as other public companies that are not emerging growth companies which may make comparison of our financials to those of other public companies
more difficult.
We have also elected to take advantage of some of the reduced regulatory and reporting requirements of emerging growth companies pursuant to the JOBS Act so long as we qualify
as an emerging growth company, including, but not limited to, not being required to comply with the auditor attestation requirements of Section 404(b) of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act and
exemptions from the requirements of holding non-binding advisory votes on executive compensation and golden parachute payments.


- 42 -


Table of Contents
BUSINESS
Overview
Our goal is to be one of the world’s leading urban air mobility companies. Our mission is to advance the benefits of sustainable air mobility. Specifically, we were founded to improve
mobility and help drive the aircraft industry towards a zero-emissions future. We are designing and developing an eVTOL aircraft for use in UAM that can carry passengers roughly
60 miles at speeds of up to 150 miles per hour while producing minimal noise and zero emissions. With eVTOL, we would, upon receipt of the necessary air carrier operating
authority, be the first urban air mobility company that moves people throughout the world’s cities in a quick, safe, sustainable, and cost-effective manner.
The growing congestion of vehicular traffic is an inefficiency that consumes time and increases carbon emissions, however, the advancement of eVTOL aircraft will provide an
additional mode of short-distance travel to alleviate congestion and reduce pollution. It is estimated that in the U.S. alone, drivers spend nearly seven billion extra hours and
unnecessarily consume three billion gallons of fuel a year in traffic. Transitioning to electric propulsion enables a change in technology that provides a low-cost and highly reliable
aircraft. Developing a low-cost eVTOL aircraft will make air mobility affordable and accessible, enabling a material reduction in the number of vehicles on the road.
We plan to have lines of business that mutually support one another. Archer Direct will manufacture and sell aircraft and Archer UAM will transform air mobility by creating a cost-
competitive aerial ride-sharing service which we can implement upon receipt of an operating certificate and relevant economic authority. We are observing early signs of demand for
electric aircraft across a wide range of industries, such as cargo logistics, military and commercial operations as organizations and people are now becoming committed to
environmentally-friendly products and services, including sustainable air mobility. Our agreement with United Airlines, further discussed below, is an example of companies
committing to accelerate de-carbonization. As the aviation industry transitions to electric aircraft, we will be a distinguished leader given our first-mover advantage.
●
Archer Direct. We design, develop, manufacture and will sell electric aircraft to third parties as an original equipment manufacturer (“OEM”). Our production aircraft is a
high-end luxury product that is designed to ensure efficient, low-cost manufacturing and facilitate the regulatory approval process. Our aircraft will use existing technology
with a focus on simplicity of operation in order to exceed the highest safety standards and ensure commercialization is achieved on the earliest possible timeline. Sales of our
aircraft will be anchored by the commercial agreement we have entered into with United Airlines for the conditional purchase of $1 billion worth of aircraft, with an option
for another $500 million worth of aircraft, while Archer Direct will also capitalize on the significant demand anticipated for electric aircraft as adoption accelerates.
●
Archer UAM. We will build our aerial ride-sharing business using the aircraft that we will manufacture. Through technological developments and a manufacturing process
designed for efficient commercialization, we will be able to build a low-cost, highly reliable, and safe aircraft. The low-cost structure will allow us to enter the ride-sharing
market at a price point that is competitive with vehicular ride sharing services while having the advantage of saving customers significant travel time. Upon receipt of
authority, we expect to initially begin operations in major U.S. cities such as Los Angeles, Miami, Dallas-Fort Worth, and Orlando. As our brand name becomes widely
known, the customer-base grows and our eVTOL aircraft manufacturing accelerates, we plan to expand into additional regions, which will be evaluated and prioritized based
on estimated demand at the time of potential market entrance.
●
Autonomous Aircraft in the Future. While it is not possible to certify and operate a commercial passenger carrying autonomous aircraft in the U.S. today, we believe this
will be possible in the future. We define an autonomous aircraft as a self-piloted aircraft that has no onboard pilot or operator, with traditional pilot responsibilities instead
being performed by a combination of onboard systems, ground-based systems, and/or ground-based operators. As autonomy gains acceptance, we believe that we are
positioned to capitalize on an evolving aerospace industry.
We have an internal autonomy roadmap and see our first step to autonomy, once regulations allow, as replacing the onboard pilot with a ground-based operator who will monitor
flights and be capable of issuing high level commands. The removal of an onboard pilot will free up payload and space for an additional passenger while reducing operating costs.
Autonomy also provides increased safety and reliability by significantly reducing human error and increasing the predictability of flights. As operational experience is gained, we
expect a single operator to be responsible for managing multiple vehicles at any given time. Eventually, technological improvements should reach the point where an operator can be
completely removed from the loop. We have hired team members with extensive experience developing autonomous systems, which we believe gives us a strong competitive
advantage in this area.


- 43 -


Table of Contents
Opportunity
The increasing public consensus that the adoption of sustainability initiatives is critical to preserve the environment and reduce emissions has accelerated the implementation of
government regulations, created additional federal and state incentives, started to meaningfully influence consumer behavior, and has led to an increasing focus by corporations on
their emissions standards and targets. This in turn has created greater interest in vehicle electrification. However, to date, the electrification of aircraft has lagged the adoption of
electric automobiles in large part because of the greater technical challenges. These challenges include the need for batteries with higher specific energy and power.
In a 2021 industry report, Morgan Stanley estimates that the global urban air mobility market is expected to be approximately $1 trillion to $4.4 trillion by 2040. Half of the world’s
population lives in cities today, and the United Nations predicts that by 2050, 70% of the population will live in cities. This migration has led to unprecedented traffic congestion, with
a noticeable inability to scale ground infrastructure. We offer a potential solution by expanding travel into the air, where one can travel up to 150 miles per hour, point-to-point, with
no congestion, no stoplights, and no traffic. Furthermore, the electrification of aircraft will also help push the world towards a zero-emissions future. The largest segment of the urban
air addressable market is shared mobility and passenger transportation, while cargo logistics and military and defense are also expected to provide a substantial market opportunity.
We are a contractor to the U.S. government and are currently working on two Small Business Technology Transfers for the U.S. Air Force focused on autonomy and acoustics.
We believe that the key to the success of our eVTOL aircraft is through achieving high utilization to amortized fixed costs over more seat-miles. The high utilization is achieved by
traveling at speeds up to 150 mile per hour and through fast charging of the batteries. Compared to ride share cars, these vehicles will generate substantially more revenue, with initial
internal estimates that each vehicle can generate over $2 million in annual revenue. Furthermore, we expect to generate over $1 million of operating profit per aircraft after accounting
for all direct and indirect costs, including pilot wages, maintenance, battery pack amortization, energy, landing fees, and depreciation of the aircraft itself. Based on our current
estimates, we expect that once the operating authority is received, the aerial ride sharing business, Archer UAM, will be more than three times more profitable over the life of an
aircraft when compared to the profit received from the sale of one aircraft to a third party.
Manufacturing
Our production aircraft is designed to be efficient, safe, and low noise in all phases of flight. In addition, the aircraft is designed for an efficient path through the certification process
and scalable commercialization. We plan to manufacture the aircraft in two distinct phases, where the initial phase leverages standard aerospace manufacturing processes, building
airplanes using the same processes as commercial aircraft manufacturers. We are currently working with Stellantis to identify opportunities to leverage their existing supply chain to
reduce costs on certain components and raw materials. Our long-term manufacturing strategy is focused on ultimately producing aircraft with high production rate processes similar to
those used in the automotive industry. This second phase of manufacturing is designed to enable us to scale output while significantly reducing costs.
Market Opportunity
We believe UAM is a large potential global market. The global UAM industry, which includes shared mobility, airlines, cargo, military, and defense applications, and key related
technology and infrastructure, represents more than $1 trillion of total addressable market opportunity by 2040. We view the underlying secular drivers of this massive total
addressable market as the following:
●
Unprecedented traffic congestion as the world’s population migrates to cities;
●
Performance improvement and cost reductions in electric power systems; and
●
Need for a zero-emission transportation solution to sustain growth while minimizing environmental impact.
Our go-to-market strategy of both selling aircraft to existing operators, as well as establishing our own operations and direct-to-consumer business, presents a unique opportunity to
capture market share. The dual revenue streams have the potential to reinforce each other and catalyze the full ecosystem.
One of our goals is to be the next great U.S.-based aerospace manufacturer. Archer Direct brings us closer to this goal while competing in the airline, cargo, and military and defense
sectors of the total addressable market. We expect that our agreement with United Airlines


- 44 -


Table of Contents
will allow us to collaborate with an industry leader and leverage their expertise as an aircraft fleet operator, which will help us design systems and processes for maintenance, develop
pilot training programs, and establish operations at airports. Beyond airlines, Archer Direct can provide OEM sales to the cargo and logistics industry with the potential to partner with
global logistics firms and large retail customers. Military and emergency services provide an additional opportunity for revenue sales as eVTOL aircraft can be used for logistics
missions that favor lower-cost operations or address the need for emergency transport in densely populated city centers.
We anticipate launching our direct-to-consumer operations shortly after our production aircraft is certified. By controlling the aircraft and operations network, we can provide a
seamless and exceptional travel experience for our customers. According to a 2021 Morgan Stanley report, shared mobility represents a significant portion of the total addressable
market. Based on our business modeling, we believe that the key determinants to a profitable urban air mobility product are developing an aircraft that saves people time at a low cost,
while providing exceptional customer service and ease of use. We are focusing our early launch markets on highly-congested cities such as Los Angeles, Miami, Dallas-Fort Worth,
and Orlando.
A low cost per trip and time saved can only be delivered by flying fast (over 100 mph) over congested cities on medium-to-long urban routes (10 to 60 miles). To achieve low
operating costs, it is important to maximize aircraft utilization as well as minimize energy and maintenance costs. The first phase of the go-to-market strategy depends on existing and
retrofitted infrastructure. To drive profitability, we ultimately plan to operate our own fleet of eVTOL aircraft. As we scale, we anticipate collaborating with aligned infrastructure
development partners to build high-throughput vertiports that can accommodate hundreds of take-offs and landings per hour. Furthermore, as adoption becomes widespread and
industry regulation is established, we expect that autonomous operations will become accepted, which would further lower costs, improve efficiency, and potentially materially
increase profitability.
Our aircraft will provide a cost-efficient solution to travel for the masses, and it is faster and more convenient than ground-based forms of transportation. To build a viable long-term
business, we believe that Archer UAM not only needs to save people time but must do so in a sustainable way. Like other electric vehicles, eVTOL aircraft will provide the sustainable
benefits of zero local emissions.
Competitive Strengths
Our aircraft is optimized for the business case.
We approach design from a holistic perspective, optimizing the aircraft design in parallel with the future network and operations. Our system simulation capability enables us to
compare performance of aircraft designs with different performance requirements on potential networks in cities across the U.S., allowing us to design the aircraft that will yield the
best operating economics and value to future customers.
Designed for manufacturing with vertical integration for key enabling technologies.
Our aircraft has been designed with manufacturing in mind from day one. Our philosophy is to keep designs as simple as possible while still meeting performance goals. We are
leveraging the existing aerospace supply chain for commodity items but are vertically integrating the key enabling technologies required for eVTOL aircraft, including the
development of a proprietary electric powertrain and flight control software.
Designed for certification from day one.
Our aircraft have been designed with certification in mind from the beginning. We are certifying in the U.S. with the FAA and have worked closely with regulators throughout the
early stages of our product design. We began the FAA type certification process in 2020 and were approved by the FAA Innovation Center intake board. Through a G-1 issue paper,
we have agreed with the FAA on the certification basis for our eVTOL aircraft. We continue to work with the FAA on the means of compliance for that certification basis, as well as
the necessary testing and methods required to demonstrate the safety and compliance of our aircraft. We believe this coordination with regulators provides a competitive strength as
we will be able to reduce the risk of redesign efforts, therefore minimizing certification timeline. We have additional confidence in our certification efforts due to the complementary
experience of our core engineering team and our seasoned certification and systems engineering teams. We are working to achieve FAA Type Certification as stated in 14 CFR Part
21.21 for the aircraft under 14 CFR Part 23 requirements in 2024.


- 45 -


Table of Contents
Strategic and commercial agreements with United and Stellantis.
We entered into strategic and commercial agreements with both United Airlines and Stellantis. We believe our relationships with United Airlines and Stellantis provide us unique
benefits that we believe will help us realize our goals for long-term success. We expect United Airlines will assist us in accelerating the path through FAA certification, pilot and
maintenance crew training, and overall go-to-market strategy for city launches and airport connections. The Stellantis partnership provides the opportunity to leverage existing
commercial supply chains to accelerate our time-to-market. We gain the benefits from an OEM global footprint and economies of scale. This will allow us to increase the volume of
aircraft produced and drive down costs. Both relationships solidify the OEM component of our business model which will accelerate and finance our growth into urban air mobility.
Deep and experienced engineering team.
We have built an elite engineering team with over 200 years of eVTOL experience. In addition, we have added individuals with extensive commercial aerospace experience,
demonstrating our commitment to certification and safety throughout the aircraft development process. We believe that our combination of technological innovation, intellectual
property, and talent differentiates us from our competitors and increases the barriers to entry.
Technology
Our technology enables a holistic eVTOL aircraft design with high performance, low operating costs, zero local emissions, small acoustic footprint, and a high level of safety. Our
aircraft configuration has the right mix of tilting and fixed rotors to provide a high level of propulsion redundancy and efficiency throughout the flight envelope. The hover efficiency
is enabled by having sufficient rotor disk area. Cruise efficiency is achieved by tilting half the rotors for use in cruise flight while stopping the other rotors and aligning them in a low
drag position. This configuration is enabled by our battery, electric powertrain, low noise rotor, and fly-by-wire flight control technologies.
The performance and operating cost of an eVTOL aircraft is largely dictated by the battery pack performance. It is important to maximize the specific energy of the battery pack while
meeting power demands at low state of charge and end of life, satisfying safety and regulatory requirements, having a fast charge capability, and ensuring a long cycle life. We have
identified production lithium ion cells today that meet our requirements and plan to partner with a leading cell supplier for production. We are designing battery packs in-house that
integrate the aforementioned cells to meet aerospace certification requirements with a low mass overhead design. The battery pack design includes structure to support the cells, a
thermal management system, and a thermal runaway propagation prevention system.
Our powertrain architecture includes six independent battery packs to provide energy to electric propulsion units over a redundant power distribution system. The electric propulsion
units include high specific torque permanent magnet synchronous electric motors driven by high specific power motor inverters. In designing our electric propulsion units, we
concentrate on the integrated system that takes high voltage electric power as an input and converts it to mechanical power at the output shaft of the motor. The electric propulsion
units are designed to be high reliability and require minimal maintenance in order to increase safety and minimize operating costs.
The electric propulsion units drive high efficiency proprotors that are designed to have a low acoustic signature. The acoustic signature is driven by the dominant sources of rotor
noise; loading noise, thickness noise, and broadband noise. All of these sources are very strong functions of the rotor tip speeds. Our eVTOL design with many smaller rotors enables
sufficient thrust to be achieved at tip speeds in hover that are about two thirds that of a typical helicopter rotor. We have conducted extensive research and development into blade
shapes that minimize all of the noise sources. An additional advantage of eVTOL vehicles is that the frequencies of the dominant tones are higher, resulting in increased atmospheric
attenuation and a smaller acoustic footprint. Our design goals are for the rotor noise to be dominated by broadband contributions which minimize annoyance compared to tonal noise
resulting from unsteady loading. We expect our aircraft to be an order of magnitude (10 EPNdB) quieter than existing rotorcraft in the takeoff and approach certification test
conditions. During the flyover certification test condition in the cruise configuration our aircraft should be at least two orders of magnitude (20 EPNdB) quieter than existing
rotorcraft, rendering it inaudible in major cities.
Our fly-by-wire flight control system is a final core technology that enables an easy-to-fly, safe, and efficient eVTOL design. The flight control system intelligently combines pilot
control inputs with signals from redundant feedback sensors to command the large number of redundant actuators on the vehicle. The avionics architecture includes redundancy on all
flight critical sensors, computation, and internal communication buses. The control system is tuned to provide an easy to fly vehicle throughout the flight envelope. Other
differentiated aspects of our flight control system include:


- 46 -


Table of Contents
●
autopilot modes;
●
inner loop stabilization throughout the flight envelope;
●
actuator allocation that translates pilot commands to the plurality of actuators;
●
automatic compensation for failures of propulsion components or control surface actuators;
●
features that reduce perceived noise; and
●
electric motors with torque on demand to enable high bandwidth control.
Manufacturing
From the beginning, our aircraft have been designed for rapid certification and ease of mass manufacturing. We intend to vertically integrate key technologies such as the proprotors,
electric powertrain, and its fly-by-wire flight control system.
We anticipate opening a manufacturing facility in late 2022. We plan to leverage our experienced engineering team and proven aerospace manufacturing techniques to initially
produce hundreds of aircraft per year, while continuing to plan for higher volume manufacturing in the future.
As the business scales and exceeds existing aerospace production rate capabilities, we will need to invest in higher rate and more automated production technologies to reduce costs.
In 2020, we established a partnership with Stellantis, the fourth-largest automotive OEM in the world by volume, to explore high-rate composite manufacturing technologies for
aerospace and to gain access to their low-cost supply chain. As partners, we plan to leverage Stellantis’ automotive industry expertise and apply that to aircraft manufacturing.
Additionally, we will further improve the processes specific to the assembly of aircraft and utilize advanced composite materials to enable higher production rates.
Growth Strategy
We pursue the following key growth strategies:
●
Develop a reliable, certifiable aircraft. We work closely with regulators during the early design stage of our production vehicle to define the certification requirements and
agree to means of compliance for those requirements. This coordination is imperative to the design process as we seek to minimize the certification timeline by avoiding
costly re-design efforts to meet previously unaccounted for regulatory requirements. While focusing on certification, we are designing the aircraft to meet aviation safety
standards, which includes incorporating redundancy into all critical systems to ensure no single points of failure. In parallel with the design efforts for our production vehicle,
we are in the final assembly stage of a full scale demonstrator vehicle, Maker. As a full scale demonstrator, Maker will help us advance our key enabling technologies: high
specific energy batteries, electric propulsion system, fly-by-wire flight control system, and low acoustic signature rotors. This vehicle will allow us to gather flight test data
to validate the design and de-risk the vehicle configuration prior to producing the production aircraft.
●
Round out our world-class team. The development of a certified eVTOL aircraft that meets our business’ requirements demands a significant system development effort on
all facets of the vehicle. By establishing our business in Silicon Valley, we have been able to recruit top-tier engineers with previous experience designing and testing eVTOL
vehicles. Our engineering team has extensive experience designing, building, and testing six full scale eVTOL aircraft at other manufacturers over the past decade. We have
augmented this talent base with experienced engineers from traditional aerospace companies who have taken designs from conception through certification and talent from
the electric vehicle industry to aid its electric powertrain development. We believe that by continuing to build out a diverse world-class team, we will continue on our current
trajectory of bringing the right vehicle to market with a clear path to certification and high-volume production.
●
Construct manufacturing facilities. A key milestone for 2021 is the site selection for our manufacturing and production flight test facility. We plan for the first version of
our product to be produced at this location using existing aerospace manufacturing


- 47 -


Table of Contents
processes to reduce development and certification risks. We plan to transition to high-volume composite manufacturing over time, which will enable us to scale to production
rates that exceed 1,000 aircraft per year.
●
Build out our flight operations infrastructure. Our current plans are to first launch in the United States but also investigate regulatory requirements for certifying and
operating outside of the United States. In addition to selling aircraft to existing operators, we plan to go to market by establishing our own direct to consumer flight
operations business. By owning and controlling the aircraft and operations network, we believe we can provide a seamless and exceptional travel experience for our
customers. Through our recent agreement with United Airlines, we expect to leverage their expertise as an aircraft fleet operator, which will help us design systems and
processes for maintenance, develop pilot training programs, and establish operations at airports. We anticipate launching our direct-to-consumer operations shortly after the
Archer aircraft is certified.
●
Autonomous flight capabilities. We are investing heavily in autonomous flight technologies to improve safety, increase aircraft utilization, and reduce costs. To move up the
learning curve, all Maker test flights are being conducted autonomously, increasing safety and improving its system performance. We see our first step to autonomy as
replacing the onboard pilot with a ground-based operator who will monitor flights and be capable of issuing high level commands, freeing up another passenger seat. As
operational experience is gained, a single operator should be able to manage multiple vehicles, with technology eventually improving to the point where you can completely
remove an operator from the loop.
●
Optimize system simulation to save time and money. We continue to improve our demand modeling and operations simulation tool, Prime Radiant, to refine operational
requirements for our mass production vehicle. This system includes detailed modeling of the future Archer UAM network to enable us to optimize aircraft specifications
(range and payload), operations across various cities, and landing and takeoff infrastructure (location, size, and throughput). This proprietary tool combines origin-destination
trip data with mode choice models to gain an understanding of existing trips in cities that are likely to convert to UAM while understanding the sensitivity to various
operating assumptions and vehicle performance parameters. In addition, we use Prime Radiant to understand which cities will benefit most from Archer UAM and are likely
to be early adopters. The data generated is vital for engaging with cities around the world to demonstrate the opportunities UAM provides and even aids in locating vertiport
infrastructure. The operational models inside Prime Radiant which assign simulated demand requests to flights will also form the backbone of our future operational
algorithms. We plan to expand our capabilities to model induced demand and further understand how Archer UAM can help shape the fabric of cities moving forward.
Intellectual Property
Our ability to protect our material intellectual property is important to our business. We rely upon a combination of protections afforded to owners of patents, copyrights, trade secrets,
and trademarks, along with employee and third-party non-disclosure agreements and other contractual restrictions to establish and protect our intellectual property rights. In particular,
unpatented trade secrets in the fields of research, development and engineering are an important aspect of our business by ensuring that our technology remains confidential. We also
pursue patent protection when we believe we have developed a patentable invention and the benefits of obtaining a patent outweigh the risks of making the invention public through
patent filings.
As of September 30, 2021, we have 13 pending U.S. patent applications. Our patent applications are directed to, among other things, configurations for eVTOL aircraft, electric
aircraft power distribution, control allocation for eVTOL aircraft, and battery network management for electric vehicle fleets. Our U.S. patents, including those covering our eVTOL
aircraft configurations, power distribution systems and methods, control allocation systems and methods, and battery network management, pending grant of each application, will
expire in approximately 2040 and 2041, based on the 20-year term of U.S. patents (absent any available patent term adjustments or extensions). As of September 30, 2021, we had
trademark registrations pending in 31 countries.
We regularly review our development efforts to assess the existence and patentability of new inventions, and we are prepared to file additional patent applications when it determines
it would benefit our business to do so.
Research and Development
We are conducting extensive research and development to reduce technical risks associated with developing our production aircraft. Today, a significant portion of our team is focused
on the development and testing of our demonstrator aircraft, called Maker. This aircraft provides a technology development testbed to evaluate candidate system architectures and


- 48 -
components for the certified production aircraft. Additionally, we are performing research and development on battery systems and other electric powertrain components in order to
maximize the performance of our aircraft.


Table of Contents
Our eVTOL Aircraft
We have designed an eVTOL aircraft that brings together advances in electric propulsion and fly-by-wire flight controls. The aircraft is designed to be quiet, require low maintenance,
meet high safety standards, and have low operating costs. Since the start of the design process, we have been working closely with the FAA to understand certification requirements
and incorporate this into its design process. Our end result is a novel aircraft configuration with differentiated technology that leverages the benefits of distributed electric propulsion
in a vehicle, is optimized for low drag, and achieves high efficiency in all phases of flight. Our fully electric aircraft feature high-performance batteries, electric motors and fly-by-
wire flight controls. It is designed for a cruise range of approximately 60 miles and cruise speeds of up to 150 miles per hour.
Key Agreements
United Airlines Collaboration Agreement
On January 29, 2021, we entered the Purchase Agreement with United Airlines relating to the purchase of an Archer eVTOL model (the “Aircraft”) and the Collaboration Agreement
with United Airlines related to the development of the Aircraft and certain material terms regarding the Aircraft and the related purchase obligations. Subject to certain conditions and
material terms (including those described below), the Purchase Agreement provides for the purchase by United Airlines of a given quantity of Aircraft at a fixed base purchase price
per unit for an aggregate base purchase price of $1 billion and grants United Airlines an option, at its election, to order an additional quantity of Aircraft at the same unit price for an
additional aggregate base purchase price of up to $500 million. The Collaboration Agreement provides that Archer and United Airlines will hold certain senior management team
meetings periodically where they will continue to discuss and negotiate the Material Terms (as described below), contemporaneously with the development of the Aircraft. We expect
that United Airlines will allocate resources in the form of personnel time from its experienced team of pilots, maintenance staff, and regulatory experts. We believe our access to these
valuable resources will accelerate the certification of our Aircraft and result in an aircraft with lower maintenance and operational costs.
In connection with the Purchase Agreement and Collaboration Agreement, on January 29, 2021, Legacy Archer granted United Airlines a warrant to purchase up to 14,645,614 shares
of Legacy Archer Common Stock subject to the adjustments and other terms and conditions set forth in such warrant (the “United Warrant”) with a $0.01 per share exercise price,
subject to adjustment by application of the Exchange Ratio at the Effective Time.
On February 26, 2021, Legacy Archer, United Airlines and Mesa Airlines, Inc. (“Mesa”) entered into an Assignment and Assumption Agreement (the “Assignment and Assumption
Agreement”). The Assignment and Assumption Agreement provides for the assignment by United Airlines and assumption by Mesa of twenty-percent of those certain purchase order
rights and obligations related to the scheduled aircraft deliveries under the Purchase Agreement, as well as the conditional assignment by United Airlines and assumption by Mesa of
twenty-percent of the United Warrant issued to United Airlines. Pursuant to the Assignment and Assumption Agreement, Mesa also assumed the right and obligation to purchase
500,000 shares of Class A Common Stock in the PIPE Financing, which shares were to be originally purchased by United Airlines pursuant to United Airlines’ Subscription
Agreement. United Airlines also agreed to assign certain portions of the United Warrant to Mesa upon the achievement of certain conditions (consistent with the milestones described
in the United Warrant) (the “Mesa Warrants”), and we will issue such Mesa Warrants as such conditions are met and we will simultaneously reduce the United Warrant in an equal
portion for each of the Mesa Warrants.
Prior to Closing, (i) United Airlines transferred and assigned all of its rights and interests in and to purchase 13,562,423 Class A Shares to United Airlines Ventures, Ltd. (“UAV”) and
(ii) UAV exercised warrants to acquire 4,686,597 Legacy Archer Common Stock. In connection with the Closing, 4,717,365 Class B Shares were issued to UAV and pursuant to a
Transaction Support Agreement, all of the Class B Shares held by UAV were converted into Class A Shares on a one-for-one basis. UAV acquired 2,000,000 Class A Shares and Mesa
acquired 500,000 Class A Shares under the PIPE Financing in connection with the Business Combination.
United Airlines’ obligation to purchase Aircraft under the Purchase Agreement is subject to the parties first agreeing after the date hereof on certain additional material terms and
conditions (collectively, the “Material Terms”), including, but not limited to, Aircraft specifications, warranties, United Airlines’ usage and transfer of the Aircraft, performance
guarantees, delivery periods, most favored nation provisions, the type and extent of United Airlines’ assistance in obtaining certification of the Aircraft, territorial restrictions, rights to
jointly developed intellectual property and other matters. United Airlines’ obligation to purchase Aircraft under the Purchase Agreement will arise only after all of the Material Terms
are agreed in the discretion of each party, after which United Airlines’ obligations will be further subject to us satisfying certain conditions comprising the Material Terms, including
without limitation obtaining the necessary regulatory approvals, meeting Aircraft specifications and delivery periods. Neither we nor United Airlines have


- 49 -


Table of Contents
any duty or obligation to agree on any of the Material Terms. Further, and in addition to other termination rights set forth in the Purchase Agreement and the Collaboration Agreement,
if we do not agree on Material Terms, either we or United Airlines have the right to terminate the agreements if such party determines in its discretion that it is not likely that the
Material Terms will be agreed in a manner that is consistent with such party’s business and operational interests (as those interests may change from time to time).
Stellantis Agreements
In November 2020, Legacy Archer entered into agreements (the “FCA Agreements”) with FCA US LLC (now known as “Stellantis”) to cooperate on projects that leverage existing
Stellantis capabilities to accelerate our long-term roadmap and improve our aircraft. The FCA Agreements cover support from Stellantis in three areas: (i) design for NVH (noise
vibration and harshness), (ii) access to the existing Stellantis supply chain and (iii) design and production support for high volume composite manufacturing. Stellantis possesses deep
expertise and capabilities in each of these areas, which will allow us to more quickly develop a product with a better passenger experience, at lower cost with better scalability for
future high-volume production.
We previously collaborated with Stellantis to create an industrial design of an interior/cockpit of our two-passenger demonstrator eVTOL aircraft. This aircraft will only fly
autonomously, with no passengers onboard, but will have a functional interior to help develop and communicate the passenger experience and interior design for the future piloted
production aircraft. To achieve this goal, both parties participated in brainstorming sessions, generated sketches/renderings of interior design concepts, and built 3D rendering views of
one or more refined design concepts.
Government Regulations and Compliance
In the near-term, our efforts will focus on obtaining FAA certification of our aircraft and engaging with key decision makers in the cities in the United States in which we anticipate
our aircraft and UAM service will initially operate. Our aircraft will be required to comply with regulations governing aircraft design, production and airworthiness. In the U.S., this
primarily includes regulations put forth by the FAA and DOT. Outside the United States, similar requirements are generally administered by the national civil aviation and
transportation authorities of each country.
Designing Our Aircraft
Type certification is the FAA’s approval process for new aircraft designs and covers the design of the aircraft and all component parts. Our intent is that our aircraft will meet the
criteria set forth by the FAA as defined Part 23 of the FARs (14 CFR Part 23) as a normal category piloted electric airplane that can also take off and land vertically. We are working
with the FAA to establish the set of regulatory requirements and standards that must be satisfied at the component and aircraft level to prove the safety of the aircraft in order to
receive a type certificate.
Producing Our Aircraft
Production certification is the FAA’s approval for us to be able to manufacture our aircraft under an FAA-approved type design. To obtain production certification from the FAA, we
must demonstrate that our organization and our personnel, facilities, and quality system can produce the aircraft such that they conform to the approved design. We are working to
develop the systems and processes we will need to obtain FAA production certification with the goal of obtaining such certification shortly following completion of the aircraft type
certificate.
Operating Our Aircraft
Airworthiness certification from the FAA signifies that an aircraft meets its approved type design and is in a condition for safe operation in the National Airspace System. As is the
industry standard, each of the aircraft manufactured by us will need to be issued an airworthiness certificate. We expect that the airworthiness certificates issued to our aircraft will be
a Standard Airworthiness certificate in the Normal Category, as such terms are defined by the FAA.
Operating Our UAM Service


- 50 -
The DOT and the FAA have regulatory authority over air transportation operations in the United States. To operate our UAM in air taxi service, we will be required to hold an FAA
Air Carrier Certificate and operate under Part 135 of the FARs and register as an air taxi operator at DOT. In addition, takeoff and landing locations (e.g., airports and heliports)
typically require state and local approval for


Table of Contents
zoning and land use and their ongoing use are subject to regulations by local authorities. We expect that as we build out our UAM service there will be additional federal, state and
local laws, regulations and other requirements that will cover our operations. Therefore, we have already begun and will continue to grow our engagement and collaboration with the
cities in which we intend to operate our service in an effort to ensure that we operate in a safe and sustainable manner.
Competition
We offer a range of professional services and support structures to complement our product line. Our goal is first to drive adoption. Through direct customer engagement, we also
determine investments for new and existing product innovation. These are often used as low-risk ways to customize and enhance solutions for industry verticals to supply demands for
document management, education, end-user engagement, and delegated administration, as examples.
Core Services
Our main sources of competition fall into three categories:
●
ground vehicle transportation, including personal vehicles and asset-light businesses, such as Uber and Lyft;
●
companies, including other eVTOL manufacturers and urban air mobility service providers, that have entered, or plan to enter, the commercial electric vehicle market, such
as Joby, EHang, Volocopter, and Lilium; and
●
incumbent aircraft charter services that have served a similar market for years with hydro-carbon-based combustion engines, including Blade and NetJets.
We believe the principal competitive factors in our market include, but are not limited to:
●
cost;
●
product performance;
●
integrated business model;
●
technological innovation;
●
manufacturing efficiency;
●
product quality, reliability, and safety;
●
service capabilities; and
●
customer experience.
Because of our focus on eVTOL aircraft design for safety and commercialization, we believe that we are able to compete favorably across these factors.
Facilities
We are headquartered in Palo Alto, California with additional research and development facilities in Mountain View, California and flight test facilities at Salinas Municipal Airport
(KSNS), California. To support our planned headcount growth, we are in the process of locating additional office and laboratory space for use later in 2021. We are also beginning the
process of selecting a new long-term headquarters with office and lab space to facilitate growth up to approximately 750 employees. We anticipate this new facility to be ready in the


- 51 -
second half of 2022. Additionally, we are beginning the search for a manufacturing facility for assembly and production flight testing of our certified production aircraft. We are
exploring locations across the United States.


Table of Contents
- 52 -
Employees and Human Capital
As of September 30, 2021, we had 188 full-time employees and are actively recruiting new employees as we continue to scale our operations. Our employment strategy has been to
hire top talent across various disciplines to build the best eVTOL aircraft possible. As a result, we have assembled a world-class engineering team with extensive experience in
aerodynamics, electric propulsion, batteries, and aircraft manufacturing. We have also hired key personnel to ensure safety, move towards certification, and create our market launch
strategy. In addition to our strong team, we believe our culture of collaboration and innovation differentiates us and will be a key driver of our success.
We have not experienced any work stoppages and consider our relationship with our employees to be good. None of our employees are subject to a collective bargaining agreement or
represented by a labor union.
Our human capital resources objectives include, as applicable, identifying, recruiting, retaining, incentivizing and integrating our existing and additional employees. The principal
purposes of our equity incentive plans are to attract, retain and motivate selected employees, consultants and directors through the granting of stock-based compensation awards and
cash-based performance bonus awards.
Legal Proceedings
On March 30, 2021, one of our employees, who is a former employee of Wisk, had a search warrant executed at his home in connection with a federal investigation. In addition, we
and three of our employees, who are also former Wisk employees, received grand jury subpoenas from the United States Attorney’s Office for the Northern District of California in
relation to the same investigation. The grand jury subpoenas seek documents and information about our business, including our hiring practices and intellectual property, as well as
documents and information relating to the employment of such employees at Wisk, including Wisk’s intellectual property, business plans, and information relating to Wisk’s aircraft
design. As of October 6, 2021, the investigation is ongoing.
On April 6, 2021, Wisk brought a lawsuit against us in the District Court, alleging misappropriation of trade secrets and patent infringement. We have placed an employee on paid
administrative leave in connection with a government investigation and a search warrant issued to the employee, which we believe is focused on conduct prior to the employee joining
Archer. Archer and three other Archer employees with whom the individual worked have received subpoenas relating to this investigation. We are cooperating with the investigation
of the employee. On May 19, 2021, Wisk filed a motion for preliminary injunction and expedited discovery. On June 1, 2021, we filed a motion to dismiss the trade secret claims and
filed counterclaims and issued a press release in response to Wisk’s allegations. On June 15, 2021, Wisk amended its complaint, and the following day we filed a motion to dismiss the
amended complaint. On June 23, 2021, we filed an opposition to the motion for preliminary injunction and issued a press release the following day. On July 13, 2021, we filed
amended counterclaims. On July 22, 2021, the District Court denied Wisk’s motion for preliminary injunction. On July 27, 2021, Wisk filed a motion to strike and dismiss certain of
our amended counterclaims.
On August 10, 2021, we filed an opposition to Wisk’s motion to strike and dismiss certain of our amended counterclaims. On August 20, 2021, Wisk filed a notice of appeal of the
District Court’s denial of the motion for preliminary injunction. On August 24, 2021, the District Court denied our motion to dismiss the trade secret claims. On September 14, 2021,
the District Court denied Wisk’s motion to strike and dismiss certain of our amended counterclaims. On September 30, 2021, Wisk withdrew its notice of appeal of the District Court’s
denial of the motion for preliminary injunction. We cannot predict the timing or outcome of the litigation or federal government investigation.
In addition to the foregoing, we have in the past and may in the future be subject to legal proceedings or claims arising in the ordinary course of our business. We do not anticipate that
the ultimate liability, if any, arising out of any such matter would individually or in the aggregate have a material adverse effect on our business, financial condition, or results of
operations.


Table of Contents
MANAGEMENT
Directors and Executive Officers
Our directors and executive officers and their ages as of September 30, 2021 are as follows:
Name
    
Age
    
Position
Executive Officers
Brett Adcock
35
Co-Chief Executive Officer and Co-Chairman of the Board
Adam Goldstein
42
Co-Chief Executive Officer and Co-Chairman of the Board
Tom Muniz
36
Chief Operating Officer
Andy Missan
59
Chief Legal Officer
Ben Lu
45
Chief Financial Officer
Non-Employee Directors
Deborah Diaz(1)(3)
63
Director
Fred Diaz(1)(2)
55
Director
Oscar Munoz(2)
62
Director
Maria Pinelli(1)(2)
58
Director
Michael Spellacy(3)
49
Director
(1) Member of the Audit Committee
(2) Member of the Compensation Committee
(3) Member of the Nominating and Corporate Governance Committee
Executive Officers
Brett Adcock is our co-founder and has served as our Co-Chief Executive Officer and Co-Chairman of our board of directors since October 2018. Prior to co-founding Archer, Mr.
Adcock co-founded and led Vettery, an online job search and recruiting marketplace, from November 2012 to December 2019. Before Vettery, Mr. Adcock served as a Hedge Fund
Analyst at Minetta Lane Capital Partners from November 2011 to November 2012. From August 2009 to October 2011, Mr. Adcock served as a Hedge Fund Analyst at Cedar Hill
Capital Partners. From June 2008 to August 2009, Mr. Adcock served as an Investment Banking Analyst at Bank of America Merrill Lynch. Mr. Adcock holds a B.S. in Business
Administration from the University of Florida. We believe that Mr. Adcock is qualified to serve as a member of our board of directors because of his deep experience in the industry
and role as President and Co-Chief Executive Officer.
Adam Goldstein is our co-founder and has served as our Co-Chief Executive Officer and Co-Chairman of our board of directors since October 2018. Prior to co-founding Archer, Mr.
Goldstein also co-founded and led Vettery from November 2012 to December 2019. Before Vettery, Mr. Goldstein served as Co-Managing Partner of Minetta Lane Capital Partners
from March 2011 to August 2012. From February 2011 to November 2019 Mr. Goldstein served as Portfolio Manager at Plural Investments and from September 2005 to October
2009 Mr. Goldstein served as a Senior Analyst at Cedar Hill Capital Partners. Mr. Goldstein serves as a member of the board of directors of the Museum of American Finance. Mr.
Goldstein holds a B.S. in Business Administration from the University of Florida and an M.B.A. from NYU Stern School of Business. We believe that Mr. Goldstein is qualified to
serve as a member of our board of directors because of his deep experience in the industry and role as Co-Chief Executive Officer.
Tom Muniz has served as our Chief Operating Officer since March 2021. Before being promoted to COO, Mr. Muniz served as our Vice President of Engineering from December
2019 through February 2021. From July 2019 to December 2019, Mr. Muniz served as Vice President of Engineering at Wisk, an eVTOL company. From January 2011 to July 2019,
Mr. Muniz served in a variety of roles at Kitty Hawk, an eVTOL company, including Lead Engineer, Battery Systems Group, Director of Subsystems Engineering, and VP
Engineering. From May 2009 to December 2010, Mr. Muniz served as an Aerospace Engineer at Desktop Aeronautics, Inc., a developer of aeronautics software. Mr. Muniz holds a
B.S. in Mechanical Engineering from the University of California, Berkeley and an M.S. in Aeronautics and Astronautics from the University of Washington.


- 53 -
Andy Missan has served as our Chief Legal Officer since August 2021. Prior to joining Archer, from October 2015 to August 2021, Mr. Missan served as Executive Vice President,
General Counsel and Secretary at Fitbit Inc., and prior to that, from March 2013 to October 2015, served as Fitbit's Vice President and General Counsel. From July 2009 to October
2012, Mr. Missan served as Vice President and General Counsel at Bytemobile, Inc., a mobile video optimization company. From April 2005 to May 2008, Mr. Missan


Table of Contents
- 54 -
served as Vice President and General Counsel of MobiTV, Inc., a provider of mobile video solutions. Prior to MobiTV, from December 2001 to November 2004, Mr. Missan was Vice
President and General Counsel of Danger, Inc., a mobile devices and services company. Mr. Missan was also the Vice President and General Counsel of Replay TV, Inc., a DVR
technology company, from September 2000 to October 2001. Mr. Missan has also held senior legal and business affairs positions at RCA Records Label/BMG Entertainment and
Sony Music Entertainment Inc. Mr. Missan holds a B.A. in government from Oberlin College and a J.D. from Northwestern University Pritzker School of Law.
Ben Lu, CFA, has served as our Chief Financial Officer since August 2021. Before joining Archer, Mr. Lu was most recently Vice President of Finance at Logitech, a leading cloud
peripherals manufacturer. During his time at Logitech, from May 2016 to August 2021, Mr. Lu held various senior finance responsibilities, including Corporate FP&A, Treasury, and
Investor Relations. Prior to Logitech, Mr. Lu spent nearly two decades as a public equity investor and sellside research analyst. Mr. Lu currently serves on the board of directors of
NIRI Silicon Valley. Mr. Lu holds a B.S. in Finance and Information Systems from New York University.
Non-Employee Directors
Deborah Diaz has served as chief executive officer and VC Advisor of Catalyst ADV, a strategic growth advisory firm specializing in large-scale business transformation, innovation
and strategic partnerships, since December 2016. Previously, Ms. Diaz served as Chief Technology Officer and Deputy Chief Information Officer for the National Aeronautics and
Space Administration (NASA) from November 2009 to October 2016, where she was responsible for NASA’s system infrastructure, technology innovation, and risk management. Ms.
Diaz served as Deputy Chief Information Officer for the United States Patent and Trademark Office (USPTO) from January 2007 to November 2009. From October 2002 to January
2007, Ms. Diaz served as Chief Information Officer and Senior Technical Advisor for the U.S. Department of Homeland Security. Ms. Diaz also served as Deputy Associate
Administrator for the General Services Administration (GSA) from June 2000 to October 2002. Ms. Diaz currently serves on the board of directors of Primis Financial Corp., on the
board of directors of Section, and on the advisory board of directors of Equinix, Intel Corporation, and Francisco Partners’ Forcepoint. Ms. Diaz formerly served on the board of
directors of Dell Technologies GAB, Battle Resource Management, Inc. (BRMi), Intelvative, Inc., National Association of Corporate Directors CAC, and eKuber Ventures, Inc. Ms.
Diaz holds a B.S. in Business Administration from Stonehill College, an M.S in International Business from Colorado State University and is “NACD Directorship Certified.” We
believe that Ms. Diaz is qualified to serve as a member of our board of directors because of her decades of experience working with innovative technologies and leadership in multiple
high-risk market evolutions in both the private sector and in government.
Fred Diaz served as President and chief executive officer of Mitsubishi Motors North America from April 2018 to April 2020. Before that, Mr. Diaz served as General Manager in
Charge, Performance Optimization Global Marketing and Sales of Mitsubishi Motors Corporation in Japan, from July 2017 to April 2018. From April 2013 to July 2017, Mr. Diaz
served in a number of roles for Nissan Motor Corporation, including Division Vice President & General Manager — North American Trucks and Light Commercial Vehicles, Sr. Vice
President Sales & Marketing and Operations, and Division Vice President, Sales & Marketing and Parts & Service. Mr. Diaz also served in several roles for Fiat Chrysler Automobiles
(FCA) from 2004 to April 2013, including President and CEO Ram Truck Brand, President and CEO Chrysler Mexico, Head of National Sales, Regional Managing Director of the
Denver Business Center, and Director of Dodge Brand Marketing Communications. Mr. Diaz currently serves on the board of directors of Smith & Wesson Brands, Inc. and SiteOne
Landscape Supply Inc. (f/k/a as John Deere Landscapes LLC). Mr. Diaz formerly served as the chairman of the board of directors of Mitsubishi Motors North America from April
2018 to April 2020. Mr. Diaz holds a B.S. in Business Administration and Management with a Minor in Psychology from Texas Lutheran University and an M.B.A. from Central
Michigan University. We believe that Mr. Diaz is qualified to serve as a member of our board of directors because of his experience in management, sales, and marketing in the
automotive industry.
Oscar Munoz served as Chairman and chief executive officer of United Airlines from September 2015 to May 2021. He also served as a member of the board of directors of United
Continental Holdings, Inc. from October 2010 to June 2021. Before joining United Airlines’ executive team, Mr. Munoz served in several roles at CSX Corporation from May 2003 to
September 2015, including President, COO, CFO, and Executive Vice President. From January 2001 to April 2003, Mr. Munoz served as CFO of Consumer Services at AT&T. Before
that, Mr. Munoz served as SVP of Finance and Administration at U.S. West from July 1997 to December 2000. Mr. Munoz also served in various leadership roles for The Coca-Cola
Company from June 1986 to June 1997 and for PepsiCo from June 1982 to June 1986. Mr. Munoz currently serves on the board of directors of CBRE Group, Inc. and Univision
Communications Inc. and on the Advisory Board of Salesforce. Mr. Munoz also serves on the board of trustees of Fidelity Investments, the University of Southern California, and The
Brookings Institution. Mr. Munoz previous served on the board of directors of Continental Airlines, Inc. from May 2004 until its acquisition by United Airlines in October 2010. Mr.
Munoz holds a B.A. in Finance and Strategy from USC’s Marshall




Table of Contents
School of Business and an M.B.A. from Pepperdine University. We believe that Mr. Munoz is qualified to serve as a member of our board of directors because of his experience in
management and finance in the airline industry.
Maria Pinelli has served as the Chief Executive Officer of Strategic Growth Advisors, LLC since December 2020. From July 2017 to December 2020, Ms. Pinelli led Ernst & Young
LLP’s (EY) Consumer Products and Retail sector based in the U.S. Southeast. From July 2011 to June 2017, Ms. Pinelli was a Global Vice Chair of EY and led EY’s Global Strategic
Growth Business unit with a focus on serving entrepreneurs, private and public companies poised for exponential growth. During the same period, she also served as EY’s Global IPO
Leader, helping clients prepare for the public markets including initial public offering readiness, Sarbanes-Oxley compliance and how to manage stakeholder expectations. Prior to
leading this global business of EY, Ms. Pinelli was EY’s Americas Director of Strategic Growth Markets from 2006 to 2011. Ms. Pinelli currently serves on the board of directors of
Globant S.A. and Clarim Acquisition Corp. Ms. Pinelli holds a B.Com. in Commerce from McMaster University and is a qualified public accountant in the United Kingdom and
Canada. We believe that Ms. Pinelli is qualified to serve as a member of our board of directors because of her previous leadership roles at EY, her international business and financial
experience, and her extensive experience in advising growth companies.
Michael Spellacy was appointed Atlas’ Chief Executive Officer on October 2, 2020 and a director on October 14, 2020. Mr. Spellacy is also the Chief Executive Officer and a
director of Atlas Crest Investment Corp. II, Atlas Crest Investment Corp. III, Atlas Crest Investment Corp. IV and Atlas Crest Investment Corp. V. Mr. Spellacy has extensive
experience in technology, data and analytics, capital markets and private equity and has worked as an investor, investment banker and consultant. Most recently, Mr. Spellacy was a
Senior Managing Director at Accenture plc and Global Industry Leader of Accenture Capital Markets while overseeing Accenture’s Asset Management, Wealth Management and
Investment and Trading businesses. Accenture plc is a multinational Fortune Global 500 professional services firm with 2020 revenues of over $44 billion. Mr. Spellacy began his role
at Accenture in 2017.
Prior to Accenture, Mr. Spellacy was a Senior Partner, Asset and Wealth Management, at PricewaterhouseCoopers from 2015 to 2017 and prior to that role, Mr. Spellacy was a Partner
at Broadhaven Capital, an industry leading independent investment bank and private equity investor servicing the financial services and technology sectors from 2013 to 2015. Prior
to Broadhaven, Mr. Spellacy was a Senior Executive, Management Committee Advisor at Bridgewater Associates, a widely recognized asset manager from 2009 to 2013. Mr.
Spellacy led Bridgewater’s $130 billion assets under management transformation program. Prior to Bridgewater, Mr. Spellacy was a Partner and Managing Director at the Boston
Consulting Group from 2003 to 2009 where he helped guide the firm’s global Alternative Investments Practice providing strategic business advisory services to global asset managers,
sovereign wealth funds and asset owners. He received his B.S. in Economics from the London School of Economics and M.B.A. from the University of Hartford. We believe that Mr.
Spellacy is qualified to serve as a member of our board of directors because of his deep investing and management experience.
Family Relationships
There are no family relationships among any of our directors or executive officers.
Corporate Governance
Composition of the Board of Directors
Our business and affairs are organized under the direction of our board of directors. Messrs. Adcock and Goldstein serve as Co-Chairs of our board of directors. The primary
responsibilities of our board of directors are to provide oversight, strategic guidance, counseling and direction to our management. Our board of directors meets on a regular basis and
additionally as required.
In accordance with the terms of our Bylaws, our board of directors may establish the authorized number of directors from time to time by resolution. Our board of directors currently
consists of seven members. In accordance with our Certificate of Incorporation, our board of directors is divided into three classes with staggered three-year terms. At each annual
meeting of stockholders, the successors to directors whose terms then expire will be elected to serve from the time of election and qualification until the third annual meeting
following election.
Our directors are divided among the three classes as follows:


- 55 -
●
the Class I directors are Deborah Diaz and Fred Diaz and their terms will expire at the annual meeting of stockholders to be held in 2022;


Table of Contents
●
the Class II directors are Maria Pinelli and Michael Spellacy and their terms will expire at the annual meeting of stockholders to be held in 2023; and
●
the Class III directors are Brett Adcock, Adam Goldstein, and Oscar Munoz and their terms will expire at the annual meeting of stockholders to be held in 2024.
As nearly as possible, each class consists of one-third of the directors.
The division of our board of directors into three classes with staggered three-year terms may delay or prevent a change of our management or a change in control.
Board Leadership Structure
We believe that all members of the board of directors should have a voice in the affairs and the management of Archer. The board of directors believes that our stockholders are best
served at this time by having Messrs. Adcock and Goldstein serve as a co-Chairmen, who will be an integral part of the board of director leadership structure and a critical aspect of
effective corporate governance. The active involvement of our independent directors, combined with the qualifications and significant responsibilities of our co-Chairmen, we believe
will provide balance and promote strong oversight of our management and affairs. We intend to evaluate our board leadership structure on a periodic basis, which evaluations will
include, among other things, whether it is appropriate to appoint a lead independent director.
Director Independence
As a result of our Class A Common Stock being listed on NYSE, we are required to comply with the applicable rules of such exchange in determining whether a director is
independent. Following the consummation of the Business Combination, our board of directors determined that the individuals named above qualify as “independent” as defined
under the applicable NYSE rules. Messrs. Adcock and Goldstein are not deemed independent due their positions as our Co-Chief Executive Officers.
Role of the Board in Risk Oversight
One of the key functions of our board of directors is the informed oversight of our risk management process. Our board of directors does not have a standing risk management
committee, but rather administers this oversight function directly through the board of directors as a whole, as well as through various standing committees of the board of directors
that address risks inherent in their respective areas of oversight. In particular, the board of directors is responsible for monitoring and assessing strategic risk exposure and our audit
committee has the responsibility to consider and discuss our major financial risk exposures and the steps our management will take to monitor and control such exposures, including
guidelines and policies to govern the process by which risk assessment and management is undertaken. The audit committee also monitors compliance with legal and regulatory
requirements. Our compensation committee also assesses and monitors whether our compensation plans, policies and programs comply with applicable legal and regulatory
requirements.
Committees of the Board of Directors
Our board of directors established an audit committee, a compensation committee and a nominating and corporate governance committee. The composition and responsibilities of
each of the committees of the board of directors are described below. Members serve on these committees, which comply with the applicable requirements of current SEC and NYSE
rules, until their resignation or until otherwise determined by our board of directors. Copies of the charters for each committee are available on the investor relations portion of our
website at www.archer.com. Our board of directors may establish other committees as it deems necessary or appropriate from time to time.
Audit Committee
Our audit committee consists of Ms. Diaz, Mr. Diaz and Ms. Pinelli, each of whom our board of directors has determined satisfies the independence requirements under NYSE listing
standards and Rule 10A- 3(b)(1) of the Exchange Act. The chairperson of the audit committee is Ms. Pinelli. Our board of directors has determined that Ms. Pinelli is an “audit
committee financial expert” within the meaning of SEC regulations. Each member of the audit committee can read and understand fundamental financial statements in accordance
with applicable requirements. In arriving at these determinations, our board of directors examined each audit committee member’s scope of experience and the nature of their
employment.


- 56 -


Table of Contents
The primary purpose of the audit committee is to discharge the responsibilities of the board of directors with respect to corporate accounting and financial reporting processes, systems
of internal control and financial statement audits, and to oversee our independent registered public accounting firm. Specific responsibilities of the audit committee include:
●
helping the board of directors oversee corporate accounting and financial reporting processes;
●
managing the selection, engagement, qualifications, independence and performance of a qualified firm to serve as the independent registered public accounting firm to audit
our consolidated financial statements;
●
discussing the scope and results of the audit with the independent registered public accounting firm, and reviewing, with management and the independent accountants, our
interim and year-end operating results;
●
developing procedures for employees to submit concerns anonymously about questionable accounting or audit matters;
●
reviewing related person transactions;
●
obtaining and reviewing a report by the independent registered public accounting firm at least annually that describes our internal quality control procedures, any material
issues with such procedures, and any steps taken to deal with such issues when required by applicable law; and
●
approving or, as permitted, pre-approving, audit and permissible non-audit services to be performed by the independent registered public accounting firm.
Compensation Committee
The compensation committee consists of Mr. Diaz, Ms. Pinelli and Mr. Munoz. The chair of the compensation committee is Mr. Diaz. Our board of directors has determined that each
member of the compensation committee is “independent” under the NYSE listing standards and as “non-employee director” as defined in Rule 16b-3 promulgated under the Exchange
Act.
The primary purpose of the compensation committee is to discharge the responsibilities of the board of directors in overseeing the compensation policies, plans and programs and to
review and determine the compensation to be paid to executive officers, directors and other senior management, as appropriate. Specific responsibilities of the compensation
committee include:
●
reviewing and approving the compensation of the chief executive officer, other executive officers and senior management;
●
reviewing and recommending to the board of directors the compensation of directors;
●
administering the equity incentive plans and other benefit programs;
●
reviewing, adopting, amending and terminating incentive compensation and equity plans, severance agreements, profit sharing plans, bonus plans, change-of-control
protections and any other compensatory arrangements for the executive officers and other senior management; and
●
reviewing and establishing general policies relating to compensation and benefits of the employees, including the overall compensation philosophy.
Nominating and Corporate Governance Committee
The nominating and corporate governance committee consists of Ms. Diaz and Mr. Spellacy. The chair of the nominating and corporate governance committee is Ms. Diaz. Our board
of directors has determined that all members of the nominating and corporate governance committee qualify as independent under the NYSE listing standards.


- 57 -


Table of Contents
Specific responsibilities of the nominating and corporate governance committee include:
●
identifying and evaluating candidates, including the nomination of incumbent directors for re-election and nominees recommended by stockholders, to serve on the board of
directors;
●
considering and making recommendations to the board of directors regarding the composition and chairmanship of the committees of the board of directors;
●
developing and making recommendations to the board of directors regarding corporate governance guidelines and matters, including in relation to corporate social
responsibility; and
●
overseeing periodic evaluations of the performance of the board of directors, including its individual directors and committees.
Code of Ethics
We have adopted a code of ethics that applies to all of our executive officers, directors and employees, including our principal executive officer, principal financial officer, principal
accounting officer or controller or persons performing similar functions. The code of ethics is available on our website, http://www.archer.com. In addition, we intend to post on our
website all disclosures that are required by law or the listing standards of NYSE concerning any amendments to, or waivers from, any provision of the code. The reference to our
website address does not constitute incorporation by reference of the information contained at or available through our website, and you should not consider it to be a part of this
prospectus.
Compensation Committee Interlocks and Insider Participation
None of the intended members of our compensation committee has ever been an executive officer or employee of Archer. None of our executive officers currently serve, or has served
during the last completed fiscal year, on the compensation committee or board of directors of any other entity that has one or more executive officers that will serve as a member of
the board of directors or compensation committee.
Non-Employee Director Compensation
The board of directors adopted a non-employee director compensation policy designed to align compensation with our business objectives and the creation of shareholder value, while
enabling us to attract and retain directors to contribute to our long-term success.
The aggregate amount of compensation, including both cash compensation and equity compensation, paid to any non-employee director for service as a non-employee director in a
calendar year period will not exceed $1,500,000 in the first calendar year such individual becomes a non-employee director and $750,000 in any other calendar year.
Cash Compensation
Each non-employee director is entitled to a $140,000 annual cash retainer. In addition, the members of the audit committee, compensation committee, and nominating and corporate
governance committee are entitled to an annual cash retainer of $10,000, $6,000, and $4,000, respectively, with the chair of each such committee being entitled to an annual cash
retainer of $15,000, $10,000, and $8,000, respectively. In addition, our policy is to reimburse directors for reasonable and necessary out-of-pocket expenses incurred in connection
with attending board and committee meetings or performing other services in their capacities as directors. Messrs. Adcock and Goldstein do not receive additional compensation for
their services as directors.
Equity Compensation
Each of Ms. Diaz, Mr. Diaz, Ms. Pinelli and Mr. Spellacy, will be granted a restricted stock unit (“RSU”) under our 2021 Equity Incentive Plan (the “2021 Plan”) with an aggregate
value of $200,000 upon the filing of our first registration statement on Form S-8, which is expected to occur 60 days from the Closing. These RSUs will vest on the one-year


- 58 -
anniversary of the Closing. Mr. Munoz will be granted an RSU under the 2021 Plan with an aggregate value of $500,000 upon the filing of our first registration statement on Form S-
8, which is expected to occur 60 days from the Closing. This RSU will vest in equal installments on the first, second and third annual anniversaries of the Closing. Such vesting will
occur so long as the non-employee director continues to provide services to Archer through the applicable vesting date.


Table of Contents
- 59 -
Limitation on Liability and Indemnification of Directors and Officers
Our Certificate of Incorporation limits a director’s liability to the fullest extent permitted under the DGCL. The DGCL provides that directors of a corporation will not be personally
liable for monetary damages for breach of their fiduciary duties as directors, except for liability:
●
for any transaction from which the director derives an improper personal benefit;
●
for any act or omission not in good faith or that involves intentional misconduct or a knowing violation of law;
●
for any unlawful payment of dividends or redemption of shares; or
●
for any breach of a director’s duty of loyalty to the corporation or its stockholders.
If the DGCL is amended to authorize corporate action further eliminating or limiting the personal liability of directors, then the liability of the directors will be eliminated or limited to
the fullest extent permitted by the DGCL, as so amended.
Delaware law and our Bylaws provide that we will, in certain situations, indemnify our directors and officers and may indemnify other employees and other agents, to the fullest
extent permitted by law. Any indemnified person is also entitled, subject to certain limitations, to advancement, direct payment, or reimbursement of reasonable expenses (including
attorneys’ fees and disbursements) in advance of the final disposition of the proceeding.
In addition, we have entered into separate indemnification agreements with our directors and officers. These agreements, among other things, require us to indemnify our directors and
officers for certain expenses, including attorneys’ fees, judgments, fines, and settlement amounts incurred by a director or officer in any action or proceeding arising out of their
services as one of our directors or officers or any other company or enterprise to which the person provides services at our request.
We also maintain a directors’ and officers’ insurance policy pursuant to which our directors and officers are insured against liability for actions taken in their capacities as directors and
officers. We believe these provisions in our Certificate of Incorporation and our Bylaws and these indemnification agreements are necessary to attract and retain qualified persons as
directors and officers. Insofar as indemnification for liabilities arising under the Securities Act may be permitted to directors, officers, or control persons, in the opinion of the SEC,
such indemnification is against public policy as expressed in the Securities Act and is therefore unenforceable.


Table of Contents
EXECUTIVE COMPENSATION
Atlas
Employment Agreements
Prior to the Closing, Atlas did not enter into any employment agreements with its executive officers and did not make any agreements to provide benefits upon termination of
employment.
Executive Officers and Director Compensation
No Atlas executive officers or directors received any cash compensation for services rendered to Atlas. Executive officers and directors, or any of their respective affiliates were
reimbursed for any out-of-pocket expenses incurred in connection with activities on Atlas’ behalf such as identifying potential target businesses and performing due diligence on
suitable business combinations.
Archer
As used in this section, “Archer,” “we,” “us” or “our” refers to Archer Aviation Operating Corp. (formerly Archer Aviation Inc.) prior to the Closing, and Archer Aviation Inc. after the
Closing.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, our named executive officers consisted of our co-principal executive officers and the next most highly compensated executive officer (who
was the only other executive officer for the year ended December 31, 2020):
●
Brett Adcock, our Co-Chief Executive Officer;
●
Adam Goldstein, our Co-Chief Executive Officer; and
●
Tom Muniz, our VP Engineering (promoted to Chief Operating Officer, effective March 1, 2021).
Summary Compensation Table
The following table sets forth information concerning the compensation of our named executive officers for the year ended December 31, 2020:
Name and Principal Position
    
Salary(1)
    
Bonus
    
Option
Awards(2)
    
Non-Equity
Incentive
Plan
Compensation
($)
    
All Other
Compensation
($)
    
Total
Brett Adcock
Co-Chief Executive Officer
$
250,000
—
$
396,828
—
$
—
$
646,828
Adam Goldstein
Co-Chief Executive Officer
250,000
—
396,828
—
—
646,828
Tom Muniz
VP Engineering
500,000
200,000(3)
147,874
—
18,374(4)
866,248


- 60 -
(1) Salary amounts represent actual amounts paid during 2020.
(2) Amounts reported in this column do not reflect the amounts actually received by our named executive officers. Instead, these amounts reflect the aggregate grant date fair value of
each option award granted to the named executive officers during 2020, as computed in accordance with Accounting Standards Codification 718 using the assumptions described
in Note 10 to our audited financial statements for the year ended December 31, 2020 included elsewhere in this prospectus. As required by SEC rules, the amounts shown exclude
the impact of estimated forfeitures related to service-based vesting conditions.
(3) Bonus amount represents the remaining payment due to Mr. Muniz. Please see the section titled “Executive Compensation — Employment Arrangements with Executive Officers”
for additional information.


Table of Contents
(4) Amount represents the following payments made to Mr. Muniz during the year ended December 31, 2020: $9,750 in 401(k) matching contributions and $8,624 in health
insurance costs.
Outstanding Equity Awards as of December 31, 2020
The following table presents information regarding outstanding equity awards held by our named executive officers as of December 31, 2020:
Name
    
Grant
Date
    
Vesting
Commencement
Date
    
Number of
Securities
Underlying
Unexercised
Options
Exercisable
(#)
    
Number of
Securities
Underlying
Unexercised
Options
Unexercisable
(#)
    
Option
Exercise
Price
    
Option
Expiration
Date
    
Number of
Shares of
Stock That
Have Not
Vested (#)
    
Market
Value of
Shares That
Have Not
Vested(4)
 
Brett Adcock
11/03/2020(1)
11/21/2019
—
—
$
0.15
11/2/2030
1,929,023
$
23,881,305
Adam Goldstein
11/03/2020(1)
11/21/2019
—
—
0.15
11/2/2030
1,929,023
23,881,305
Tom Muniz
11/03/2020(2)
11/01/2020
—
—
0.15
11/2/2030
783,693
9,702,119
02/05/2020(3)
12/06/2019
—
—
0.04
02/4/2030
606,402
7,507,257
(1) Messrs. Adcock and Goldstein early exercised these stock options in fiscal year 2019 at the original exercise price of $0.15 per share and received restricted stock  subject to our
right of repurchase as to the unvested portion. The repurchase right lapses pursuant to the option’s vesting schedule, which is as follows: the shares underlying the option vest in
48 equal monthly installments beginning on the on the one-month anniversary of the vesting commencement date, subject to the executive’s continued service to us. The
restricted shares are subject to vesting acceleration, as described in more detail below under the subsection titled “Accelerated Vesting of Options.”
(2) Mr. Muniz early exercised these stock options in fiscal year 2020 at the original exercise price of $0.15 per share and received restricted stock subject to our right of repurchase as
to the unvested portion. The repurchase right lapses pursuant to the option’s vesting schedule, which is as follows: 20% of the shares underlying will vest on November 1, 2021,
and the remaining 80% of the shares underlying this option vest in 48 equal monthly installments thereafter, subject to Mr. Muniz’s continued service at each vesting date.
(3) Mr. Muniz early exercised these stock options in fiscal year 2020 at the original exercise price of $0.04 per share and received restricted stock subject to our right of repurchase as
to the unvested portion. The repurchase right lapses pursuant to the option’s vesting schedule, which is as follows: 20% of the shares underlying this option vested on December
6, 2020, and the remaining 80% of the shares underlying this option vest in 48 equal monthly installments thereafter, subject to Mr. Muniz’s continued service at each vesting
date.
(4) This column represents the fair market value of a share of our common stock of $12.38 as of December 31, 2020 (the determination of the fair market value by our board of
directors as of the most proximate date) multiplied by the amount shown in the column “Number of Shares of Stock That Have Not Vested.”
Accelerated Vesting of Options
Messrs. Adcock and Goldstein’s option awards provide that in the event such officer’s employment is terminated by us without cause (defined below) or by such officer for good
reason (defined below) in connection with or within 12 months of a “change of control” (as defined in the 2019 Equity Incentive Plan), then 100% of any unvested shares under such
officer’s equity award will vest in full upon the consummation of such change in control.
For purposes of this section, “cause” means: (i) a material breach by such officer of any material written agreement between the officer and Archer; (ii) any failure by such officer to
comply with our material written policies or rules; (iii) neglect or persistent unsatisfactory performance of such officer’s duties; (iv) such officer’s repeated failure to follow
reasonable and lawful instructions from our board of directors; (v) such officer’s conviction of, or plea of guilty or nolo contendere to, any crime that results in, or is reasonably
expected to result in, material harm to our business or reputation; (vi) such officer’s commission of or participation in an act of fraud against us; (vii) such officer’s intentional
material damage to our business, property or reputation; or (viii) such officer’s unauthorized use or disclosure of any of our proprietary information or trade secrets or any other party
to whom the officer owes an obligation of nondisclosure as a result of his relationship with Archer.


- 61 -


Table of Contents
For purposes of this section, “good reason” means: (i) a reduction of such officer’s then current base salary by 10% or more unless such reduction is part of a generalized salary
reduction affecting similarly situated employees; (ii) a change in such officer’s position with us that materially reduces such officer’s duties, level of authority or responsibility; or (iii)
we condition such officer’s continued service with us on the officer being transferred to a site of employment that would increase the officer’s one-way commute by more than 35
miles from the officer’s then principal residence.
Employment Arrangements with Executive Officers
Each of our named executive officers is an at-will employee. Ben Lu, Andy Missan, and Tom Muniz are each currently party to an offer letter setting forth their terms of employment
as of the date of their respective offer letter, including title, salary, initial equity grant and severance provisions, as set forth below. Please see the section titled “Outstanding Equity
Awards as of December 31, 2020” for additional information regarding the equity awards held by our named executive officers.
Adam Goldstein and Brett Adcock
We entered into employment agreements with Messrs. Adcock and Goldstein substantially on the terms set forth below in connection with the Closing of the Business Combination.
Messrs. Adcock and Goldstein are each entitled to an annual base salary of $600,000, a target annual bonus of 50% of base salary based upon the achievement of target objectives as
established by our board of directors, and standard benefit plans available to our executives.
In addition, Messrs. Adcock and Goldstein will each be eligible for the following severance package for a termination without “cause” or resignation for “good reason” (each as
defined below) not in connection with a change in control:
●
24 months of base salary at time of termination paid in accordance with our normal payroll practices;
●
a lump sum cash payment equal to two times the target annual bonus;
●
a lump sum payment equal to 24 months of COBRA premiums; and
●
24-month accelerated vesting of any time-vested equity awards (excluding for the avoidance of doubt the Archer Founder Grants).
For a termination without cause or resignation for good reason in the period starting three months prior to and ending 18 months following a change in control, Messrs. Adcock and
Goldstein will each be eligible for the following severance package:
●
24 months of base salary at time of termination paid in a lump sum;
●
a lump sum cash payment equal to two times the target annual bonus;
●
a lump sum payment equal to 24 months of COBRA premiums; and
●
100% accelerated vesting of any time-vested awards (excluding for the avoidance of doubt the Archer Founder Grants).
As a condition of receiving the severance benefits, Messrs. Adcock and Goldstein must execute a general release of claims in favor of Archer and allow it to become effective and
comply with all applicable agreements including but not limited to, our form of confidentiality and invention assignment agreement.
For purposes of the employment agreements, “cause” for termination will exist if the executive’s employment is terminated for any of the following reasons: (i) any material breach
by the executive of any material written agreement between the executive and us and the executive’s failure to cure such condition (if curable) within 30 days after receiving written
notice thereof; (ii) any failure by the executive to comply with our material written policies or rules as they may be in effect from time to time; (iii) the executive’s willful failure to
follow reasonable and lawful instructions from our board of directors and the executive’s failure to cure such condition (if curable) within 30 days after receiving written notice


- 62 -
thereof; (iv) the executive’s conviction of (including a plea of guilty or nolo contendere) to, any crime that results in, or is reasonably expected to result in, material harm to our
business or reputation; (v) the executive’s commission of or participation in an act of fraud; (vi) the executive’s misconduct that results in material damage to our


Table of Contents
- 63 -
business, property or reputation; or (vii) the executive’s unauthorized use or disclosure of any of our proprietary information or trade secrets or any other party to whom the executive
owes an obligation of nondisclosure as a result of his relationship with us. For purposes of clarity, a termination without “cause” does not include any termination that occurs as a
result of the executive’s death or disability.
For purposes of the employment agreements, resignation for “good reason” from employment with us will exist if any of the following actions are taken by us without the executive’s
prior written consent: (i) a material reduction in the executive’s base salary (unless pursuant to a salary reduction program applicable generally to the executive’s similarly situated
employees not to exceed 10%); (ii) a material reduction in the executive’s title or duties (including responsibilities and/or authorities); or (iii) relocation of the executive’s principal
place of employment by more than 35 miles, provided, however, that any change from remote work to working from our Palo Alto offices will not be deemed a relocation that could
give rise to good reason under this provision.
Upon a termination of employment without “cause” or a resignation for “good reason”, the Archer Founder Grants held by Messrs. Adcock or Goldstein, as the case may be, will
remain outstanding for 15 months from the date of such termination and will remain eligible for vesting upon the achievement of the milestones set forth in such equity award.
Tom Muniz
In December 2019, Legacy Archer entered into an offer letter with Tom Muniz. The offer letter provides for an initial base salary of $500,000 and bonuses totaling $230,000. Effective
March 1, 2021, Mr. Muniz’s base salary was increased to $650,000. Per the terms of the offer letter, Mr. Muniz was granted an option to purchase up to 758,002 shares of Archer.
Ben Lu
Legacy Archer entered into an offer letter with Ben Lu, to serve as Chief Financial Officer effective as of August 2, 2021. Pursuant to the offer letter, Mr. Lu’s initial base salary is
$500,000 per year, and Mr. Lu is eligible for an annual performance-based bonus up to $250,000. Per the terms of the offer letter, following the filing of our first registration statement
on Form S-8, we will grant Mr. Lu a restricted stock unit award with an aggregate grant date fair value of $6,000,000 (but not more than 600,000 shares of Class A Common Stock
(the “Lu Award”)). One-third of the total number of shares subject to the Lu Award will vest on August 15, 2022, with an additional 1/12th of the total number of shares subject to the
Lu Award vesting on each three-month anniversary of such date. The Lu Award will be subject to the terms and conditions set forth in the 2021 Plan and its standard form of restricted
stock unit agreement.
Andy Missan
Legacy Archer entered into an offer letter with Andy Missan to serve as Chief Legal Officer effective as of August 9, 2021. Pursuant to the offer letter, Mr. Missan’s initial base salary
is $500,000 per year and Mr. Missan is eligible for an annual performance-based bonus of $350,000. Per the terms of the offer letter, following the filing of our first registration
statement on Form S-8, we will grant Mr. Missan a restricted stock unit award of 1,000,000 shares of Class A Common Stock (the “Missan Award”). Twenty-five percent of the total
number of shares subject to the Missan Award will vest on August 15, 2022, with an additional 1/16th of the total number of shares subject to the Missan Award vesting on each three
month anniversary of such date. The Missan Award will be subject to the terms and conditions set forth in the 2021 Plan and its standard form of restricted stock unit agreement.
Non-Employee Director Compensation
The table below summarizes the compensation paid to our non-employee directors in 2020.
Atlas
During 2020, Atlas did not provide cash, equity or other non-equity compensation for service on its board of directors.




Table of Contents
Archer
Mr. Adcock and Mr. Goldstein, who are employee directors, did not receive any additional compensation for their services as directors on our board of directors.
Name
    
Fees Earned
or Paid in
Cash ($)
Joshua L. Berman(1)
$
41,667
(1) Mr. Berman resigned as a member of Legacy Archer’s board of directors in connection with the Closing.
Archer Founder Grants
Each Archer Founder was granted an Archer Founder Grant immediately prior to Closing, which as a result of the Business Combination was convertible into 20,009,224 shares of
Class B Common Stock. The Archer Founder Grants were issued under the amended and restated 2019 Equity Incentive Plan of Archer Aviation Inc. (the “2019 Plan”), and are of a
size that, when taken together with their existing equity ownership, resulted in each of the Archer Founders owning approximately 18% of all outstanding shares of capital stock of
Archer following the Closing (assuming the exercise, exchange or conversion in full of all outstanding exercisable, exchangeable or convertible securities, including options, restricted
stock units, or warrants, in each case of Legacy Archer outstanding as of immediately prior to the Closing), but not including any (i) shares reserved for issuance under equity
incentive or similar plans or (ii) shares underlying (or shares subsequently issued in respect of) any warrants or other exercisable, exchangeable or convertible securities of Atlas that
were outstanding immediately prior to the Closing, subject to certain vesting conditions. One-quarter of each Archer Founder Grant will vest upon the achievement (within seven
years following the Closing) of the earlier to occur of (i) a price-based milestone or (ii) a performance-based milestone, with a different set of such price and performance-based
milestones applying to each quarter of the Archer Founder Grant. Twenty-five percent of each Archer Founder Grant, being 5,002,306 shares of Class B Common Stock, has vested.
Vesting will generally be subject to the Archer Founder’s continued employment with Archer through the vesting date. However, if the Archer Founder’s employment is terminated by
us without “cause” or by the Archer Founder for “good reason” (with such terms to be defined in the employment agreements to be entered into with each Archer Founder), the Archer
Founder Grants will remain outstanding and eligible to vest for a period of 15 months following such termination of employment.
Executive Compensation
The Compensation Committee oversees the compensation policies, plans and programs and reviews and determines compensation to be paid to executive officers, directors and other
senior management, as appropriate. The compensation policies are intended to provide for compensation that is sufficient to attract, motivate and retain executives and potential other
individuals and to establish an appropriate relationship between executive compensation and the creation of stockholder value.
Emerging Growth Company Status
We are an “emerging growth company,” as defined in the JOBS Act. As an emerging growth company, we are exempt from certain requirements related to executive compensation,
including the requirements to hold a nonbinding advisory vote on executive compensation and to provide information relating to the ratio of total compensation of our chief executive
officer to the median of the annual total compensation of all of our employees, each as required by the Investor Protection and Securities Reform Act of 2010, which is part of the
Dodd-Frank Act.
Employee Benefit Plans
Equity-based compensation has been and will continue to be an important foundation in executive compensation packages as we believe it is important to maintain a strong link
between executive incentives and the creation of stockholder value. We believe that performance and equity-based compensation can be an important component of the total executive
compensation package for maximizing stockholder value while, at the same time, attracting, motivating and retaining high-quality executives. The 2021 Plan is an important element
of the combined company’s compensation arrangements for both executive officers and directors, and executive officers are also eligible to participate in the 2021 Employee Stock
Purchase Plan (the “ESPP”). Below is a description of the 2021 Plan.


- 64 -


Table of Contents
2021 Equity Incentive Plan
In August 2021, our board of directors adopted the 2021 Plan, and our stockholders approved the 2021 Plan in September 2021. The 2021 Plan became effective immediately upon the
Closing.
Eligibility. Any individual who is an employee of Archer or any of its affiliates, or any person who provides services to Archer or its affiliates, including consultants and members of
the board of directors, is eligible to receive awards under the 2021 Plan at the discretion of the plan administrator.
Awards. The 2021 Plan provides for the grant of incentive stock options (“ISOs”), within the meaning of Section 422 of the Code to employees, including employees of any parent or
subsidiary, and for the grant of nonstatutory stock options (“NSOs”), stock appreciation rights, restricted stock awards, restricted stock unit awards, performance awards and other
forms of awards to employees, directors and consultants, including employees and consultants of Archer’s affiliates.
Authorized Shares. Initially, the maximum number of Class A Shares that may be issued under the 2021 Plan will not exceed 7,453,588 shares of the Class A Common Stock. In
addition, the number of Class A Shares reserved for issuance under the 2021 Plan will automatically increase on January 1 of each year, starting on January 1, 2022 and ending on
December 31, 2030, in an amount equal to the lesser of (1) 2.0% of the total number of Class A Shares outstanding on December 31 of the preceding year, or (2) a lesser number of
Class A Shares determined by the board of directors prior to the date of the increase. The maximum number of Class A Shares that may be issued on the exercise of ISOs under the
2021 Plan is 22,360,764 shares of our Class A Common Stock.
The unused shares subject to stock awards granted under the 2021 Plan that expire, lapse or are terminated, exchanged for or settled in cash, surrendered, repurchased or canceled
without having been fully exercised or forfeited, in any case, in a manner that results in us acquiring shares covered by the stock award at a price not greater than the price (as adjusted
pursuant to the 2021 Plan) paid by the participant for such shares or not issuing any shares covered by the stock award, will, as applicable, become or again be available for stock
award grants under the 2021 Plan. The following Class A Shares will not be added to the shares authorized for grant and will not be available for future grants of stock awards: (i)
Class A Shares subject to a stock appreciation right that are not issued in connection with the stock settlement of the stock appreciation right on exercise thereof; and (ii) shares
purchased on the open market with the cash proceeds from the exercise of options; and (iii) shares delivered to us by a participant to satisfy the exercise or purchase price of a stock
award or to satisfy any applicable tax withholding obligation with respect to a stock award (including Class A Shares retained from the award being exercised or purchased and/or
creating the tax obligation).
Non-Employee Director Compensation Limit. The aggregate value of all compensation granted or paid to any non-employee director with respect to any calendar year, including
awards granted and cash fees paid to such non-employee director, will not exceed (1) $750,000 in total value or (2) if such non-employee director is first appointed or elected to the
board of directors during such calendar year, $1,500,000 in total value, in each case, calculating the value of any equity awards based on the grant date fair value of such equity
awards for financial reporting purposes and excluding distributions from a deferred compensation program. Notwithstanding the prior sentence, a non-employee director who is a non-
executive chairperson may receive awards and cash compensation with a maximum aggregate value of $1,500,000 during each calendar year of service.
Plan Administration. The board of directors or a duly authorized committee thereof (the “plan administrator”) will administer the 2021 Plan. The board of directors may also
delegate to one or more of our officers the authority to (1) designate employees (other than officers) to receive specified stock awards and (2) determine the number of shares subject
to such stock awards. Under the 2021 Plan, the board of directors has the authority to determine award recipients, grant dates, the numbers and types of stock awards to be granted, the
applicable fair market value, and the provisions of each stock award, including the period of exercisability and the vesting schedule applicable to a stock award.
Stock Options. ISOs and NSOs are granted under stock option agreements adopted by the plan administrator. The plan administrator determines the exercise price for stock options,
within the terms and conditions of the 2021 Plan, provided that the exercise price of a stock option generally cannot be less than 100% of the fair market value of a Class A Share on
the date of grant. Options granted under the 2021 Plan vest at the rate specified in the stock option agreement as determined by the plan administrator.
The plan administrator determines the term of stock options granted under the 2021 Plan, up to a maximum of 10 years. Unless the terms of an optionholder’s stock option agreement
provide otherwise or as otherwise provided by the plan administrator, if an optionholder’s service relationship with us or any of our affiliates ceases for any reason other than
disability, death, or cause, the optionholder may generally exercise any vested options for a period of three months following the cessation of service. This period may be extended in


- 65 -


Table of Contents
the event that exercise of the option is prohibited by applicable securities laws. Unless the terms of an optionholder’s stock option agreement provide otherwise or as otherwise
provided by the plan administrator, if an optionholder’s service relationship with us or any of our affiliates ceases due to death or disability, or an optionholder dies within a certain
period following cessation of service, the optionholder or a beneficiary may generally exercise any vested options for a period of 12 months following the date of death or disability.
In the event of a termination for cause, options generally terminate upon the termination date. In no event may an option be exercised beyond the expiration of its term.
Acceptable consideration for the purchase of Class A Shares issued upon the exercise of a stock option will be determined by the plan administrator and may include (1) cash, check,
bank draft or money order, (2) a broker-assisted cashless exercise, (3) the tender of Class A Shares previously owned by the optionholder, (4) a net exercise of the option if it is an
NSO or (5) other legal consideration approved by the plan administrator.
Unless the plan administrator provides otherwise, options and stock appreciation rights generally are not transferable except by will or the laws of descent and distribution. Subject to
approval of the plan administrator or a duly authorized officer, an option may be transferred pursuant to a domestic relations order.
Tax Limitations on ISOs. The aggregate fair market value, determined at the time of grant, of Class A Shares with respect to ISOs that are exercisable for the first time by an award
holder during any calendar year under all of our stock plans may not exceed $100,000. Options or portions thereof that exceed such limit will generally be treated as NSOs. No ISO
may be granted to any person who, at the time of the grant, owns or is deemed to own stock possessing more than 10% of our total combined voting power or that of any of our parent
or subsidiary corporations unless (1) the option exercise price is at least 110% of the fair market value of the stock subject to the option on the date of grant and (2) the term of the ISO
does not exceed five years from the date of grant.
Restricted Stock Unit Awards. Restricted stock unit awards are granted under restricted stock unit award agreements adopted by the plan administrator. Restricted stock unit awards
may be granted in consideration for any form of legal consideration that may be acceptable to the plan administrator and permissible under applicable law. A restricted stock unit
award may be settled by cash, delivery of Class A Shares, a combination of cash and Class A Shares as determined by the plan administrator, or in any other form of consideration set
forth in the restricted stock unit award agreement. Additionally, dividend equivalents may be credited in respect of shares covered by a restricted stock unit award. Except as otherwise
provided in the applicable award agreement or by the plan administrator, restricted stock unit awards that have not vested will be forfeited once the participant’s continuous service
ends for any reason.
Restricted Stock Awards. Restricted stock awards are granted under restricted stock award agreements adopted by the plan administrator. A restricted stock award may be awarded in
consideration for cash, check, bank draft or money order, services to us, or any other form of legal consideration that may be acceptable to the plan administrator and permissible
under applicable law. The plan administrator determines the terms and conditions of restricted stock awards, including vesting and forfeiture terms. If a participant’s service
relationship with us ends for any reason, we may receive any or all of the Class A Shares held by the participant that have not vested as of the date the participant terminates service
with us through a forfeiture condition or a repurchase right.
Stock Appreciation Rights. Stock appreciation rights are granted under stock appreciation right agreements adopted by the plan administrator. The plan administrator determines the
strike price for a stock appreciation right, which generally cannot be less than 100% of the fair market value of Class A Shares on the date of grant. A stock appreciation right granted
under the 2021 Plan vests at the rate specified in the stock appreciation right agreement as determined by the plan administrator. Stock appreciation rights may be settled in cash or
Class A Shares or in any other form of payment, as determined by the plan administrator and specified in the stock appreciation right agreement.
The plan administrator determines the term of stock appreciation rights granted under the 2021 Plan, up to a maximum of 10  years. Unless the terms of a participant’s stock
appreciation rights agreement provide otherwise or as otherwise provided by the plan administrator, if a participant’s service relationship with us or any of our affiliates ceases for any
reason other than cause, disability, or death, the participant may generally exercise any vested stock appreciation right for a period of three months following the cessation of service.
This period may be further extended in the event that exercise of the stock appreciation right following such a termination of service is prohibited by applicable securities laws. Unless
the terms of a participant’s stock appreciation rights agreement provide otherwise or as otherwise provided by the plan administrator, if a participant’s service relationship with us or
any of our affiliates, ceases due to disability or death, or a participant dies within a certain period following cessation of service, the participant or a beneficiary may generally exercise
any vested stock appreciation right for a period of 12 months in the event of disability and 18 months in the event of death. In the event of a termination for cause, stock appreciation
rights generally terminate immediately upon the occurrence of the event


- 66 -


Table of Contents
giving rise to the termination of the individual for cause. In no event may a stock appreciation right be exercised beyond the expiration of its term.
Performance Awards. The 2021 Plan permits the grant of performance awards that may be settled in stock, cash or other property. Performance awards may be structured so that the
stock or cash will be issued or paid only following the achievement of certain pre-established performance goals during a designated performance period. Performance awards that are
settled in cash or other property are not required to be valued in whole or in part by reference to, or otherwise based on, Class A Shares.
Other Stock Awards. The plan administrator may grant other awards based in whole or in part by reference to Class A Shares. The plan administrator will set the number of shares
under the stock award (or cash equivalent) and all other terms and conditions of such awards.
Changes to Capital Structure. In the event there is a specified type of change in the capital structure of, such as a stock split, reverse stock split, or recapitalization, appropriate
adjustments will be made to (1) the class and maximum number of shares reserved for issuance under the 2021 Plan, (2) the class of shares by which the share reserve may increase
automatically each year, (3) the class and maximum number of shares that may be issued on the exercise of ISOs and (4) the class and number of shares and exercise price, strike
price, or purchase price, if applicable, of all outstanding stock awards.
Corporate Transactions. The following applies to stock awards under the 2021 Plan in the event of a corporate transaction (as defined in the 2021 Plan), unless otherwise provided in
a participant’s stock award agreement or other written agreement with us or one of our affiliates or unless otherwise expressly provided by the plan administrator at the time of grant.
In the event of a corporate transaction, any stock awards outstanding under the 2021 Plan may be assumed, continued or substituted for by any surviving or acquiring corporation (or
its parent company), and any reacquisition or repurchase rights held by us with respect to the stock award may be assigned to our successor (or its parent company). If the surviving or
acquiring corporation (or its parent company) does not assume, continue or substitute for such stock awards, then (i) with respect to any such stock awards that are held by participants
whose continuous service has not terminated prior to the effective time of the corporate transaction, or current participants, the vesting (and exercisability, if applicable) of such stock
awards will be accelerated in full (or, in the case of performance awards with multiple vesting levels depending on the level of performance, vesting will accelerate at 100% of the
target level) to a date prior to the effective time of the corporate transaction (contingent upon the effectiveness of the corporate transaction), and such stock awards will terminate if
not exercised (if applicable) at or prior to the effective time of the corporate transaction, and any reacquisition or repurchase rights held by us with respect to such stock awards will
lapse (contingent upon the effectiveness of the corporate transaction), and (ii) any such stock awards that are held by persons other than current participants will terminate if not
exercised (if applicable) prior to the effective time of the corporate transaction, except that any reacquisition or repurchase rights held by us with respect to such stock awards will not
terminate and may continue to be exercised notwithstanding the corporate transaction.
In the event a stock award will terminate if not exercised prior to the effective time of a corporate transaction, the plan administrator may provide, in its sole discretion, that the holder
of such stock award may not exercise such stock award but instead will receive a payment equal in value to the excess (if any) of (i) the per share amount payable to holders of
Class A Shares in connection with the corporate transaction, over (ii) any per share exercise price payable by such holder, if applicable.
Plan Amendment or Termination. The board of directors has the authority to amend, suspend, or terminate the 2021 Plan at any time, provided that such action does not materially
impair the existing rights of any participant without such participant’s written consent. Certain material amendments also require approval of our stockholders. No ISOs may be
granted after the tenth anniversary of the date our board of directors adopted the 2021 Plan. No stock awards may be granted under the 2021 Plan while it is suspended or after it is
terminated.
2021 Employee Stock Purchase Plan
In August 2021, our board of directors adopted the ESPP, and our stockholders approved the ESPP in September 2021. The ESPP became effective immediately upon the Closing.
Purpose. The purpose of the ESPP is to provide a means by which our eligible employees and certain designated companies may be given an opportunity to purchase Class A Shares
to assist us in retaining the services of eligible employees, to secure and retain the services of new employees and to provide incentives for such persons to exert maximum efforts for
our success.


- 67 -


Table of Contents
The ESPP includes two components: a 423 Component and a Non-423 Component. We intend the 423 Component to qualify as options issued under an “employee stock purchase
plan” as that term is defined in Section 423(b) of the Code. Except as otherwise provided in the ESPP or determined by the board of directors, the Non-423 Component will operate
and be administered in the same manner as the 423 Component.
Share Reserve. The maximum number of Class A Shares that may be issued under the ESPP will not exceed 4,969,059 shares. Additionally, the number of Class A Shares reserved for
issuance under the ESPP will automatically increase on January 1st of each year, beginning on January 1, 2022 and continuing through and including January 1, 2031, by the lesser of
(i) 1.0% of the total number of Class A Shares outstanding on December 31st of the preceding calendar year; (ii) 9,938,118 shares of Common Stock; or (iii) such lesser number of
shares of Archer as determined by the board of directors. Shares subject to purchase rights granted under the ESPP that terminate without having been exercised in full will not reduce
the number of shares available for issuance under the ESPP.
Administration. The board of directors, or a duly authorized committee thereof, will administer the ESPP.
Limitations. Our employees and the employees of any of our designated affiliates, as designated by the board of directors, will be eligible to participate in the ESPP, provided they
may have to satisfy one or more of the following service requirements before participating in the ESPP, as determined by the administrator: (1) customary employment with us or one
of our affiliates for more than 20 hours per week and five or more months per calendar year or (2) continuous employment with us or one of our affiliates for a minimum period of
time, not to exceed two years, prior to the first date of an offering. In addition, the board of directors may also exclude from participation in the ESPP or any offering, employees who
are “highly compensated employees” (within the meaning of Section 423(b)(4)(D) of the Code) or a subset of such highly compensated employees. An employee may not be granted
rights to purchase stock under the ESPP (i) if such employee immediately after the grant would own stock possessing 5% or more of the total combined voting power or value of all
classes of our stock or (ii) to the extent that such rights would accrue at a rate that exceeds $25,000 worth of our stock for each calendar year that the rights remain outstanding.
The ESPP is intended to qualify as an employee stock purchase plan under Section 423 of the Code. The administrator may specify offerings with a duration of not more than
27 months and may specify one or more shorter purchase periods within each offering. Each offering will have one or more purchase dates on which Class A Shares will be purchased
for the employees who are participating in the offering. The administrator, in its discretion, will determine the terms of offerings under the ESPP. The administrator has the discretion
to structure an offering so that if the fair market value of a share of our stock on any purchase date during the offering period is less than or equal to the fair market value of a share of
our stock on the first day of the offering period, then that offering will terminate immediately, and the participants in such terminated offering will be automatically enrolled in a new
offering that begins immediately after such purchase date.
A participant may not transfer purchase rights under the ESPP other than by will, the laws of descent and distribution, or as otherwise provided under the ESPP.
Payroll Deductions. The ESPP permits participants to purchase Class A Shares through payroll deductions. Unless otherwise determined by the administrator, the purchase price of the
shares will be 85% of the lower of the fair market value of Class A Shares on the first day of an offering or on the date of purchase. Participants may end their participation at any time
during an offering and will be paid their accrued contributions that have not yet been used to purchase shares, without interest. Participation ends automatically upon termination of
employment with us and our related corporations.
Withdrawal. Participants may withdraw from an offering by delivering a withdrawal form to us and terminating their contributions. Such withdrawal may be elected at any time prior
to the end of an offering, except as otherwise provided by the administrator. Upon such withdrawal, we will distribute to the employee his or her accumulated but unused contributions
without interest, and such employee’s right to participate in that offering will terminate. However, an employee’s withdrawal from an offering does not affect such employee’s
eligibility to participate in any other offerings under the ESPP.
Termination of Employment. A participant’s rights under any offering under the ESPP will terminate immediately if the participant either (i) is no longer employed by us or any of our
parent or subsidiary companies (subject to any post-employment participation period required by law) or (ii) is otherwise no longer eligible to participate. In such event, we will
distribute to the participant his or her accumulated but unused contributions, without interest.
Corporate Transactions. In the event of certain specified significant corporate transactions, such as a merger or change in control, a successor corporation may assume, continue, or
substitute each outstanding purchase right. If the successor corporation does not assume,


- 68 -


Table of Contents
continue, or substitute for the outstanding purchase rights, the offering in progress will be shortened and a new purchase date will be set. The participants’ purchase rights will be
exercised on the new purchase date and such purchase rights will terminate immediately thereafter.
Amendment and Termination. The board of directors has the authority to amend, suspend, or terminate the ESPP, at any time and for any reason, provided certain types of amendments
will require the approval of our stockholders. Any benefits, privileges, entitlements and obligations under any outstanding purchase rights granted before an amendment, suspension or
termination of the ESPP will not be materially impaired by any such amendment, suspension or termination except (i) with the consent of the person to whom such purchase rights
were granted, (ii) as necessary to facilitate compliance with any laws, listing requirements, or governmental regulations, or (iii) as necessary to obtain or maintain favorable tax,
listing, or regulatory treatment. The ESPP will remain in effect until terminated by the board of directors in accordance with the terms of the ESPP.
2019 Equity Incentive Plan
The following describes the material terms of the 2019 Plan which was adopted by the board of directors and approved by the stockholders of Legacy Archer in September 2021.
Stock Awards. The 2019 Plan provides for the grant of ISOs, NSOs and restricted stock awards, or collectively, stock awards. ISOs may be granted only to our employees and the
employees of our affiliates. All other awards may be granted to our employees, directors and consultants and the employees and consultants of our affiliates. We have granted stock
options and restricted stock awards under the 2019 Plan.
Share Reserve. Subject to certain capitalization adjustments, the aggregate number of shares of our Common Stock that may be issued pursuant to stock awards under the 2019 Plan is
15,689,294 shares, all of which may be granted as ISOs. If a stock award granted under the 2019 Plan expires or otherwise terminates without being exercised in full, or is surrendered
pursuant to an option exchange program, the shares of our Common Stock not acquired pursuant to the stock award again will become available for subsequent issuance under the
2019 Plan. In addition, the following types of shares of our Common Stock under the 2019 Plan may become available for the grant of new stock awards under the 2019 Plan: (1)
shares that are forfeited to or repurchased by us prior to becoming fully vested; (2) shares withheld to satisfy withholding taxes; or (3) shares used to pay the exercise or purchase
price of a stock award.
Administration. Our board of directors, or a duly authorized committee thereof, has the authority to administer the 2019 Plan. Our board of directors may also delegate to one or more
of our officers the authority to (1) designate employees (other than other officers) to be recipients of certain stock awards, and (2) determine the number of shares of Common Stock to
be subject to such stock awards. Subject to the terms of the 2019 Plan, the plan administrator determines the award recipients, dates of grant, the numbers and types of stock awards to
be granted and the applicable fair market value and the provisions of the stock awards, including the period of their exercisability, the vesting schedule applicable to a stock award and
any repurchase rights that may apply.
The plan administrator has the authority to modify outstanding awards, including reducing the exercise, purchase or strike price of any outstanding stock award, canceling any
outstanding stock award in exchange for new stock awards, cash or other consideration or taking any other action that is treated as a repricing under generally accepted accounting
principles, with the consent of any adversely affected participant.
Stock Options. ISOs and NSOs are granted pursuant to stock option agreements adopted by the plan administrator. The plan administrator determines the exercise price for a stock
option, provided that the exercise price of a stock option generally cannot be less than 100% of the fair market value of our Common Stock on the date of grant. Options granted under
the 2019 Plan vest at the rate specified by the plan administrator.
The plan administrator determines the term of stock options granted under the 2019 Plan, up to a maximum of ten years. In no event may an option be exercised beyond the expiration
of its term.
Acceptable consideration for the purchase of Common Stock issued upon the exercise of a stock option will be determined by the plan administrator and may include (1) cash; (2) a
check; (3) a promissory note with such recourse, interest, security and redemption provisions as the plan administrator determines to be appropriate; (4) a cancellation of indebtedness;
(5) a broker-assisted cashless exercise; (6) the tender of shares of our Common Stock previously owned by the optionholder; and, (7) other legal consideration approved by the plan
administrator.


- 69 -


Table of Contents
- 70 -
Tax Limitations on Incentive Stock Options. The aggregate fair market value, determined at the time of grant, of our Common Stock with respect to ISOs that are exercisable for the
first time by an optionholder during any calendar year under all of our stock plans may not exceed $100,000. Options or portions thereof that exceed such limit will generally be
treated as NSOs. No ISO may be granted to any person who, at the time of the grant, owns or is deemed to own stock possessing more than 10% of our total combined voting power
or that of any of our affiliates unless (1) the option exercise price is at least 110% of the fair market value of the stock subject to the option on the date of grant and (2) the term of the
ISO does not exceed five years from the date of grant.
Restricted Stock Awards. Restricted stock awards are granted pursuant to restricted stock award agreements adopted by the plan administrator. Except as otherwise provided in the
applicable award agreement, restricted stock awards that have not vested may be forfeited or repurchased by us upon the participant’s cessation of continuous service for any reason.
Changes to Capital Structure. In the event that there is a specified type of change in our capital structure, such as a stock split or recapitalization, appropriate adjustments will be made
to (1) the numbers and class of shares or other stock or securities: (x) available for future stock awards under the 2019 Plan and (y) covered by each outstanding award, (2) the
exercise price per share of each such outstanding option, and (3) any repurchase price per share applicable to shares issued pursuant to any award.
Corporate Transactions. The 2019 Plan provides that in the event of certain specified significant corporate transactions set forth in the 2019 Plan, unless otherwise provided in an
award agreement or other written agreement between Archer and the award holder, the plan administrator may take one or more of the following actions with respect to such stock
awards: (1) arrange for the continuation of such outstanding stock awards by Archer (if Archer is the surviving corporation); (2) arrange for the assumption of such outstanding stock
awards by the surviving corporation or its parent; (3) arrange for the substitution by the surviving corporation or its parent of new options or equity awards for such stock awards; (4)
cancel or arrange for the cancellation of such stock awards in exchange for a payment to the participants equal to the excess of, if any, of the fair market value of the shares subject to
such awards as of the closing date of such corporate transaction over the exercise price or purchase price paid or to be paid for the shares subject to the stock awards; or (5) cancel or
arrange for the cancellation of any outstanding options or an outstanding right to purchase restricted stock, in either case, for no consideration. Any escrow, holdback, earnout or
similar provisions agreed to pursuant to, or in connection with, a corporate transaction may apply to any payment or other right a participant may be entitled to under the 2019 Plan, if
any, to the same extent and in the same manner as the provisions apply to holders of Archer’s common stock. The plan administrator is not obligated to treat all stock awards or
portions thereof in the same manner, and the plan administrator may take different actions with respect to the vested and unvested portions of a stock award.
Change in Control. Under the 2019 Plan, a change of control is generally (1) a sale of all or substantially all of our assets other than to an Excluded Entity (as defined below), (2) a
merger, consolidation or other capital reorganization or business combination transaction of Archer with or into another corporation, limited liability company or other entity other
than an Excluded Entity, or (3) the consummation of a transaction, or series of related transactions, in which any person becomes the beneficial owner, directly or indirectly, of all of
our then outstanding voting securities. An “Excluded Entity” means a corporation or other entity of which the holders of our voting capital stock outstanding immediately prior to such
transaction are the direct or indirect holders of voting securities representing at least a majority of the votes entitled to be cast by all of such corporation’s or other entity’s voting
securities outstanding immediately after such transaction.
Transferability. A participant generally may not transfer stock awards under the 2019 Plan other than by will, the laws of descent and distribution or as otherwise provided under the
2019 Plan.
Amendment and Termination. Our board of directors has the authority to amend or terminate the 2019 Plan, provided that, with certain exceptions, such action does not materially and
adversely impair the existing rights of any participant without such participant’s written consent. Certain material amendments also require the approval of our stockholders. No
options may be granted after the tenth anniversary of the date our board of directors adopted the 2019 Plan. No stock awards may be granted under the 2019 Plan while it is suspended
or terminated. The 2019 Plan terminated in connection with the Business Combination.
Following the Business Combination, we assumed the outstanding stock options under the 2019 Plan and converted such stock options into options to purchase our Common Stock.
Such stock options will continue to be governed by the terms of the 2019 Plan and the stock option agreements thereunder, until such outstanding options are exercised or until they
terminate or expire by their terms. No further awards shall be made under the 2019 Plan following the effectiveness of the 2021 Plan.




Table of Contents
- 71 -
401(k) Plan
We provide a retirement savings plan for the benefit of our employees, including our named executive officers. The plan is intended to qualify as a tax-qualified 401(k) plan so that
contributions to the 401(k) plan, and income earned on such contributions, are not taxable to participants until withdrawn or distributed from the 401(k) plan (except in the case of
contributions under the 401(k) plan designated as Roth contributions). The 401(k) plan provides that each participant may contribute up to an annual statutory limit. Participants who
are at least 50 years old can also contribute additional amounts based on statutory limits for “catch-up” contributions. Under the 401(k) plan, each employee is fully vested in his or
her deferred salary contributions. Employee contributions are held and invested by the plan’s trustee as directed by participants.
Rule 10b5-1 Sales Plans
Our directors and executive officers may adopt written plans, known as Rule 10b5-1 plans, in which they will contract with a broker to buy or sell shares of Common Stock on a
periodic basis. Under a Rule 10b5-1 plan, a broker executes trades pursuant to parameters established by the director or executive officer when entering into the plan, without further
direction from them. The director or executive officer may amend a Rule 10b5-1 plan in some circumstances and may terminate a plan at any time. Our directors and executive
officers also may buy or sell additional shares outside of a Rule 10b5-1 plan when they are not in possession of material nonpublic information, subject to compliance with the terms
of our insider trading policy and the lock-up restrictions set forth in that certain Registration Rights Agreement such persons have entered into in connection with the Business
Combination. For more information regarding such lock-up agreements, please see the section titled “Certain Relationships and Related Party Transactions — Archer Related
Agreements — Registration Rights Agreements”.


Table of Contents
CERTAIN RELATIONSHIPS AND RELATED PERSON TRANSACTIONS
Other than compensation arrangements for our directors and executive officers, which are described elsewhere in this prospectus, below is a description of transactions since our
inception on October 16, 2018 to which Atlas or Legacy Archer were a party or will be a party, in which:
●
the amounts involved exceeded or will exceed $120,000; and
●
any of our directors, executive officers or holders of more than 5% of Legacy Archer’s capital stock, or any member of the immediate family of, or person sharing the
household with, the foregoing persons, had or will have a direct or indirect material interest.
Legacy Archer Related Party Transactions
Founder Convertible Promissory Note
In October 2019, Legacy Archer issued and sold convertible promissory notes with an aggregate principal amount of $600,570 with an interest rate of 5% per annum (the “Founder
Notes”) pursuant to a note purchase agreement. In November 2019, Legacy Archer held the initial closing of its Series Seed Preferred Stock financing (as described below), which
triggered the automatic conversion of the outstanding principal plus accrued interest on such notes into shares of Series Seed Preferred Stock.
The participants in the convertible note financing included entities affiliated with members of Legacy Archer’s board of directors. The following table sets forth the aggregate
principal amount of the Founder Notes issued to such parties:
Noteholders
    
Aggregate
Principal
Amount
Capri Growth LLC(1)
$
300,285
Hight Drive Growth LLC(2)
300,285
(1) Adam Goldstein, co-CEO and co-Chairman of our board of directors, is a managing member of Capri Growth LLC, a beneficial owner of greater than 5% of our capital stock.
(2) Brett Adcock, co-CEO and co-Chairman of our board of directors, is a managing member of Hight Drive Growth LLC, a beneficial owner of greater than 5% of our capital stock.
Series Seed Preferred Stock Financing
Between November 2019 to December 2019, Legacy Archer issued and sold an aggregate of 16,363,635 shares of its Series Seed Preferred Stock at a purchase price of $0.33 per
share, for an aggregate purchase price of $5.4 million, and issued an aggregate of 1,829,880 shares of Legacy Archer’s Series Seed Preferred Stock upon conversion of the Founder
Notes. Each share of Legacy Archer’s Series Seed Preferred Stock converted into one share of Legacy Archer’s common stock in connection with the Closing.
The table below sets forth the number of shares of Series Seed Preferred Stock purchased by Legacy Archer’s related parties:
Stockholder
    
Shares of
Series Seed
Preferred Stock
    
Total Cash
Purchase
Price
    
Principal &
Interest
Cancelled
Capri Growth LLC(1)
914,940
$
—
$
301,930
Hight Drive Growth LLC(2)
914,940
—
301,930
Marc Lore
15,151,515
5,000,000
—
Adam Goldstein(1)
606,060
200,000
—
Brett Adcock(2)
606,060
200,000
—


- 72 -
(1) Adam Goldstein, co-CEO and co-Chairman of our board of directors, is a managing member of Capri Growth LLC, a beneficial owner of greater than 5% of our capital stock.


Table of Contents
(2) Brett Adcock, co-CEO and co-Chairman of our board of directors, is a managing member of Hight Drive Growth LLC, a beneficial owner of greater than 5% of our capital stock.
2019 Convertible Promissory Note
Between November 2019 and December 2019, Legacy Archer issued and sold convertible promissory notes with an aggregate principal amount of $5.0 million and an interest rate of
10% per annum (the “2019 Notes”) pursuant to a note purchase agreement. In July 2020, Legacy Archer held the initial closing of its Series A Preferred Stock financing (as described
below), in which holders of all 2019 Notes elected to convert the outstanding principal plus accrued interest on the 2019 Notes into shares of Series A Preferred Stock.
The participants in the convertible note financing included members of our board of directors and an owner of greater than 5% of Legacy Archer’s capital stock. The following table
sets forth the aggregate principal amount of the 2019 Notes issued to such parties:
Noteholders
    
Aggregate
Principal
Amount
Marc Lore
$
3,000,000
Adam Goldstein(1)
1,000,000
Brett Adcock(2)
1,000,000
(1) Adam Goldstein is co-CEO and co-Chairman of our board of directors.
(2) Brett Adcock is co-CEO and co-Chairman of our board of directors.
Series A Preferred Stock Financing
Between July 2020 and October 2020, Legacy Archer issued and sold an aggregate of 41,872,399 shares of its Series A Preferred Stock at a purchase price of $1.2046 per share, for an
aggregate purchase price of $50.4 million, and issued an aggregate of 4,395,023 shares of Legacy Archer’s Series A Preferred Stock upon conversion of the 2019 Notes. Each share of
Legacy Archer’s Series A Preferred Stock converted into one share of Legacy Archer’s common stock in connection with the Closing.
The table below sets forth the number of shares of Legacy Archer Series A Preferred Stock purchased by Legacy Archer’s related parties:
Stockholder
    
Shares of
Series A
Preferred Stock
    
Total Cash
Purchase
Price
    
Principal &
Interest
Cancelled
 
Capri Growth LLC(1)
1,660,302
$
2,000,000
—
Hight Drive Growth LLC(2)
1,660,302
2,000,000
—
Marc Lore
5,675,959
6,837,260
—
2,633,739
—
$
3,172,603
Adam Goldstein
880,642
—
1,060,822
Brett Adcock
880,642
—
1,060,822
TCP Archer Aviation LLC
7,702,468
9,278,392
—
(1) Adam Goldstein, co-CEO and co-Chairman of our board of directors, is a managing member of Capri Growth LLC, a beneficial owner of greater than 5% of our capital stock.
(2) Brett Adcock, co-CEO and co-Chairman of our board of directors, is a managing member of High Drive Growth LLC, a beneficial owner of greater than 5% of our capital stock.
Loans to Executive Officers


- 73 -
In November  2020, Legacy Archer entered into partial recourse promissory note arrangements with Mr. Adcock and Mr.  Goldstein. The aggregate principal amount of each
promissory note was $396,827 and bore interest at 0.38% per annum. All of the principal and interest under the note was repaid upon the Closing.


Table of Contents
Loans to the Sponsor
Atlas entered into a promissory note with the Sponsor effective June 25, 2021, pursuant to which Atlas borrowed an aggregate amount of $300,000, which was used to finance
transaction costs in connection with the Business Combination. The loan was non-interest bearing and paid off in connection with the Business Combination.
Business Combination Private Placement
In connection with the execution of the Business Combination Agreement, Subscription Agreements were entered into with certain investors, pursuant to which each investor agreed
to purchase an aggregate of 60,000,000 PIPE Shares, for a purchase price of $10.00 per share and an aggregate purchase price of $600.0 million, in the PIPE Financing. UAV
purchased 2,500,000 PIPE Shares for an aggregate purchase price of $25.0 million. Marc Lore purchased 1,000,000 PIPE Shares for an aggregate purchase price of $10.0 million.
Brett Adcock and Adam Goldstein, Archer’s Co-Chief Executive Officers, each agreed to purchase 100,000 PIPE Shares for an aggregate purchase price of $1,000,000, respectively.
Other Transactions
Legacy Archer entered into employment agreements with its executive officers. For more information regarding employment agreements with our named executive officers, see the
section titled “Executive Compensation of Archer — Employment Arrangements with Executive Officers.”
Legacy Archer has also granted stock options to its executive officers. For a description of these equity awards, see the section titled “Executive Compensation of Archer.”
Transaction Support Agreements
In February 2021, Atlas, Legacy Archer and certain Legacy Archer stockholders, including holders affiliated with members of the Legacy Archer’s board of directors and beneficial
owners of greater than 5% of Legacy Archer’s capital stock, entered into the Transaction Support Agreements, whereby such Archer stockholders agreed to, among other things, vote
all of their shares of Legacy Archer’s capital stock in favor of the approval and adoption of the transactions contemplated by the Business Combination Agreement. Additionally, such
stockholders agreed, among other things, not to transfer any of their shares of Legacy Archer common stock and Legacy Archer preferred stock (or enter into any arrangement with
respect thereto), subject to certain customary exceptions, or enter into any voting arrangement that is inconsistent with the Transaction Support Agreement.
Indemnification Agreements
Legacy Archer has entered into indemnification agreements with each of its directors and officers. The indemnification agreements require Legacy Archer to indemnify its directors
and officers to the fullest extent permitted by Delaware law.
Archer Related Agreements
Registration Rights Agreement
In connection with the Closing of the Business Combination, certain holders of our capital stock entered into that certain Registration Rights Agreement. Pursuant to the Registration
Rights Agreement, the holders of (i) the Sponsor Shares, (ii) the Private Warrants and the Class A Shares underlying such Private Warrants, (iii) the Private Warrants that may be
issued upon conversion of working capital loans, (iv) the shares underlying the private placement warrants previously issued to United Airlines and assumed by us in connection with
the Business Combination, and (v) the Class A Shares issued or issuable to holders of greater than 2% of Legacy Archer common stock on a fully-diluted basis as of the Closing Date,
have registration rights to require us to register a sale of any of our securities held by them. The Registration Rights Agreement also provides that neither the Sponsor nor any person
who was a holder of greater than 2% of Legacy Archer Common Stock on a fully-diluted basis on the Closing Date shall transfer certain of its registrable securities until the earlier of
(i) 180 days after the completion of the Business Combination, and (ii) the date subsequent to the Business Combination on which we complete a liquidation, merger, capital stock
exchange, reorganization or other similar transaction that results in all of our stockholders having the right to exchange their shares of Common Stock for cash, securities or other
property. The Sponsor has also agreed not to transfer any Private Warrants (or any shares issued or issuable upon the exercise of such Private Warrants) until 30 days after Closing.


- 74 -


Table of Contents
Related Person Transactions Policy Following the Business Combination
Upon the consummation of the Business Combination, our board of directors adopted a written related person transactions policy that sets forth our policies and procedures regarding
the identification, review, consideration and oversight of “related person transactions.” For purposes of our policy only, a “related person transaction” is a transaction, arrangement or
relationship (or any series of similar transactions, arrangements or relationships) in which we or any of our subsidiaries are participants involving an amount that exceeds $120,000,
including purchases of goods or services by or from the related person or entities in which the related person has a material interest, indebtedness and guarantees of indebtedness,
subject to certain exceptions set forth in Item 404 of Regulation S-K under the Securities Act.
Transactions involving compensation for services provided to us as an employee, consultant or director will not be considered related person transactions under this policy. A related
person is any executive officer, director, nominee to become a director or a holder of more than 5% of any class of our voting securities (including our Common Stock), including any
of their immediate family members and affiliates, including entities owned or controlled by such persons.
Under the policy, the related person in question or, in the case of transactions with a holder of more than 5% of any class of our voting securities, an officer with knowledge of a
proposed transaction, must present information regarding the proposed related person transaction to our audit committee (or, where review by our audit committee would be
inappropriate, to another independent body of our board of directors) for review. To identify related person transactions in advance, we will rely on information supplied by our
executive officers, directors and certain significant stockholders. In considering related person transactions, our audit committee will take into account the relevant available facts and
circumstances, which may include, but are not limited to:
●
the risks, costs, and benefits to us;
●
the impact on a director’s independence in the event the related person is a director, immediate family member of a director or an entity with which a director is affiliated;
●
the extent of the related person’s interest in the transaction;
●
the purpose and terms of the transaction;
●
management’s recommendation with respect to the proposed related person transaction;
●
the availability of other sources for comparable services or products; and
●
whether the transaction is on terms comparable to those that could be obtained in an arm’s length transaction.
Our audit committee will approve only those transactions that it determines are fair to us and in our best interests. All of the transactions described above were entered into prior to the
adoption of such policy.
Indemnification Agreements
Our Certificate of Incorporation contains provisions limiting the liability of our executive officers and directors, and our Bylaws provide that we will indemnify each of our executive
officers and directors to the fullest extent permitted under Delaware law. Our Certificate of Incorporation and our Bylaws also provide our board of directors with discretion to
indemnify certain key employees when determined appropriate by our board of directors.
We have entered into indemnification agreements with all of our directors and executive officers. The indemnification agreements provide that we will indemnify each of our
directors, executive officers, and other key employees against any and all expenses incurred by such director, executive officer, or other key employee because of his or her status as
one of our directors, executive officers, or other key employees, to the fullest extent permitted by Delaware law, our Certificate of Incorporation and our Bylaws. In addition, the
indemnification agreements provide that, to the fullest extent permitted by Delaware law, we will advance all expenses incurred by our directors, executive officers, and other key


- 75 -
employees in connection with a legal proceeding involving his or her status as a director, executive officer, or key employee. For more information regarding these indemnification
agreements, see the section entitled “Description of Securities”.


Table of Contents
- 76 -
Atlas Related Agreements
The Sponsor holds 12,500,000 Sponsor Shares and 8,000,000 Private Warrants. Each Private Warrant entitles the holder to purchase one Class A Share at $11.50 per share. The Private
Warrants (including the Class A Shares issuable upon exercise of the Private Warrants) may not, subject to certain limited exceptions, be transferred, assigned, or sold until 30 days
after Closing.
Prior to the Closing, Atlas utilized office space at 399 Park Ave., New York, New York 10022 rented from the Sponsor. Atlas paid the Sponsor $10,000 per month for office space,
secretarial and administrative services provided to members of the management team. Following the Closing, Atlas ceased paying these monthly fees.
Except as otherwise disclosed in this prospectus, no compensation of any kind, including finder’s and consulting fees, was paid to the Sponsor, executive officers and directors, or any
of their respective affiliates, for services rendered prior to or in connection with the completion of the Business Combination. However, these individuals were reimbursed for any out-
of-pocket expenses incurred in connection with activities on Atlas’ behalf such as identifying potential target businesses and performing due diligence on suitable business
combinations.
Atlas engaged Moelis & Company LLC as a financial advisor in connection with the Business Combination and paid a customary financial advisory fee in an amount that constitutes
a market standard financial advisory fee for comparable transactions.


Table of Contents
PRINCIPAL STOCKHOLDERS
The following table sets forth information regarding the beneficial ownership of shares of our Common Stock as of September 16, 2021 by:
·
each person known by us to be the beneficial owner of more than 5% of any class of our Common Stock;
·
each of our named executive officers and directors; and
·
all of our executive officers and directors as a group.
Beneficial ownership is determined according to the rules of the SEC, which generally provide that a person has beneficial ownership of a security if he, she or it possesses sole or
shared voting or investment power over that security, including options, warrants and restricted stock units that are currently exercisable or vested or that will become exercisable or
vest within 60 days. This table is based upon information supplied by officers, directors and principal stockholders and Schedules 13G or 13D filed with the SEC. Unless otherwise
indicated in the footnotes to this table and subject to community property laws where applicable, we believe that all persons named in the table have sole voting and investment power
with respect to all shares of Common Stock beneficially owned by them. The beneficial ownership percentages set forth in the table below are based on 156,991,960 shares of Class A
Shares and 83,641,594 Class B Shares issued and outstanding as of September 16, 2021.
    
Class A
Class B
 
Name of Beneficial Owner(1)
Number of
Shares
%
Number of
Shares
    
%
  
% of
Combined
Voting
Power
5% or Greater Stockholders:
    
    
    
    
Atlas Crest Investment LLC(2)
20,500,000
13.1 %  
—
*
2.1 %
Marc Lore(3)
25,925,286
16.5
—
*
2.6
United Airlines Ventures, Ltd.(4)
9,076,047
5.7
—
*
*
Executive Officers and Directors:
Brett Adcock
37,017,931(5)
19.1
36,917,931(6)
44.1 %  
37.2
Adam Goldstein
37,017,931(7)
19.1
36,917,931(8)
44.1
37.2
Ben Lu
—
*
—
*
*
Andy Missan
—
*
—
*
*
Tom Muniz
1,551,816
*
—
*
*
Deborah Diaz
—
*
—
*
*
Fred Diaz
—
*
—
*
*
Oscar Munoz
250,000
*
—
*
*
Maria Pinelli
—
*
—
*
*
Michael Spellacy(9)
90,000
*
—
*
*
All current directors and executive officers as a group (10
persons)(10)
75,927,678
32.9
73,835,862
88.3
74.5
*
Less than one percent.
(1) Unless otherwise indicated, the business address of each of the following is 1880 Embarcadero Road, Palo Alto, CA 94303.
(2) Includes (i) 12,500,000 Class A Shares and (ii) 8,000,000 Private Warrants. Atlas Crest Investment LLC is the record holder of the shares reported herein and its address is c/o
Atlas Crest Investment Corp., 399 Park Avenue, 5th Floor, New York, NY 10022.


- 77 -
(3) Marc Lore is the record holder of the shares reported herein and his address is 443 Greenwich Street, PHA, New York, NY 10013.
(4) United Airlines Ventures, Ltd. is the record holder of the shares reported herein and its address is 233 S. Wacker Drive, Chicago, IL 60606.
(5) Consists of (i) 100,000 Class A Shares held by Hight Drive Growth LLC, (ii) 27,756,278 Class B Shares held by Hight Drive Growth LLC, and (iii) 9,161,653 Class B Shares
held by Mr. Adcock. Class B Shares may be converted into Class A Shares, at the


Table of Contents
- 78 -
discretion of the holder, on a one-for-one basis within 60 days. Mr. Adcock is a managing member of Hight Growth LLC. Brett Adcock has sole voting and dispositive power
with respect to these shares.
(6) Consists of (i) 27,756,278 Class B Shares held by Hight Drive Growth LLC and (ii) 9,161,653 Class B Shares held by Mr. Adcock. Mr. Adcock is a managing member of Hight
Growth LLC. Brett Adcock has sole voting and dispositive power with respect to these shares.
(7) Consists of (i) 100,000 Class A Shares held by Capri Growth LLC, (ii) 27,756,278 Class B Shares held by Capri Growth LLC, and (iii) 9,161,653 Class B Shares held by Mr.
Goldstein. Class B Shares may be converted into Class A Shares, at the discretion of the holder, on a one-for-one basis within 60 days. Mr. Goldstein is a managing member of
Capri Growth LLC. Adam Goldstein has sole voting and dispositive power with respect to these shares.
(8) Consists of (i) 27,756,278 Class B Shares held by Capri Growth LLC and (ii) 9,161,653 Class B Shares held by Mr. Goldstein. Mr. Goldstein is a managing member of Capri
Growth LLC. Adam Goldstein has sole voting and dispositive power with respect to these shares.
(9) Mr. Spellacy is currently a member of our board of directors and was a member of the Atlas board of directors prior to the Business Combination. Mr. Spellacy is also a member
of the Sponsor.
(10)Includes the shares described in notes (5) to (9).


Table of Contents
- 79 -
SELLING SECURITYHOLDERS
This prospectus relates to the resale by the selling securityholders from time to time of: (i) up to 165,425,700 Class A Shares, consisting of (a) up to 12,500,000 Class A Shares issued
as Sponsor Shares, (b) 61,512,500 Class A Shares, consisting of 60,000,000 PIPE Shares and 1,512,500 Class A Shares issued to satisfy certain fees related to the Business
Combination and PIPE Financing, (c) up to 8,732,280 Class A Shares issuable upon the exercise of the Private Warrants, and (d) 82,680,920 Class A Shares pursuant to the
Registration Rights Agreement; and (ii) up to 8,732,280 Private Warrants. We are required to file this registration statement in accordance with our obligations set forth in the
Registration Rights Agreement as more fully described in “Certain Relationships and Related Party Transactions – Archer Related Agreements – Registration Rights Agreements”.
The selling securityholders may from time to time offer and sell some, all or none of their shares of Class A Common Stock, Private Warrants and Public Warrants set forth below
pursuant to this prospectus and any accompanying prospectus supplement. As used in this prospectus, the term “selling securityholders” includes the persons listed in the table below,
together with any additional selling securityholders listed in a subsequent amendment to this prospectus, and their pledgees, donees, transferees, assignees, successors, designees and
others who later come to hold any of the selling securityholders’ interests in the Class A Common Stock, Private Warrants or Public Warrants other than through a public sale.
Certain securityholders are subject to lock-up restrictions pursuant to the Registration Rights Agreement, which provides that such securityholders will not transfer such shares until
the earlier of (i) 180 days after the completion of the Business Combination, and (ii) the date subsequent to the Business Combination on which we complete a liquidation, merger,
capital stock exchange, reorganization or other similar transaction that results in all of our stockholders having the right to exchange their shares of Common Stock for cash, securities
or other property. The Sponsor has also agreed not to transfer any of its Private Warrants (or any shares issued or issuable upon the exercise of such Private Warrants) until 30 days
after Closing. In addition, 1,875,000 shares of the 12,500,000 Sponsor Shares remain subject to certain vesting and forfeiture conditions, set forth in the Sponsor Letter Agreement.
These 1,875,000 Sponsor Shares shall vest (and shall not be subject to forfeiture) upon the occurrence of the Sponsor Earn Out Trigger Event, which is defined as the first date on
which our volume weighted average price of the Class A Common Stock over any 10 trading days within the preceding 20 trading day period within three years from the Closing Date
is greater than or equal to $12.00. If this trigger event does not occur during the period beginning on the Closing Date and ending on the three year anniversary of the Closing Date,
the 1,875,000 Sponsor Shares will not vest and shall be deemed transferred by the forfeiting holder to us and shall be cancelled and cease to exist.
Except as set forth in the footnotes below, the following table sets forth, based on written representations from the selling securityholders, certain information as of the date hereof
regarding the beneficial ownership of our Class A Common Stock and Warrants by the selling securityholders and the shares of Class A Common Stock and Warrants being offered by
the selling securityholders. For the avoidance of doubt, the table below also includes Sponsor Shares and shares of Class A Common Stock issued upon the exercise of options not yet
vested. The applicable percentage ownership of Class A Common Stock is based on 156,991,960 Class A Shares outstanding as of the Closing Date. Information with respect to shares
of Class A Common Stock, the Private Warrants and the Public Warrants owned beneficially after the offering assumes the sale of all of the shares of Class A Common Stock, Private
Warrants or Public Warrants registered hereby.
We have determined beneficial ownership in accordance with the rules of the SEC. Except as indicated by the footnotes below, we believe, based on the information furnished to us,
that the selling securityholders have sole voting and investment power with respect to all shares of Common Stock and Warrants that they beneficially own, subject to applicable
community property laws. Except as otherwise described below, based on the information provided to us by the selling securityholders, no selling securityholder is a broker-dealer or
an affiliate of a broker dealer.
Except as set forth in the footnotes below, (i) the following table does not include up to 16,666,667 Class A Shares issuable upon exercise of the Public Warrants and (ii) the address of
each selling securityholder is 1880 Embarcadero Road, Palo Alto, CA 94303, unless stated otherwise.
Please see the section titled “Plan of Distribution” for further information regarding the selling securityholder’s method of distributing these shares.


Table of Contents
    
Shares of Class A Common Stock
Warrants to Purchase Class A Common Stock
 
Name of Selling Securityholders
    
Number
Beneficially
Owned
Prior to
Offering
    
Number
Registered
for Sale
Hereby
    
Number
Beneficially
Owned
After
Offering
    
Percent
Owned
After
Offering
    
Number
Beneficially
Owned
Prior to
Offering
    
Number
Registered 
for Sale
Hereby
    
Number
Beneficially
Owned
After
Offering
    
Percent
Owned
After
Offering
PIPE Investors
40 North Latitude Master Fund Ltd.(1)
2,000,000
2,000,000
—
—
—
—
—
—
AI Atlas Holdings LLC(2)
2,000,000
2,000,000
—
—
—
—
—
—
Alyeska Master Fund, L.P.(3)
500,000
500,000
—
—
—
—
—
—
American Funds Insurance Series - Growth Fund(4)
446,251
446,251
—
—
—
—
—
—
Arena Capital Fund, LP - Series 3(5)
100,000
100,000
—
—
—
—
—
—
Arena Capital Fund, LP - Series 5(5)
100,000
100,000
—
—
—
—
—
—
Arena Capital Fund, LP - Series 9(5)
100,000
100,000
—
—
—
—
—
—
Baron Partners Fund(6)
1,502,000
500,000
1,002,000
*
—
—
—
—
BMO Nesbitt Burns Inc. ITF Polar Long/Short
Master Fund(7)
756,328
756,328
—
—
—
—
—
—
BMO Nesbitt Burns Inc. ITF Polar Multi-Strategy
Master Fund(7)
543,672
543,672
—
—
—
—
—
—
BMO Nesbitt Burns ITF MMCAP International
Inc. SPC for and on behalf of MMCAP Master
Segregated Portfolio(8)
500,000
500,000
—
—
—
—
—
—
Broadscale AA Investors LP(9)
500,000
500,000
—
—
—
—
—
—
Capital Group Growth Fund of America Trust (US)
(10)
27,796
27,796
—
—
—
—
—
—
Funds associated with Putnam Investment
Management, LLC(11)
300,000
300,000
—
—
—
—
—
—
CVI Investments, Inc.(12)
1,755,857
1,000,000
755,857
*
—
—
—
—
D. E. Shaw Oculus Portfolios, L.L.C.(13)
187,500
187,500
—
—
—
—
—
—
D. E. Shaw Valence Portfolios, L.L.C.(14)
562,500
562,500
—
—
—
—
—
—
David Fox(15)
37,500
37,500
—
—
—
—
—
—
Decca SF, L.P.(16)
500,000
500,000
—
—
—
—
—
—
Deep Field Opportunities Fund, L.P.(17)
400,000
400,000
—
—
—
—
—
—
Eileen K. Murray(18)
75,000
75,000
—
—
—
—
—
—
Empyrean Capital Overseas Master Fund, Ltd.(19)
200,000
200,000
—
—
—
—
—
—
Entities affiliated with Monashee Investment
Management LLC(20)
200,000
200,000
—
—
—
—
—
—
Evolution VCP 18X LLC(21)
100,000
100,000
—
—
—
—
—
—
Exor Seeds, L(22)
1,000,000
1,000,000
—
—
—
—
—
—
Falcon 2021 LLC(23)
300,000
300,000
—
—
—
—
—
—
FCA Italy S.p.A(24)
7,500,000
7,500,000
—
—
—
—
—
—
Federated Hermes Kaufmann Small Cap Fund, a
portfolio of Federated Hermes Equity Funds(25)
1,000,000
1,000,000
—
—
—
—
—
—
Glenview Capital Master Fund, Ltd.(26)
339,317
339,317
—
—
—
—
—
—
Glenview Capital Opportunity Fund, L.P.(27)
268,011
268,011
—
—
—
—
—
—
Glenview Capital Partners, L.P.(28)
46,491
46,491
—
—
—
—
—
—
Glenview Institutional Partners, L.P.(29)
121,474
121,474
—
—
—
—
—
—
Glenview Offshore Opportunity Master Fund, Ltd.
(30)
224,707
224,707
—
—
—
—
—
—
Gratia Capital Concentrated Master Fund, Ltd.(31)
100,000
100,000
—
—
—
—
—
—
GTAM TS Investment LLC(32)
200,000
200,000
—
—
—
—
—
—
Gundy Co ITF The HGC Fund LP(33)
500,000
500,000
—
—
—
—
—
—
Halle Special Situations Fund LLC(34)
100,000
100,000
—
—
—
—
—
—
Hawkeye Capital Master(35)
850,000
850,000
—
—
—
—
—
—
Inherent ESG Opportunity Master, LP(36)
1,000,000
1,000,000
—
—
—
—
—
—
Iridian Asset Management LLC(37)
2,000,000
2,000,000
—
—
—
—
—
—
Jericho Growth Fund I LP(38)
750,000
750,000
—
—
—
—
—
—
Kayne Anderson NextGen Energy & Infrastructure,
Inc.(39)
500,000
500,000
—
—
—
—
—
—
Liberty City Ventures 1815, LLC(40)
5,000,000
5,000,000
—
—
—
—
—
—
Linden Capital L.P.(41)
500,000
500,000
—
—
—
—
—
—
Entities affiliated with Longfellow Investment
Management(42)
300,000
300,000
—
—
—
—
—
—
Luktev GmbH(43)
7,084,808
400,000
6,684,808
4.3 %
—
—
—
—
Entities affiliated with Luxor Capital(44)
1,000,000
1,000,000
—
—
—
—
—
—


- 80 -
Entities affiliated with Magnetar Financial LLC(45)
500,000
500,000
—
—
—
—
—
—
Marc Lore(46)
25,925,286
1,000,000
24,925,286
15.9%  
—
—
—
—


Table of Contents
MDC Capital Partners (Ventures) LP(47)
700,000
700,000
—
—
—
—
—
—
Mesa Air Group, Inc.(48)
2,269,012
1,089,671
1,179,341
*
—
—
—
—
Entities managed by UBS O-Connor LLC(49)
200,000
200,000
—
—
—
—
—
—
Senator Global Opportunity Master Fund L.P.(50)
1,500,000
1,500,000
—
—
—
—
—
—
SMALLCAP World Fund, Inc.(51)
3,134,336
3,134,336
—
—
—
—
—
—
Entities affiliated with Suvretta(52)
750,000
750,000
—
—
—
—
—
—
Tamarack EV Opportunities I LLC(53)
100,000
100,000
—
—
—
—
—
—
TBC Magnetar, L.P.(54)
1,500,000
1,500,000
—
—
—
—
—
—
Tech Opportunities LLC(55)
500,000
500,000
—
—
—
—
—
—
The Alex Rodriguez Revocable Trust dated January
5, 1998(56)
1,500,000
1,500,000
—
—
—
—
—
—
The Growth Fund of America(57)
4,891,617
4,891,617
—
—
—
—
—
—
Third Point Loan LLC(58)
2,500,000
2,500,000
—
—
—
—
—
—
Todd and Kasey Lemkin Trust Agreement dated
Dec. 3, 2009(59)
75,000
75,000
—
—
—
—
—
—
Ulysses Offshore Fund Ltd.(60)
24,000
24,000
—
—
—
—
—
—
Ulysses Partners L.P.(60)
176,000
176,000
—
—
—
—
—
—
United Airlines Ventures, Ltd.(61)
9,076,047
10,255,387
4,717,365
3.0%  
—
—
—
—
XN Exponent Master Fund LP(62)
1,200,000
1,200,000
—
—
—
—
—
—
Other Selling Securityholders(63)
1,322,500
1,322,500
—
—
—
—
—
—
Total – PIPE Investors
102,923,010
68,555,058
39,264,657
25.0 %  
—
—
—
—
Directors & Officers of Archer and their
Affiliated Entities
Brett Adcock(64)
37,017,931
37,017,931
—
—
—
—
—
—
Adam Goldstein(65)
37,017,931
37,017,931
—
—
—
—
—
—
Michael Spellacy(66)
90,000
90,000
—
—
—
—
—
—
Total – Directors & Officers of Archer and 
their Affiliated Entities  
74,125,862
74,125,862
—
—
—
—
—
—
Other Holders of Registration Rights
Atlas Crest Investment LLC(67)
20,500,000
20,500,000
—
—
8,000,000
8,000,000
—
—
Moelis & Company Group LP(68)
1,512,500
1,512,500
—
—
—
—
—
—
SVB Financial Group(69)
366,140
366,140
366,140
366,140
SVB Innovation Credit Fund VIII, L.P.(70)
366,140
366,140
—
—
366,140
366,140
—
—
Total – Other Holders of Registration Rights
22,744,780
22,744,780
—
—
8,732,280
8,732,280
—
—
Total
198,793,652
165,425,700
39,264,657
25.0 %
8,732,280
8,732,280
—
—
*
Less than one percent
(1) 40 North Latitude Master Fund Ltd. is now known as Standard Latitude Master Fund Ltd. (“Latitude”). David Winter and David Millstone are the co-managers of 40 North
Management LLC (now known as Standard Investments LLC), which holds the sole voting power in Latitude and 40 North GP III LLC (now known as Standard Investments
LLC), the General Partner of Latitude. Mr. Winter and Mr. Millstone are the sole directors of Latitude. The business address of Latitude is c/o Standard Investments LLC 9 West
57th Street, 46th floor, New York, NY 10019.
(2) Each of Access Industries Management, LLC (“AIM”) and Mr. Len Blavatnik may be deemed to beneficially own, and share investment and voting power over, the 2,000,000
shares of Class A Common Stock held directly by AI Atlas Holdings LLC (“AIAH”) because (i) Mr. Blavatnik controls AIM and holds a majority of the outstanding voting
interests in AIAH and (ii) AIM is the controlling entity of AIAH. Each of AIM and Mr. Blavatnik disclaim beneficial ownership of the shares held directly by AIAH, except to the
extent of their actual pecuniary interest therein. The address of Mr. Blavatnik and each of the foregoing entities is 40 West 57th Street, 28th Floor, New York, NY 10019.
(3) Alyeska Investment Group, L.P., the investment manager of Alyeska Master Fund, L.P. (“Alyeska”), has voting and investment control of the shares of Class A Common Stock
held by the Alyeska. Anand Parekh is the Chief Executive Officer of Alyeska Investment Group, L.P. and may be deemed to be the beneficial owner of such shares. Mr. Parekh,
however, disclaims any beneficial ownership of the shares held by Alyeska. The registered address of Alyeska is at c/o Maples Corporate Services Limited, P.O. Box 309, Ugland
House, South Church Street George Town, Grand Cayman, KY1-1104, Cayman Islands. Alyeska Investment Group, L.P. is located at 77 W. Wacker, Suite 700, Chicago, IL
60601.


- 81 -
(4) Capital Research and Management Company (“CRMC”) serves as investment adviser to American Funds Insurance Series-Growth Fund (the “Growth Fund”). CRMC, Capital
World Investors (“CWI”) and/or Capital International Investors (“CII”) may be deemed to be the beneficial owner of the shares of Class A Common Stock held by the Growth
Fund; however, each of CRMC,


Table of Contents
CWI and CII expressly disclaims that it is the beneficial owner of such securities. Paul Benjamin, Mark L. Casey, Irfan M. Furniturewala, Anne-Marie Peterson, Andraz Razen
and Alan J. Wilson, as portfolio managers, have voting and investment powers over the shares held by the Growth Fund. The address for the Growth Fund is c/o Capital Research
and Management Company, 333 S. Hope Street, 50th Floor, Los Angeles, CA 90071. The Growth Fund acquired the securities being registered hereby in the ordinary course of
its business.
(5) Arena Capital Advisors, LLC manages this entity as the General Partner for Arena Capital Fund, LP. The address of the entity is 12121 Wilshire Blvd Suite 1010, Los Angeles,
CA 90025.
(6) Baron Partners Fund is a registered investment company under the Investment Company Act of 1940. Mr. Ronald Baron has voting and/or investment control over the shares of
Class A Common Stock held by Baron Partners Fund and, accordingly, may be deemed to have beneficial ownership of such shares. Mr. Baron disclaims beneficial ownership of
the shares held by Baron Partners Fund. The business address of Baron Partners Fund and BAMCO, Inc. is 767 Fifth Avenue, 49th Floor, New York, NY 10153.
(7) Polar Multi-Strategy Master Fund and Polar Long/Short Master Fund (the “Polar Funds”) are under management by Polar Asset Management Partners Inc. (“PAMPI”). PAMPI
serves as investment advisor of the Polar Funds and has control and discretion over the shares of Class A Common Stock held by the Polar Funds. As such, PAMPI may be
deemed the beneficial owner of the shares held by the Polar Funds. PAMPI disclaims any beneficial ownership of the reported shares other than to the extent of any pecuniary
interest therein. The business address of the Polar Funds is c/o Polar Asset Management Partners Inc., , 16 York Street, Suite 2900 Toronto, ON MSJ OE6.
(8) Matthew MacIssac is the Secretary of MM Asset Management Inc., the Investment Advisor to MMCAP International Inc. SPC, and as such, may be deemed to be the beneficial
owner of the 500,000 shares of Class A Common Stock. The business address for the entity is BMO Nesbitt Burns, 1 First Canadian Place B1 Level Stock Cage, Toronto, ON
M5X 1H3.
(9) Broadscale AA General Partner LLC is the General Partner of Broadscale AA Investors LP. Andrew L. Shapiro of 430 Park Avenue, Suite 1501, New York, NY 10022 is the
Managing Member of Broadscale AA General Partner LLC.
(10)Capital Bank and Trust Company (“CB&T”) serves as the discretionary trustee for Capital Group Growth Fund of America Trust (US) (the “Capital Group Growth Fund”), and
Capital Research and Management Company (“CRMC”) serves as investment adviser to CB&T for the Capital Group Growth Fund. CB&T, CRMC, Capital World Investors
(“CWI”), Capital International Investors (“CII”) and/or Capital Research Global Investors (“CRGI”) may be deemed to be the beneficial owner of the shares of Class A
Common Stock held by the Capital Group Growth Fund; however, each of CB&T, CRMC, CWI, CII and CRGI expressly disclaims that it is the beneficial owner of such
securities. Christopher D. Buchbinder, Mark L. Casey, Barry S. Crosthwaite, J. Blair Frank, Joanna F. Jonsson, Carl M. Kawaja, Donald D. O’Neal, Anne-Marie Peterson, Alex
Popa, Andraz Razen, Martin Romo, Lawrence R. Solomon and Alan J. Wilson, as portfolio managers, have voting and investment powers over the shares held by the Capital
Group Growth Fund. The address for the Capital Group Growth Fund is c/o Capital Research and Management Company, 333 S. Hope Street, 50th Floor, Los Angeles, CA
90071. The Capital Group Growth Fund acquired the securities being registered hereby in the ordinary course of its business.
(11) Consists of (i) 277,744 shares of Class A Common Stock held by Putnam Investment Funds - Putnam Sustainable Future Fund (the “Putnam Investment Fund”) and (ii) 22,256
shares of Class A Common Stock held by Putnam Variable Trust - Putnam VT Sustainable Future Fund (the “Putnam Variable Trust”, and, together with the Putnam Investment
Fund, the “Putnam Funds”). The Putnam Funds are mutual funds registered with the SEC under the Investment Company Act of 1940, as amended, whose account is managed
by Putnam Investment Management, LLC, including sole dispositive power over the shares of Class A Common Stock. The Board Policies and Nominating Committee of the
board of trustees of the Putnam Funds has sole voting power over the shares held by the Putnam Funds. The business address for each entity is c/o Putnam Investment
Management, LLC, 100 Federal Street, Mail Stop: M26A, Boston, MA 02210.
(12)Consists of (i) 1,000,000 PIPE Shares and (ii) 755,857 shares of Class A Common Stock (the “CVI Shares”) held by CVI Investments, Inc. (“CVI”). Heights Capital
Management, Inc., the authorized agent of CVI Investments, Inc. (“CVI”), has discretionary authority to vote and dispose of the CVI Shares and may be deemed to be the
beneficial owner of the CVI Shares. Martin Kobinger, in his capacity as Investment Manager of Heights Capital Management, Inc., may also be deemed to have investment
discretion and voting power over the CVI Shares. Mr. Kobinger disclaims any such beneficial ownership of the CVI Shares. The principal business address of CVI is c/o Heights
Capital Management, Inc., 101 California Street, Suite 3250, San Francisco, CA 94111.


- 82 -


Table of Contents
(13)D. E. Shaw Oculus Portfolios, L.L.C. has the power to vote or to direct the vote of (and the power to dispose or direct the disposition of) the 187,500 shares of Class A Common
Stock to be registered for resale pursuant to the Registration Statement (the “Subject Shares”. D. E. Shaw & Co., L.P. (“DESCO LP”), as the investment adviser of D. E. Shaw
Oculus Portfolios, L.L.C., may be deemed to have the shared power to vote or direct the vote of (and the shared power to dispose or direct the disposition of) the Subject Shares.
D. E. Shaw & Co., L.L.C. (“DESCO LLC”), as the manager of D. E. Shaw Oculus Portfolios, L.L.C., may be deemed to have the shared power to vote or direct the vote of (and
the shared power to dispose or direct the disposition of) the Subject Shares. Julius Gaudio, Maximilian Stone, and Eric Wepsic, or their designees, exercise voting and investment
control over the Shares on DESCO LP’s and DESCO LLC’s behalf.
D. E. Shaw & Co., Inc. (“DESCO Inc.”), as general partner of DESCO LP, may be deemed to have the shared power to vote or direct the vote of (and the shared power to dispose
or direct the disposition of) the Subject Shares. D. E. Shaw & Co. II, Inc. (“DESCO II Inc.”), as managing member of DESCO LLC, may be deemed to have the shared power to
vote or direct the vote of (and the shared power to dispose or direct the disposition of) the Subject Shares. None of DESCO LP, DESCO LLC, DESCO Inc., or DESCO II Inc.
owns any shares of the Company directly, and each such entity disclaims beneficial ownership of the Subject Shares.
David E. Shaw does not own any shares of the Company directly. By virtue of David E. Shaw’s position as President and sole shareholder of DESCO Inc., which is the general
partner of DESCO LP, and by virtue of David E. Shaw’s position as President and sole shareholder of DESCO II Inc., which is the managing member of DESCO LLC, David E.
Shaw may be deemed to have the shared power to vote or direct the vote of (and the shared power to dispose or direct the disposition of) the Subject Shares and, therefore, David
E. Shaw may be deemed to be the beneficial owner of the Subject Shares. David E. Shaw disclaims beneficial ownership of the Subject Shares. The business address of D. E.
Shaw Oculus Portfolios, L.L.C. is c/o D. E. Shaw & Co., L.P., 1166 Avenue of the Americas, 9th Floor, New York, NY 10036.
(14)D. E. Shaw Valence Portfolios, L.L.C. has the power to vote or to direct the vote of (and the power to dispose or direct the disposition of) the 562,500 shares of Class A Common
Stock to be registered for resale pursuant to the Registration Statement (the “Subject Shares” . D. E. Shaw & Co., L.P. (“DESCO LP”), as the investment adviser of D. E. Shaw
Valence Portfolios, L.L.C., may be deemed to have the shared power to vote or direct the vote of (and the shared power to dispose or direct the disposition of) the Subject Shares.
D. E. Shaw & Co., L.L.C. (“DESCO LLC”), as the manager of D. E. Shaw Valence Portfolios, L.L.C., may be deemed to have the shared power to vote or direct the vote of (and
the shared power to dispose or direct the disposition of) the D.E. Shares. Julius Gaudio, Maximilian Stone, and Eric Wepsic, or their designees, exercise voting and investment
control over the Subject Shares on DESCO LP’s and DESCO LLC’s behalf.
D. E. Shaw & Co., Inc. (“DESCO Inc.”), as general partner of DESCO LP, may be deemed to have the shared power to vote or direct the vote of (and the shared power to dispose
or direct the disposition of) the Subject Shares. D. E. Shaw & Co. II, Inc. (“DESCO II Inc.”), as managing member of DESCO LLC, may be deemed to have the shared power to
vote or direct the vote of (and the shared power to dispose or direct the disposition of) the Subject Shares. None of DESCO LP, DESCO LLC, DESCO Inc., or DESCO II Inc.
owns any of our shares directly, and each such entity disclaims beneficial ownership of the Subject Shares.
David E. Shaw does not own any of our shares directly. By virtue of David E. Shaw’s position as President and sole shareholder of DESCO Inc., which is the general partner of
DESCO LP, and by virtue of David E. Shaw’s position as President and sole shareholder of DESCO II Inc., which is the managing member of DESCO LLC, David E. Shaw may
be deemed to have the shared power to vote or direct the vote of (and the shared power to dispose or direct the disposition of) the Subject Shares and, therefore, David E. Shaw
may be deemed to be the beneficial owner of the Subject Shares. David E. Shaw disclaims beneficial ownership of the Subject Shares. The business address of D. E. Shaw
Oculus Portfolios, L.L.C. is c/o D. E. Shaw & Co., L.P., 1166 Avenue of the Americas, 9th Floor, New York, NY 10036.
(15)Mr. Fox was a director of Atlas prior to the Business Combination and is a member of the Sponsor. Mr. Fox’s address is c/o Atlas Crest Investment LLC 399 Park Avenue, Fifth
Floor, NY, NY 10022.
(16)Shahraab Ahmadh holds the sole voting power in Decca SF, L.P. (“Decca”). The business address of Decca is 53rd Street, Suite 900, San Francisco, CA 94103.
(17)Deep Field Asset Management, LLC, the general partner of Deep Field Opportunities Fund, L.P., and Jordan Moelis, the managing member of Deep Field Asset Management,
LLC, each may be deemed to have voting and dispositive power of such shares. The address for Deep Field Opportunities Fund, L.P. is 9355 Wilshire Blvd., Suite 350 Beverly
Hills, CA 90210.


- 83 -


Table of Contents
(18)Ms. Murray was a director of Atlas prior to the Business Combination and is a member of the Sponsor. Ms. Murray’s address is c/o Atlas Crest Investment LLC 399 Park Avenue,
Fifth Floor, NY, NY 10022.
(19)Empyrean Capital Partners, LP (“Empyrean”) serves as investment manager to Empyrean Capital Overseas Master Fund, Ltd. (“ECOMF”), and has voting and investment
control of the shares of Class A Common Stock held by ECOMF. Empyrean Capital, LLC serves as the general partner to Empyrean. Amos Meron is the managing member of
Empyrean Capital, LLC, and as such may be deemed to have voting and dispositive control of the shares held by ECOMF. The address of each of ECOMF, Empyrean, Empyrean
Capital, LLC, and Amos Meron is c/o Empyrean Capital Partners, LP, 10250 Constellation Boulevard, Suite 2950, Los Angeles, CA 90067.
(20)Consists of (i) 51,785 shares of Class A Common Stock held by BEMAP Master Fund Ltd (“BEMAP”), (ii) 39,481 shares of Class A Common Stock held by Monashee Solitario
Fund LP (“Monashee Solitario”), (iii)  30,779 shares of Class A Common Stock held by Monashee Pure Alpha SPV I LP (“Monashee Pure Alpha”), (iv) 8,788  shares of Class
A Common Stock held by SFL SPV I LLC (“SFL”), (v) 6,702 shares of Class A Common Stock held by Bespoke Alpha MAC MIM LP (“Bespoke Alpha”) and (vi) 62,465
shares of Class A Common Stock held by DS Liquid Div RVA MON LLC (“DS Liquid”). Monashee Investment Management LLC is the investment advisor for BEMAP,
Monashee Solitario, Monashee Pure Alpha, SFL, Bespoke Alpha and DS Liquid. Jeff Muller is an officer of Monashee Investment Management LLC, and may be deemed to have
voting and investment power of the shares of Class A Common Stock held by BEMAP, Monashee Solitario, Monashee Pure Alpha, SFL, Bespoke Alpha and DS Liquid. The
address of the foregoing entities is c/o Monashee Investment Management, LLC, 75 Park Plaza, 2nd Floor, Boston, MA 02116.
(21)Lee Chaikin holds the sole voting power in Evolution VCP 18X LLC (“Evolution”). The business address of Evolution is 40 West 57th Street, Suite 2020, New York, NY 10019.
(22)Noam Ohana is the Managing Member of Exor Seeds GP, LLC, the General Partner of Exor Seeds, LP (“Exor”). The business address of Exor is 767 Fifth Avenue, Floor 12A,
New York, NY 10153.
(23)James Lang is the Managing Member of Falcon 2021 LLC. The business address for the entity is 394 Pacific Ave, Floor 2, San Francisco, CA 94111.
(24)The business address for the entity is Corso Giovanni Agnelli 200, 10135 Torino, TO, Italy.
(25)The address of the Federated Hermes Kaufmann Small Cap Fund, a portfolio of Federated Hermes Equity Funds (the “Fund”) is 4000 Ericsson Drive, Warrendale, Pennsylvania
15086-7561. The Fund is managed by Federated Equity Management Company of Pennsylvania and subadvised by Federated Global Investment Management Corp., which are
wholly owned subsidiaries of FII Holdings, Inc., which is a wholly owned subsidiary of Federated Hermes, Inc. (the “Parent”). All of the Parent’s outstanding voting stock is
held in the Voting Shares Irrevocable Trust (the “Trust”), for which Thomas R. Donahue, Rhodora J. Donahue and J. Christopher Donahue, who are collectively referred to as
“Trustees,” act as trustees. The Parent’s subsidiaries have the power to direct the vote and disposition of the securities held by the Fund. Each of the Parent, its subsidiaries, the
Trust, and each of the Trustees expressly disclaim beneficial ownership of such securities.
(26)Larry Robbins, as CEO and portfolio manager, may be deemed to have voting and dispositive power over the shares held by Glenview Capital Master Fund, Ltd. Larry Robbins
disclaims beneficial ownership of such shares. The address of Glenview Capital Master Fund, Ltd. is 190 Elgin Avenue George Town, Grand Cayman KY1-9008.
(27)Larry Robbins, as CEO and portfolio manager, may be deemed to have voting and dispositive power over the shares held by Glenview Capital Opportunity Fund, L.P. Larry
Robbins disclaims beneficial ownership of such shares. The address of Glenview Capital Opportunity Fund, L.P. is 767 Fifth Avenue, 44th floor New York, NY 10153.
(28)Larry Robbins, as CEO and portfolio manager, may be deemed to have voting and dispositive power over the shares held by Glenview Capital Partners, L.P. Larry Robbins
disclaims beneficial ownership of such shares. The address of Glenview Capital Partners, L.P. is 767 Fifth Avenue, 44th floor New York, NY 10153.
(29)Larry Robbins, as CEO and portfolio manager, may be deemed to have voting and dispositive power over the shares held by Glenview Institutional Partners, L.P. Larry Robbins
disclaims beneficial ownership of such shares. The address of Glenview Institutional Partners, L.P. is 767 Fifth Avenue, 44th floor New York, NY 10153.


- 84 -


Table of Contents
(30)Larry Robbins, as CEO and portfolio manager, may be deemed to have voting and dispositive power over the shares held by Glenview Offshore Opportunity Master Fund, Ltd.
Larry Robbins disclaims beneficial ownership of such shares. The address of Glenview Offshore Opportunity Master Fund, Ltd. is 190 Elgin Avenue George Town, Grand
Cayman KY1-9008.
(31)Gratia Capital LLC is the General Partner of Gratia Capital Concentrated Master Fund, Ltd. Steve Pei of 11835 West Olympic Boulevard, Suite 385, Los Angeles California
90064 is the Managing Member of Gratia Capital LLC.
(32) Steven A. Tananbum is sole Class A Member of GTAM TS investment LLC, serving as a manager thereof and has discretionary authority to trade the shares and make voting and
investment decisions relating to such shares. The business address for GTAM TS Investment LLC is 300 Park Avenue, 21st Floor, New York, NY 10022.
(33)Shares held in trust by Gundy Co for The HGC Fund LP. Sean Kallir is the Chief Executive Officer of The HGC Fund LP and has the power to vote or dispose of such shares. The
address of The HGC Fund LP is 601-366 Adelaide St W, Toronto, ON M5V 1R9.
(34)John Peter Gutfreund is the Managing Member of Halle Capital Partners GP LLC, the General Partner of Halle Special Situations Fund LLC (“Halle”). The business address of
Halle is 767 5th Avenue, 44th floor, New York, NY 10153.
(35)Hawkeye Capital Management LLC (“HCMLLC”), the Investment Advisor of Hawkeye Capital Master (“HCM”), has voting and investment control of the shares of Class A
Common Stock held by HCM. Richard Rubin is the managing member of HCMLLC and may be deemed the beneficial owner of the shares of Class A Common Stock held by
HCM. The business address of HCM is 1828 Bay Rd, 2nd Floor Miami Beach, Fl 33139.
(36)Inherent ESG Opportunity GP, LLC (the “ESG GP”), is the general partner of the selling securityholder in this offering and may be deemed to have voting and dispositive power
with respect to the shares. Anthony Davis, Michael Ellis, and Danielle Schaefer may be deemed to have voting and dispositive power with respect to the shares held by this
selling securityholder. Mr. Davis is the indirect beneficial owner of the selling securityholder, and, together with Mr. Ellis, and Ms. Schaefer, disclaims beneficial ownership of
the shares of Common Stock held by the selling securityholder. The business address of the selling securityholder is Attn: Inherent Group, 510 LaGuardia Pl, 5th Floor, New
York, NY 10012.
(37)Consists of (i) 35,000 shares of Class A Common Stock held by Iridian Durascent Fund, LP, (ii) 235,000 shares of Class A Common Stock held by Iridian Eagle Fund, LP, (iii)
1,630,000 shares of Class A Common Stock held by Iridian Raven Fund, LP, and (iv) 100,000 shares of Class A Common Stock held by Iridian Wasabi Fund, LP. Iridian Asset
Management LLC is the investment manager of each of these funds and has voting and investment power over the securities. The address of Iridian Asset Management LLC is
276 Post Road West, Westport, CT 06880-4703.
(38)Joshua Resnick is the Managing Member of Jericho Growth GP I LLC, the General Partner of Jericho Growth Fund I L.P. (“Jericho”). The business address of Jericho is 510
Madison Avenue, 27th Floor, New York, NY 10022.
(39)James C. Baker and J.C. Frey are the portfolio managers of Kayne Anderson NextGen Energy & Infrastructure, Inc. (“KMF”), and, accordingly, may also be deemed to have
investment discretion and voting power over the shares held by KMF. Mr. Baker and Mr. Frey disclaim beneficial ownership of the shares held by KMF. The business address of
KMF is, 811 Main St., 14th Floor, Houston, TX 77002.
(40)Murtaza S. Akbar holds the sole voting power in Liberty City Ventures 1815, LLC (“Liberty City”). The business address of Liberty City is Attn: Murtaza Akbar, 130 Fifth
Avenue, Fl 5, New York, NY 10011.
(41)Linden GP LLC is the general partner of Linden Capital L.P. (“Linden Capital”) and, in such capacity, may be deemed to beneficially own the shares held by Linden Capital.
Linden Advisors LP is the investment manager of Linden Capital. Siu Min (Joe) Wong is the principal owner and controlling person of Linden Advisors LP and Linden GP LLC.
In such capacities, Linden Advisors LP and Mr. Wong may each be deemed to beneficially own the shares held by Linden Capital. The principal business address for Linden
Capital is Victoria Place, 31 Victoria Street, Hamilton HM10, Bermuda. The principal business address for each of Linden Advisors, LP Linden GP LLC and Mr. Wong is 590
Madison Avenue, 15th Floor, New York, New York 10022.


- 85 -
(42)Consists of (i) 14,295 shares of Class A Common Stock held by Boothbay Absolute Return Strategies, LP, (ii) 9,530 shares of Class A Common Stock held by Boothbay
Diversified Alpha Master, LP, (iii) 2,344 shares of Class A Common Stock held by Starr Commonwealth, (iv) 234,375 shares of Class A Common Stock HR Fund LP, (iv) 11,719
shares of Class A Common Stock held


Table of Contents
by BBR Fixed Income Opportunities LP; (v) 8,203 shares of Class A Common Stock held by BBR Absolute Return (QP), LP, (vi) 938 shares of Class A Common Stock held by
BBR Absolute Return, LP, (vii) 1,020 shares of Class A Common Stock held by BBR Absolute Return Ltd., and (vii) 17,576 shares of Class A Common Stock held by BCOF
Special Account, Ltd. Acting as their investment advisor, Longfellow Investment Management Co., LLC is deemed to have investment discretion and shared voting control over
the shares beneficially owned by their clients. David Stueher, portfolio manager, may be deemed to be the beneficial owner of such shares. The business address for Longfellow
Investment Management Co., LLC is 125 High Street, Suite 832, Boston, MA 02110.
(43)Consists of (i) 400,000 PIPE Shares and (ii) 6,684,808 shares of Class A Common Stock issued in connection with the Business Combination. Lukasz Gadowski is the Managing
Director of Luktev GmbH (“Luktev”), and, accordingly, may also be deemed to have investment discretion and voting power over the shares of Class A Common Stock held by
Luktev. The business address for Luktev is Friedrichstr. 68, Berlin, Germany 10117.
(44)Consists of (i) 1,228 shares of Class A Common Stock held by Luxor Capital Partners Long Offshore Master Fund, LP, (ii) 3,674 shares of Class A Common Stock held by Luxor
Capital Partners Long, LP, (iii) 75,393 shares of Class A Common Stock held by Luxor Capital Partners Offshore Master Fund, LP, (iv) 120,320 shares of Class A Common Stock
held by Luxor Capital Partners, LP, (v) 8,228 shares of Class A Common Stock held by Luxor Gibraltar, LP - Series 1, (vi) 52,407 shares of Class A Common Stock held by
Luxor Wavefront, LP and (vii) 738,750 shares of Class A Common Stock held by Lugard Road Capital Master Fund, LP. Jonathan Green, Portfolio Manager, Luxor Capital
Group, LP, the investment manager for Lugard Road Capital Master Fund, LP, has voting and/or investment control over the shares held by such entity. Christian Leone, Portfolio
Manager, Luxor Capital Group, LP, the investment manager for each of Luxor Capital Partners Long Offshore Master Fund, LP, Luxor Capital Partners Long, LP, Luxor Capital
Partners Offshore Master Fund, LP, Luxor Capital Partners, LP, Luxor Gibraltar, LP - Series 1, Luxor Wavefront, LP, has voting and/or investment control over the shares held by
such entities. The principal business address of the entity is 1114 Avenue of the Americas 28th Floor, New York, NY 10036.
(45)Magnetar Financial LLC (“MFL”) serves as investment manager of each of Magnetar Capital Master Fund, Ltd., Magnetar Discovery Master Fund Ltd, Purpose Alternative
Credit Fund Ltd., Purpose Alternative Credit Fund - T LLC, Magnetar Constellation Master Fund, Ltd., Magnetar Constellation Fund II, Ltd, Magnetar Longhorn Fund LP,
Magnetar SC Fund Ltd, and Magnetar Xing He Master Fund Ltd. MFL is the manager of Magnetar Lake Credit Fund LLC. MFL is the general partner of Magnetar Structured
Credit Fund, LP (together with all of the foregoing funds, the “Magnetar Funds”). In such capacities, MFL exercises voting and investment power over the securities held for the
accounts of the Magnetar Funds. MFL is a registered investment adviser under Section 203 of the Investment Advisers Act of 1940, as amended. Magnetar Capital Partners LP
(“MCP”), is the sole member and parent holding company of MFL. Supernova Management LLC (“Supernova”), is the sole general partner of MCP. The manager of Supernova
is Alec N. Litowitz, a citizen of the United States of America. Each of the Magnetar Funds, MFL, MCP, Supernova and Alec N. Litowitz disclaim beneficial ownership of these
securities except to the extent of their pecuniary interest in the securities. Shares shown include only the securities being registered for resale and may not incorporate all interests
deemed to be beneficially held by the registered holders described above or by other investment funds managed or advised by MFL. The business address for the Magnetar Funds
is c/o Magnetar Financial LLC, 1603 Orrington Ave., 13th Floor, Evanston, IL 60201.
(46)Marc Lore’s address is 443 Greenwich Street, PHA, New York, NY 10013.
(47)MDC Capital Partners (Ventures) GP, LP is the general partner of MDC Capital Partners (Ventures), LP. MDC Capital Partners (Ventures) GP, LP has created an investment
committee comprised of four individual members, which has the authority, by affirmative majority consent, to approve all investment and divestment decisions made with respect
to MDC Capital Partners (Ventures), LP. Each of the members of the investment committee expressly disclaims beneficial ownership of the shares held by MDC Capital Partners
(Ventures), LP. The address of the entities listed herein is c/o Mubadala Capital, 22nd Floor Al Sila Tower, Abu Dhabi Global Market, Al Maryah Island, Abu Dhabi, United Arab
Emirates.
(48)Consists of (i) 1,179,341 shares of Class A Common Stock issued in connection with the Business Combination, (ii) 500,000 PIPE Shares, and (ii) 589,671 shares of Class A
Common Stock issued upon the exercise of the vested portion of the Mesa Warrants. Jonathan G. Ornstein, Michael J. Lotz and Brian S. Gillman are officers and directors of
Mesa and, accordingly, may also be deemed to have investment discretion and voting power over the shares held by Mesa. Messrs. Ornstein, Lotz and Gillman disclaims
beneficial ownership of the shares held by Mesa. The business address for Mesa is 410 N. 44th Street, STE 700, Phoenix, AZ 85008.
(49)Consists of (i) 92,300 shares of Class A Common Stock held by Nineteen77 Global Merger Arbitrage Master Limited, (ii) 15,400 shares of Class A Common Stock held by
Nineteen77 Global Merger Arbitrage Opportunity Fund, and (iii) 92,300 shares of Class


- 86 -


Table of Contents
A Common Stock held by Nineteen77 Global Multi-Strategy Alpha Master Limited. Mr. Kevin Russell is the Chief Investment Officer of UBS O’Connor LLC, the investment
manager of the selling securityholders, has voting and/or investment control over the shares held by the selling securityholders. As a result, Mr. Russell may be deemed to
beneficially own the shares held by the selling securityholder. Notwithstanding the foregoing, Mr. Russell disclaims any such beneficial ownership, except to the extent of his
pecuniary interest. The principal business address of the entity is One N Wacker Drive 31st Floor, Chicago, IL 60606.
(50)Senator Investment Group LP (“Senator”) is investment manager of the selling security holder and may be deemed to have voting and dispositive power with respect to the
shares. The general partner of Senator is Senator Management LLC (the “Senator GP”). Douglas Silverman controls Senator GP, and, accordingly, may be deemed to have
voting and dispositive power with respect to the shares held by this selling security holder. Mr. Silverman disclaims beneficial ownership of the shares held by this selling security
holder. The address for Senator Global Opportunity Master Fund L.P. is c/o Senator Investment Group LP 510 Madison Avenue, 28th Floor, New York, NY 10022.
(51)Capital Research and Management Company (“CRMC”) serves as investment adviser to SMALLCAP World Fund, Inc. (the “Fund”). CRMC, Capital World Investors (“CWI”),
Capital International Investors (“CII”) and/or Capital Research Global Investors (“CRGI”) may be deemed to be the beneficial owner of the shares of Common Stock held by the
Fund; however, each of CRMC, CWI, CII and CRGI expressly disclaims that it is the beneficial owner of such securities. Brady L. Enright, Julian N. Abdey, Jonathan Knowles,
Gregory W. Wendt, Peter Eliot, Bradford F. Freer, Leo Hee, Roz Hongsaranagon, Harold H. La, Dimitrije Mitrinovic, Aidan O’Connell, Samir Parekh, Andraz Razen, Renaud H.
Samyn, Michael Beckwith and Arun Swaminathan, as portfolio managers, have voting and investment powers over the shares held by the Fund. The address for the Fund is c/o
Capital Research and Management Company, 333 S. Hope Street, 50th Floor, Los Angeles, CA 90071.
(52)Consists of (i) 5,000 shares of Class A Common Stock held by Suvretta Long Master Fund, Ltd., and (ii) 745,000 shares of Class A Common Stock held by Suvretta Master Fund,
Ltd. Suvretta Capital Management, LLC is the investment manager of Suvretta Long Master Fund, Ltd. and Suvretta Master Fund, Ltd. Aaron Cowen is the Chief Investment
Officer of Suvretta Capital Management, LLC. Suvretta Capital Management, LLC and Mr. Cowen may be deemed to be the beneficial owners of the securities beneficially
owned by Suvretta Long Master Fund, Ltd. and Suvretta Master Fund, Ltd. Mr. Cowen has the power to vote and dispose of the securities held by Suvretta Long Master Fund,
Ltd. and Suvretta Master Fund, Ltd. The principal business address of the entity is 540 Madison Avenue 7th Floor, New York, NY 10022.
(53)John McCormick, the Managing Director of Tamarack EV Opportunities I LLC (“Tamarack”), has voting and investment control of the shares held by Tamarack Richard Rubin
is the managing member of HCMLLC and may be deemed the beneficial owner of the shares of Class A Common Stock held by HCM. The business address of Tamarack is 12
Wooddale Road, Greenwich, CT 06830.
(54)Tomales Bay Capital LLC is the General Partner of TBC Magnetar, L.P. Iqbaljit Kahlon of 53rd Street, Suite 900, San Francisco, California 94103 is the Managing Member of
Tomales Bay Capital LLC.
(55)Hudson Bay Capital Management LP, the investment manager of Tech Opportunities LLC, has voting and investment power over these securities. Sander Gerber is the managing
member of Hudson Bay Capital GP LLC, which is the general partner of Hudson Bay Capital Management LP. Each of Tech Opportunities LLC and Sander Gerber disclaims
beneficial ownership over these securities. The business address of the entities and persons named herein is c/o Hudson Bay Capital Management LP 28 H­
avemeyer Place, 2nd
Floor Greenwich CT 06830.
(56)Alex Rodriguez, Trustee of The Alex Rodriguez Revocable Trust dated January 5, 1998, is deemed to have power to vote or dispose of the shares of Class A Common Stock being
offered hereby. ­
The business address is of the trust is 21731 Ventura Blvd., Ste 300, Woodland Hills, CA 91364.
(57)Capital Research and Management Company (“CRMC”) serves as investment adviser to The Growth Fund of America (the “Fund”). CRMC, Capital World Investors (“CWI”),
Capital International Investors (“CII”), and/or Capital Research Global Investors (“CRGI”) may be deemed to be the beneficial owner of the shares of Class A Common Stock
held by the Fund; however, each of CRMC, CWI, CII and CRGI expressly disclaims that it is the beneficial owner of such securities. Christopher D. Buchbinder, Mark L. Casey,
Barry S. Crosthwaite, J. Blair Frank, Joanna F. Jonsson, Carl M. Kawaja, Donald D. O’Neal, Anne-Marie Peterson, Alex Popa, Andraz Razen, Martin Romo, Lawrence R.
Solomon and Alan J. Wilson, as portfolio managers, have voting and investment powers over the shares held by the Fund. The address for the Fund is c/o Capital Research and
Management Company, 333 S. Hope Street, 50th Floor, Los Angeles, CA 90071.


- 87 -


Table of Contents
(58)The shares of Class A Common Stock set forth herein are directly beneficially owned by Third Point Loan LLC (“TP Loan”). TP Loan is an affiliate of Third Point LLC (“Third
Point”) and holds the securities listed herein as nominee for funds managed and/or advised by Third Point and not in its individual capacity. Daniel S. Loeb is the Chief Executive
Officer of Third Point. By reason of the provisions of Rule 13d-3 under the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended, Third Point and Mr. Loeb may be deemed to be the
beneficial owners of the securities beneficially owned by TP Loan. Third Point and Mr. Loeb hereby disclaim beneficial ownership of all such securities, except to the extent of
any indirect pecuniary interest therein. The business address for Mr. Loeb and the entities identified in this footnote is c/o Third Point LLC, 55 Hudson Yards, 51st Floor, New
York, NY 10001.
(59)Todd Lemkin, Trustee of the Todd and Kasey Lemkin Trust Agreement dated Dec. 3, 2009, is deemed to have power to vote or dispose of the shares of Class A Common Stock
being offered hereby. The business address is of the trust is 10771 Bellagio Rd, Los Angeles, CA 90077.
(60)Ulysses Management LLC, a Delaware limited liability company (“Ulysses Management”), in its capacity as investment manager, may be deemed to share voting and
investment power over the shares of Class A Common Stock beneficially owned by Ulysses Partners, L.P., a Delaware limited partnership (“Ulysses Partners”) and Ulysses
Offshore Fund, Ltd., an exempted company incorporated and existing under the laws of the Cayman Islands (“Ulysses Offshore,” and collectively with Ulysses Partners, the
“Ulysses Purchasers”). Joshua Nash LLC, a Delaware limited liability company (“Nash LLC”), as the managing general partner of Ulysses Partners, may be deemed to share
voting and investment power over the shares beneficially owned by Ulysses Partners; and Joshua Nash, who is a United States citizen (“Mr. Nash”), as an executive of Ulysses
Management, the sole member of Nash LLC and the President of Ulysses Offshore, may be deemed to share voting and investment power over the shares beneficially owned by
each of Ulysses Management, Ulysses Partners and Ulysses Offshore. The address of each Ulysses Management affiliate is c/o Ulysses Management LLC, One Rockefeller Plaza,
New York, NY 10020.
(61)Consists of (i) 4,717,365 shares of Class A Common Stock issued in connection with the Business Combination, (ii) 2,000,000 PIPE Shares, (iii) 2,358,682 shares of Class A
Common Stock issued upon the exercise of the vested portion of the United Warrant, and (iv) 5,896,705 shares of Class A Common Stock issuable upon the exercise of the
remainder of the United Warrant, which may be exercised upon satisfaction of the vesting conditions contained therein. United Airlines Ventures, Ltd. (“UAV”) is an indirect,
wholly-owned subsidiary of United Airlines Holdings, Inc. (“UAH”), and is controlled by a board of directors consisting of five directors appointed by UAH. The board of
directors of UAV at any time and from time to time has voting and dispositive power over the shares beneficially owned by UAV, and the approval of a majority of the directors is
required to approve an action. Under the so-called “rule of three,” if voting and dispositive decisions regarding an entity’s securities are made by three or more individuals, and a
voting and dispositive decision requires the approval of a majority of those individuals, then none of the individuals is deemed a beneficial owner of the entity’s securities. As a
result, none of the individual directors on the board of directors of UAV is deemed to have beneficial ownership of such shares. The address of UAV is 233 South Wacker Drive,
Chicago, IL 60606.
(62)XN LP serves as investment manager to XN Exponent Master Fund LP (the “Fund”) and has discretionary authority to make investment decisions and determine how to vote any
securities held by the Fund. The general partner of XN LP is XN Management GP LLC, which is indirectly controlled by Gaurav Kapadia. The principal business address of the
entities referenced herein is 412 West 15th Street, 13th Floor, New York, NY.
(63) Consists of shares of Class A Common Stock beneficially owned by 20 selling securityholders affiliated with the Sponsor who own less than 1.0% of our outstanding Class A
Common Stock prior to this offering. The address of this group is 399 Park Avenue, New York NY 10022.
(64)Consists of (i) 100,000 shares of Class A Common Stock held by Hight Drive Growth LLC, (ii) 27,756,278 shares of Class B Common Stock held by Hight Drive Growth LLC,
and (iii) 9,161,653 shares of Class B Common Stock held directly by Brett Adcock. Brett Adcock has sole voting and dispositive power with respect to these shares. Shares of
Class B Common Stock are convertible at any time into shares of Class A Common Stock.
(65)Consists of (i) 100,000 shares of Class A Common Stock held by Capri Growth LLC, (ii) 27,756,278 shares of Class B Common Stock held by Capri Growth LLC, and (iii)
9,161,653 shares of Class B Common Stock held directly by Adam Goldstein. Adam Goldstein has sole voting and dispositive power with respect to these shares. Shares of Class
B Common Stock are convertible at any time into shares of Class A Common Stock.


- 88 -


Table of Contents
- 89 -
(66)Mr. Spellacy is currently a member of our board of directors and was a member of the Atlas board of directors prior to the Business Combination. Mr. Spellacy is also a member
of the Sponsor.
(67)Consists of (i) 12,500,000 shares of Class A Common Stock held by the Sponsor as Sponsor Shares and (ii) 8,000,000 shares of Class A Common Stock issuable to the Sponsor
upon the exercise of Private Warrants exercisable within 30 days of closing. The Sponsor is the registered holder of the Sponsor Shares and Private Warrants reported herein.
Kenneth Moelis is the sole managing member of the Sponsor. Mr. Moelis has voting and investment discretion with respect to the common stock held of record by the Sponsor.
Mr. Moelis disclaims any beneficial ownership of any shares held by the Sponsor except to the extent of his ultimate pecuniary interest. The address of the Sponsor is 399 Park
Avenue, Fifth floor, New York NY 10022.
(68)Moelis & Company Group LP is an affiliate of Moelis & Company LLC, a broker-dealer registered with the Securities and Exchange Commission and a member of the Financial
Industry Regulatory Authority. These shares were received as compensation to satisfy certain fees related to the Business Combination and PIPE Financing. Moelis & Company
Group LP is a member of the Sponsor. The address of Moelis & Company Group LP is c/o Moelis & Company, 399 Park Avenue, Fifth Floor, New York NY 10022.
(69)Daniel Beck, Chief Financial Officer of SVB Financial Group, Michael Kruse, Treasurer of SVB Financial Group, Ryan Henry, Portfolio Manager for SVB Financial Group,
Bradford Davis, Senior Portfolio Manager for SVB Financial Group, and David Busch, Head of Corporate Investments and Capital Markets for SVB Financial Group, have
voting and/or investment control over the shares held by SVB Financial Group. The principal business address of the entity is 3003 Tasman Drive, Santa Clara, CA 95054.
(70)The address of this entity is 2770 Sand Hill Road, Menlo Park, CA 94025.


Table of Contents
MATERIAL U.S. FEDERAL INCOME TAX CONSEQUENCES
The following discussion is a summary of certain material U.S. federal income tax considerations generally applicable to the ownership and disposition of our Common Stock and the
exercise, disposition and lapse of our Warrants. The Common Stock and the Warrants are referred to collectively herein as our securities. All prospective holders of our securities
should consult their tax advisors with respect to the U.S. federal, state, local and non-U.S. tax consequences of the ownership and disposition of our securities.
This discussion is not a complete analysis of all potential U.S. federal income tax consequences relating to the ownership and disposition of our securities. This summary is based
upon current provisions of the Code, existing U.S. Treasury Regulations promulgated thereunder, published administrative pronouncements and rulings of the U.S. Internal Revenue
Service (the “IRS”), and judicial decisions, all as in effect as of the date of this prospectus. These authorities are subject to change and differing interpretation, possibly with
retroactive effect. Any change or differing interpretation could alter the tax consequences to holders described in this discussion. There can be no assurance that a court or the IRS will
not challenge one or more of the tax consequences described herein, and we have not obtained, nor do we intend to obtain, a ruling with respect to the U.S. federal income tax
consequences to a holder of the ownership or disposition of our securities.
We assume in this discussion that a holder holds our securities as a “capital asset” within the meaning of Section 1221 of the Code (generally, property held for investment). This
discussion does not address all aspects of U.S. federal income taxation that may be relevant to a particular holder in light of that holder’s individual circumstances, nor does it address
the special tax accounting rules under Section 451(b) of the Code, any alternative minimum, Medicare contribution, estate or gift tax consequences, or any aspects of U.S. state, local
or non-U.S. taxes or any non-income U.S. federal tax laws. This discussion also does not address consequences relevant to holders subject to special tax rules, such as holders that
own, or are deemed to own, more than 5% of our capital stock (except to the extent specifically set forth below), corporations that accumulate earnings to avoid U.S. federal income
tax, tax-exempt organizations, governmental organizations, banks, financial institutions, investment funds, insurance companies, brokers, dealers or traders in securities, commodities
or currencies, regulated investment companies or real estate investment trusts, persons that have a “functional currency” other than the U.S. dollar, tax- qualified retirement plans,
holders who hold or receive our securities pursuant to the exercise of employee stock options or otherwise as compensation, holders holding our securities as part of a hedge, straddle
or other risk reduction strategy, conversion transaction or other integrated investment, holders deemed to sell our securities under the constructive sale provisions of the Code, passive
foreign investment companies, controlled foreign corporations, and certain former U.S. citizens or long-term residents.
In addition, this discussion does not address the tax treatment of partnerships (or entities or arrangements that are treated as partnerships for U.S. federal income tax purposes) or
persons that hold our securities through such partnerships. If a partnership, including any entity or arrangement treated as a partnership for U.S. federal income tax purposes, holds our
securities, the U.S. federal income tax treatment of a partner in such partnership generally will depend upon the status of the partner and the activities of the partnership. Such partners
and partnerships should consult their tax advisors regarding the tax consequences of the ownership and disposition of our securities.
For purposes of this discussion, a “U.S. Holder” means a beneficial owner of our securities (other than a partnership or an entity or arrangement treated as a partnership for U.S.
federal income tax purposes) that is, for U.S. federal income tax purposes:
●
an individual who is a citizen or resident of the United States;
●
a corporation, or an entity treated as a corporation for U.S. federal income tax purposes, created or organized in the United States or under the laws of the United States or of
any state thereof or the District of Columbia;
●
an estate, the income of which is subject to U.S. federal income tax regardless of its source; or
●
a trust if (a) a U.S. court can exercise primary supervision over the trust’s administration and one or more U.S. persons have the authority to control all of the trust’s
substantial decisions or (b) the trust has a valid election in effect under applicable U.S. Treasury Regulations to be treated as a U.S. person.
For purposes of this discussion, a “non-U.S. Holder” is a beneficial owner of our securities that is neither a U.S. Holder nor a partnership or an entity or arrangement treated as a
partnership for U.S. federal income tax purposes.


- 90 -


Table of Contents
Tax Considerations Applicable to U.S. Holders
Taxation of Distributions
If we pay distributions or make constructive distributions (other than certain distributions of our stock or rights to acquire our stock) to U.S. Holders of shares of our Common Stock,
such distributions generally will constitute dividends for U.S. federal income tax purposes to the extent paid or deemed paid from our current or accumulated earnings and profits, as
determined under U.S. federal income tax principles. Distributions in excess of our current and accumulated earnings and profits will constitute a return of capital that will be applied
against and reduce (but not below zero) the U.S. Holder’s adjusted tax basis in our Common Stock. Any remaining excess will be treated as gain realized on the sale or other
disposition of the Common Stock and will be treated as described under “Tax Considerations Applicable to U.S. Holders — Gain or Loss on Sale, Taxable Exchange or Other Taxable
Disposition of Common Stock” below.
Dividends we pay to a U.S. Holder that is a taxable corporation generally will qualify for the dividends received deduction if the requisite holding period is satisfied. With certain
exceptions (including dividends treated as investment income for purposes of investment interest deduction limitations), and provided certain holding period requirements are met,
dividends we pay to a non-corporate U.S. Holder generally will constitute “qualified dividends” that will be subject to tax at long-term capital gains rates. If the holding period
requirements are not satisfied, a corporation may not be able to qualify for the dividends received deduction and would have taxable income equal to the entire dividend amount, and
non-corporate holders may be subject to tax on such dividend at ordinary income tax rates instead of the preferential rates that apply to qualified dividend income.
Gain or Loss on Sale, Taxable Exchange or Other Taxable Disposition of Common Stock
A U.S. Holder generally will recognize gain or loss on the sale, taxable exchange or other taxable disposition of our Common Stock. Any such gain or loss will be capital gain or loss,
and will be long-term capital gain or loss if the U.S. Holder’s holding period for the Common Stock so disposed of exceeds one year. The amount of gain or loss recognized generally
will be equal to the difference between (1) the sum of the amount of cash and the fair market value of any property received in such disposition and (2) the U.S. Holder’s adjusted tax
basis in its Common Stock so disposed of. A U.S. Holder’s adjusted tax basis in its Common Stock generally will equal the U.S. Holder’s acquisition cost for such Common Stock (or,
in the case of Common Stock received upon exercise of a Warrant, the U.S. Holder’s initial basis for such Common Stock, as discussed below), less any prior distributions treated as a
return of capital. Long-term capital gains recognized by non-corporate U.S. Holders generally are eligible for reduced rates of tax. If the U.S. Holder’s holding period for the Common
Stock so disposed of is one year or less, any gain on a sale or other taxable disposition of the shares would be subject to short-term capital gain treatment and would be taxed at
ordinary income tax rates. The deductibility of capital losses is subject to limitations.
Exercise of a Warrant
Except as discussed below with respect to the cashless exercise of a Warrant, a U.S. Holder generally will not recognize taxable gain or loss upon the exercise of a Warrant for cash.
The U.S. Holder’s initial tax basis in the share of our Common Stock received upon exercise of the Warrant generally will be an amount equal to the sum of the U.S. Holder’s
acquisition cost of the Warrant and the exercise price of such Warrant. It is unclear whether a U.S. Holder’s holding period for the Common Stock received upon exercise of the
Warrant would commence on the date of exercise of the Warrant or the day following the date of exercise of the Warrant; however, in either case the holding period will not include
the period during which the U.S. Holder held the Warrants.
In certain circumstances, the Warrants may be exercised on a cashless basis. The U.S. federal income tax treatment of an exercise of a warrant on a cashless basis is not clear, and
could differ from the consequences described above. It is possible that a cashless exercise could be a taxable event. U.S. holders are urged to consult their tax advisors as to the
consequences of an exercise of a Warrant on a cashless basis, including with respect to their holding period and tax basis in the Common Stock received upon exercise of the Warrant.
Sale, Exchange, Redemption or Expiration of a Warrant
Upon a sale, exchange (other than by exercise), redemption, or expiration of a Warrant, a U.S. Holder will recognize taxable gain or loss in an amount equal to the difference between
(1) the amount realized upon such disposition or expiration and (2) the U.S. Holder’s adjusted tax basis in the Warrant. A U.S. Holder’s adjusted tax basis in its Warrants generally will
equal the U.S. Holder’s acquisition cost of the Warrant, increased by the amount of any constructive distributions included in income by such U.S. Holder (as described below under
“Tax Considerations Applicable to U.S. Holders — Possible Constructive Distributions”). Such gain or loss generally will


- 91 -


Table of Contents
be treated as long-term capital gain or loss if the Warrant is held by the U.S. Holder for more than one year at the time of such disposition or expiration.
If a Warrant is allowed to lapse unexercised, a U.S. Holder generally will recognize a capital loss equal to such holder’s adjusted tax basis in the Warrant. Any such loss generally will
be a capital loss and will be long-term capital loss if the Warrant is held for more than one year. The deductibility of capital losses is subject to certain limitations.
Possible Constructive Distributions
The terms of each Warrant provide for an adjustment to the number of shares of Common Stock for which the Warrant may be exercised or to the exercise price of the Warrant in
certain events, as discussed in the section of this prospectus captioned “Description of Securities – Warrants.” An adjustment which has the effect of preventing dilution generally
should not be a taxable event. Nevertheless, a U.S. Holder of Warrants would be treated as receiving a constructive distribution from us if, for example, the adjustment increases the
holder’s proportionate interest in our assets or earnings and profits (e.g., through an increase in the number of shares of Common Stock that would be obtained upon exercise or an
adjustment to the exercise price of the Warrant) as a result of a distribution of cash to the holders of shares of our Common Stock that is taxable to such holders as a distribution. Such
constructive distribution would be subject to tax as described above under “Tax Considerations Applicable to U.S. Holders — Taxation of Distributions” in the same manner as if such
U.S. Holder received a cash distribution from us on Common Stock equal to the fair market value of such increased interest.
Information Reporting and Backup Withholding
In general, information reporting requirements may apply to distributions paid to a U.S. Holder and to the proceeds of the sale or other disposition of our shares of Common Stock and
Warrants, unless the U.S. Holder is an exempt recipient. Backup withholding may apply to such payments if the U.S. Holder fails to provide a taxpayer identification number (or
furnishes an incorrect taxpayer identification number) or a certification of exempt status, or has been notified by the IRS that it is subject to backup withholding (and such notification
has not been withdrawn).
Backup withholding is not an additional tax. Any amounts withheld under the backup withholding rules will be allowed as a credit against a U.S. Holder’s U.S. federal income tax
liability and may entitle such holder to a refund, provided the required information is timely furnished to the IRS. Taxpayers should consult their tax advisors regarding their
qualification for an exemption from backup withholding and the procedures for obtaining such an exemption.
Tax Considerations Applicable to Non-U.S. Holders
Taxation of Distributions
In general, any distributions (including constructive distributions) we make to a non-U.S. Holder of shares on our Common Stock, to the extent paid or deemed paid out of our current
or accumulated earnings and profits (as determined under U.S. federal income tax principles), will constitute dividends for U.S. federal income tax purposes and, provided such
dividends are not effectively connected with the non-U.S. Holder’s conduct of a trade or business within the United States, we will be required to withhold tax from the gross amount
of the dividend at a rate of 30%, unless such non-U.S. Holder is eligible for a reduced rate of withholding tax under an applicable income tax treaty and provides proper certification
of its eligibility for such reduced rate (usually on an IRS Form W-8BEN or W-8BEN-E, as applicable). In the case of any constructive dividend (as described below under “Non-U.S.
Holders — Possible Constructive Distributions”), it is possible that this tax would be withheld from any amount owed to a non-U.S. Holder by the applicable withholding agent,
including cash distributions on other property or sale proceeds from Warrants or other property subsequently paid or credited to such holder. Any distribution not constituting a
dividend will be treated first as reducing (but not below zero) the non-U.S. Holder’s adjusted tax basis in its shares of our Common Stock and, to the extent such distribution exceeds
the non-U.S. Holder’s adjusted tax basis, as gain realized from the sale or other disposition of the Common Stock, which will be treated as described under “Tax Considerations
Applicable to Non-U.S. Holders — Gain on Sale, Taxable Exchange or Other Taxable Disposition of Common Stock and Warrants” below.
Dividends we pay to a non-U.S. Holder that are effectively connected with such non-U.S. Holder’s conduct of a trade or business within the United States (or, if a tax treaty applies,
are attributable to a U.S. permanent establishment or fixed base maintained by the non-U.S. Holder) generally will not be subject to U.S. withholding tax, provided such non-U.S.
Holder complies with certain certification and disclosure requirements (generally by providing an IRS Form W-8ECI). Instead, such dividends generally will be subject to U.S. federal
income tax, net of certain deductions, at the same individual or corporate rates applicable to U.S. Holders. If the non-U.S. Holder is a


- 92 -


Table of Contents
corporation, dividends that are effectively connected income may also be subject to a “branch profits tax” at a rate of 30% (or such lower rate as may be specified by an applicable
income tax treaty).
Exercise of a Warrant
The U.S. federal income tax treatment of a non-U.S. Holder’s exercise of a Warrant generally will correspond to the U.S. federal income tax treatment of the exercise of a Warrant by
a U.S. Holder, as described under “Tax Considerations Applicable to U.S. Holders — Exercise of a Warrant” above, although to the extent a cashless exercise results in a taxable
exchange, the tax consequences to the non-U.S. Holder would be the same as those described below in “Tax Considerations Applicable to Non-U.S. Holders — Gain on Sale,
Exchange or Other Taxable Disposition of Common Stock and Warrants.”
Gain on Sale, Exchange or Other Taxable Disposition of Common Stock and Warrants
A non-U.S. Holder generally will not be subject to U.S. federal income or withholding tax in respect of gain recognized on a sale, taxable exchange or other taxable disposition of our
Common Stock or Warrants or an expiration or redemption of our Warrants, unless:
●
the gain is effectively connected with the conduct of a trade or business by the non-U.S. Holder within the United States (and, if an applicable tax treaty so requires, is
attributable to a U.S. permanent establishment or fixed base maintained by the non-U.S. Holder);
●
the non-U.S. Holder is an individual who is present in the United States for 183 days or more in the taxable year of disposition and certain other conditions are met; or
●
we are or have been a “United States real property holding corporation” for U.S. federal income tax purposes at any time during the shorter of the five-year period ending on
the date of disposition or the period that the non-U.S. Holder held our Common Stock or Warrants and, in the case where shares of our Common Stock are regularly traded
on an established securities market, the non-U.S. Holder has owned, directly or constructively, more than 5% of our Common Stock at any time within the shorter of the five-
year period preceding the disposition or such Non-U.S. Holder’s holding period for the shares of our Common Stock. These rules may be modified as applied to the
Warrants. There can be no assurance that our Common Stock will or will not be treated as regularly traded on an established securities market for this purpose.
Gain described in the first bullet point above will be subject to tax at generally applicable U.S. federal income tax rates as if the non-U.S. Holder were a U.S. resident. Any gains
described in the first bullet point above of a non-U.S. Holder that is a foreign corporation may also be subject to an additional “branch profits tax” at a 30% rate (or lower applicable
treaty rate). Gain described in the second bullet point above generally will be subject to a flat 30% U.S. federal income tax. Non-U.S. Holders are urged to consult their tax advisors
regarding possible eligibility for benefits under income tax treaties.
If the third bullet point above applies to a non-U.S. Holder and applicable exceptions are not available, gain recognized by such holder on the sale, exchange or other disposition of
our Common Stock or Warrants, as applicable, will be subject to tax at generally applicable U.S. federal income tax rates. In addition, a buyer of our Common Stock or Warrants from
such holder may be required to withhold U.S. income tax at a rate of 15% of the amount realized upon such disposition. We will be classified as a United States real property holding
corporation if the fair market value of our “United States real property interests” equals or exceeds 50% of the sum of the fair market value of our worldwide real property interests
plus our other assets used or held for use in a trade or business, as determined for U.S. federal income tax purposes. We do not believe we currently are or will become a United States
real property holding corporation; however, there can be no assurance in this regard. Non-U.S. Holders are urged to consult their tax advisors regarding the application of these rules.
Possible Constructive Distributions
The terms of each Warrant provide for an adjustment to the number of shares of Common Stock for which the Warrant may be exercised or to the exercise price of the Warrant in
certain events, as discussed in the section of this prospectus captioned “Description of Securities — Warrants.” An adjustment which has the effect of preventing dilution generally
should not be a taxable event. Nevertheless, a non-U.S. Holder of Warrants would be treated as receiving a constructive distribution from us if, for example, the adjustment increases
the holder’s proportionate interest in our assets or earnings and profits (e.g., through an increase in the number of shares of Common Stock that would be obtained upon exercise or an
adjustment to the exercise price of the Warrant) as a result of a distribution of cash to the holders of shares of our Common Stock which is taxable to such holders as a distribution. A
non-U.S. Holder would be subject to


- 93 -


Table of Contents
- 94 -
U.S. federal income tax withholding as described above under “Tax Considerations Applicable to Non-U.S. Holders — Taxation of Distributions” under that section in the same
manner as if such non-U.S. Holder received a cash distribution from us on Common Stock equal to the fair market value of such increased interest.
Foreign Account Tax Compliance Act
Sections 1471 through 1474 of the Code (commonly referred to as the “Foreign Account Tax Compliance Act” or “FATCA”) impose a U.S. federal withholding tax of 30% on certain
payments paid to a foreign financial institution (as specifically defined by applicable rules) unless such institution enters into an agreement with the U.S. government to withhold on
certain payments and to collect and provide to the U.S. tax authorities substantial information regarding U.S. account holders of such institution (which includes certain equity holders
of such institution, as well as certain account holders that are foreign entities with U.S. owners). FATCA also generally imposes a federal withholding tax of 30% on certain payments
to a non-financial foreign entity unless such entity provides the withholding agent with either a certification that it does not have any substantial direct or indirect U.S. owners or
provides information regarding substantial direct and indirect U.S. owners of the entity. An intergovernmental agreement between the United States and an applicable foreign country
may modify these requirements. The withholding tax described above will not apply if the foreign financial institution or non-financial foreign entity otherwise qualifies for an
exemption from the rules.
FATCA withholding currently applies to payments of dividends. The U.S. Treasury Department has released proposed regulations which, if finalized in their present form, would
eliminate the federal withholding tax of 30% applicable to the gross proceeds of a disposition of our Common Stock. In its preamble to such proposed regulations, the U.S. Treasury
Department stated that taxpayers may generally rely on the proposed regulations until final regulations are issued. Non-U.S. Holders are encouraged to consult with their own tax
advisors regarding the possible implications of FATCA on their investment in our securities.
Information Reporting and Backup Withholding
Information returns will be filed with the IRS in connection with payments of distributions and the proceeds from a sale or other disposition of our Common Stock and Warrants. A
non-U.S. Holder may have to comply with certification procedures to establish that it is not a United States person in order to avoid information reporting and backup withholding
requirements. The certification procedures required to claim a reduced rate of withholding under a treaty generally will satisfy the certification requirements necessary to avoid the
backup withholding as well. Backup withholding is not an additional tax. The amount of any backup withholding from a payment to a non-U.S. Holder will be allowed as a credit
against such holder’s U.S. federal income tax liability and may entitle such holder to a refund, provided that the required information is timely furnished to the IRS.
THE U.S. FEDERAL INCOME TAX DISCUSSION SET FORTH ABOVE IS INCLUDED FOR GENERAL INFORMATION ONLY AND MAY NOT BE APPLICABLE
DEPENDING UPON A HOLDER’S PARTICULAR SITUATION. HOLDERS ARE URGED TO CONSULT THEIR TAX ADVISORS WITH RESPECT TO THE TAX
CONSEQUENCES TO THEM OF THE REDEMPTION OF ATLAS PUBLIC SHARES, INCLUDING THE TAX CONSEQUENCES UNDER STATE, LOCAL, ESTATE, NON-
U.S. AND OTHER TAX LAWS AND TAX TREATIES AND THE POSSIBLE EFFECTS OF CHANGES IN U.S. OR OTHER TAX LAWS.


Table of Contents
DESCRIPTION OF SECURITIES
The following is a summary of the rights of our Common Stock and preferred stock. This summary is qualified by reference to the complete text of our Certificate of Incorporation and
our Bylaws filed as exhibits to the registration statement of which this prospectus forms a part.
General
Our Certificate of Incorporation authorizes us to issue up to 700,000,000 shares of our Class A Common Stock, par value $0.0001 per share, 300,000,000 shares of our Class B
Common Stock, par value $0.0001 per share, and 10,000,000 shares of our preferred stock, par value $0.0001 per share.
Common Stock
Voting Power
Holders of our Class A Common Stock are entitled to one vote per share on all matters to be voted upon by the stockholders, and holders of Class B Common Stock are entitled to ten
votes per share on all matters to be voted upon by the stockholders. The holders of Class A Common Stock and Class B Common Stock will generally vote together as a single class
on all matters submitted to a vote of our stockholders, unless otherwise required by Delaware law or our Certificate of Incorporation. Delaware law could require either holders of
Class A Common Stock or Class B Common Stock to vote separately as a single class in the following circumstances:
●
if we were to seek to amend our Certificate of Incorporation to increase or decrease the par value of a class of our capital stock, then that class would be required to vote
separately to approve the proposed amendment; and
●
if we were to seek to amend our Certificate of Incorporation in a manner that alters or changes the powers, preferences, or special rights of a class of our capital stock in a
manner that affected its holders adversely, then that class would be required to vote separately to approve the proposed amendment.
As a result, in these limited instances, the holders of a majority of Class A Common Stock could defeat an amendment to our Certificate of Incorporation.
Dividends
Holders of Class A Common Stock and Class B Common Stock are entitled to receive such dividends, if any, as may be declared from time to time by our board of directors in its
discretion out of funds legally available therefor. We do not anticipate paying any cash dividends in the foreseeable future.
Liquidation, Dissolution and Winding Up
In the event of our voluntary or involuntary liquidation, dissolution, distribution of assets or winding-up, subject to preferences that may apply to any shares of preferred stock
outstanding at the time, the holders of our Common Stock will be entitled to receive an equal amount per share of all of our assets of whatever kind available for distribution to
stockholders, after the rights of the holders of the preferred stock have been satisfied.
Conversion
Each share of Class B Common Stock is convertible at any time at the option of the holder into one share of Class A Common Stock. In addition, each share of Class B Common
Stock will automatically convert into one share of Class A Common Stock upon transfer to a non-authorized holder. In addition, Class B Common Stock is subject to “sunset”
provisions, under which all share of Class B Common Stock will automatically convert into an equal number of share of Class A Common Stock upon the earliest to occur of (i) the
ten-year anniversary of the Closing of the Business Combination, (ii) the date specified by the holders of two-thirds of the then outstanding Class B Common Stock, voting as a
separate class, and when the number of Class B Common Stock represents less than 10% of the aggregate number of Class A Common Stock and Class B Common Stock then


- 95 -
outstanding. In addition, each share of Class B Common Stock will automatically convert into an equal number of Class A Common Stock upon the earliest to occur of (a) in the case
of an Archer Founder, the date that is nine months following the death or incapacity of such Archer Founder, and, in the case of any other holder, the


Table of Contents
date of the death or incapacity of such holder, (b) in the case of an Archer Founder, the date that is 12 months following the date that such Archer Founder ceases to provide services to
Archer and its subsidiaries as an executive officer, employee or director of Archer, and, in the case of any other holder, immediately at the occurrence of any such event, and (c) in the
case of an Archer Founder or any other holder, at least 80% (subject to customary capitalization adjustments) of the Class B Common Stock held by such Archer Founder (on a fully
as converted/as exercised basis) as of immediately following the Closing of the Business Combination having been transferred (subject to the exceptions described above).
Preemptive or Other Rights
Stockholders have no preemptive or other subscription rights and there are no sinking fund or redemption provisions applicable to Class A Common Stock and Class B Common
Stock.
Election of Directors
Our board of directors will remain divided into three classes, Class I, Class II and Class III, with only one class of directors being elected in each year and each class serving a three-
year term. There will be no cumulative voting with respect to the election of directors, with the result that the holders of more than 50% of the shares voted for the election of directors
will be in a position to elect all of the directors.
Preferred Stock
Under our Certificate of Incorporation, shares of preferred stock may be issued from time to time in one or more series. The board of directors is authorized to fix the voting rights, if
any, designations, powers and preferences, the relative, participating, optional or other special rights, and any qualifications, limitations and restrictions thereof, applicable to the
shares of each series of preferred stock. The board of directors is able to, without stockholder approval, issue preferred stock with voting and other rights that could adversely affect
the voting power and other rights of the holders of the Common Stock and could have anti-takeover effects. The ability of the board of directors to issue preferred stock without
stockholder approval could have the effect of delaying, deferring or preventing a change of control or the removal of existing management. No shares of preferred stock are
outstanding as of the Closing and we have no present plans to issue any shares of preferred stock.
Warrants
SVB Warrants
In connection with a certain Loan and Security Agreement, Archer issued Silicon Valley Bank a warrant to purchase 211,642 shares of Legacy Archer common stock (“SVB Warrant
I”). At the Effective Time, SVB Warrant I was automatically exchanged for a warrant to purchase 366,140 Class A Common Stock at an exercise price of $11.50 per share.
In connection with a certain Loan and Security Agreement, Archer and SVB Innovation Credit Fund VIII, L.P. entered into a warrant to purchase 211,641 shares of Legacy Archer
common stock (“SVB Warrant II”) per warrant agreement with SVB Innovation Credit Fund VIII. At the Effective Time, SVB Warrant II was automatically exchanged for a warrant
to purchase 366,140 Class A Common Stock at an exercise price of $11.50 per share.
Mesa Warrant
In connection with the Collaboration Agreement with United and the Assignment and Assumption Agreement with Mesa, Legacy Archer issued Mesa a warrant to purchase 1,171,649
shares of Legacy Archer Common Stock at an exercise price of $0.01. The Mesa Warrant was adjusted by the application of the Exchange Ratio at the Effective Time.
United Warrant
In connection with the Purchase Agreement and Collaboration Agreement, Archer issued the United Warrant to United Airlines, of which 1,171,649 shares subject to such warrant
were assigned to Mesa pursuant to the Assignment and Assumption Agreement. The United Warrant was assigned by United Airlines to UAV and shall vest and become exercisable
upon the achievement of certain milestones. The United Warrant was adjusted by the application of the Exchange Ratio at the Effective Time.


- 96 -


Table of Contents
FCA Warrant
In connection with the FCA Agreements, (as defined below) Legacy Archer issued FCA US LLC a warrant to purchase up to 1,671,202 shares of Legacy Archer Common Stock at an
exercise price of $0.01 per share (the “Initial FCA Warrant”). The Initial FCA Warrant shall vest and become exercisable upon the achievement of certain milestones. The Initial
FCA Warrant was adjusted by the application of the Exchange Ratio at the Effective Time.
In connection with that certain consulting agreement, Legacy Archer issued FCA Italy S.p.A. a warrant to purchase up to 1,070,000 shares of Class B Common Stock at an exercise
price of $0.01 per share (the “Second FCA Warrant”). The Second FCA Warrant shall vest and become exercisable upon the achievement of certain milestones. The Second FCA
Warrant was adjusted by the application of the Exchange Ratio at the Effective Time.
Redeemable Warrants
As of the Closing of the Business Combination, there were 24,666,667 Warrants outstanding (excluding the warrants discussed immediately above), consisting of 16,666,667 Public
Warrants and 8,000,000 Private Warrants held by the Sponsor. Each Warrant entitles the registered holder to purchase one share of Class A Common Stock at a price of $11.50 per
share at any time commencing 30 days after the Closing of the Business Combination. The Warrants will expire at 5:00 p.m., New York City time, on the fifth anniversary of the
Closing of the Business Combination, or earlier upon redemption or liquidation.
Holders of Public Warrants cannot pay cash to exercise their Public Warrants unless we have an effective and current registration statement covering the issuance of the shares
underlying such Warrants and a current prospectus relating thereto. Notwithstanding the foregoing, if a registration statement covering the Class A Common Stock issuable upon
exercise of the Public Warrants is not effective within a specified period following the consummation of the Business Combination, warrant holders may, until such time as there is an
effective registration statement and during any period when we will have failed to maintain an effective registration statement, exercise Public Warrants on a cashless basis pursuant to
the exemption provided by Section 3(a)(9) of the Securities Act, provided that such exemption is available. If that exemption, or another exemption, is not available, holders will not
be able to exercise their Public Warrants on a cashless basis. In the event of such cashless exercise, each holder would pay the exercise price by surrendering the Warrants for that
number of shares of Class A Common Stock equal to the quotient obtained by dividing (x) the product of the number of shares of Class A Common Stock underlying the Public
Warrants, multiplied by the difference between the exercise price of the Public Warrants and the “fair market value” (defined below) by (y) the fair market value. The “fair market
value” for this purpose will mean the average reported last sale price of the shares of Class A Common Stock for the 10 trading days ending on the third trading day prior to the date
on which the notice of redemption is sent to holders of warrants.
The Private Warrants are identical to the Public Warrants except that such warrants will be exercisable for cash or on a cashless basis, at the holder’s option, and will not be
redeemable by us, in each case so long as they are still held by the Atlas Initial Stockholders or their permitted transferees.
We may call the Public Warrants for redemption, in whole and not in part, at a price of $0.01 per warrant,
●
at any time after the warrants become exercisable;
●
upon not less than 30 days’ prior written notice of redemption to each warrant holder;
●
if, and only if, the last reported sale price of the shares of Class A Common Stock equals or exceeds $18.00 per share (as adjusted for stock splits, stock dividends,
reorganizations and recapitalizations), for any 20 trading days within a 30-trading day period commencing at any time after the warrants become exercisable and ending on
the third business day prior to the notice of redemption to warrant holders; and
●
if, and only if, there is a current registration statement in effect with respect to the shares of Class A Common Stock underlying such warrants.
The right to exercise will be forfeited unless the Warrants are exercised prior to the date specified in the notice of redemption. On and after the redemption date, a record holder of a
warrant will have no further rights except to receive the redemption price for such holder’s warrant upon surrender of such warrant.


- 97 -


Table of Contents
- 98 -
The redemption criteria for our Warrants was established at a price which is intended to provide warrant holders a reasonable premium to the initial exercise price and provide a
sufficient differential between the then-prevailing share price and the warrant exercise price so that if the share price declines as a result of our redemption call, the redemption will
not cause the share price to drop below the exercise price of the Warrants.
If we call the Warrants for redemption as described above, our management will have the option to require all holders that wish to exercise Warrants to do so on a “cashless basis.” In
such event, each holder would pay the exercise price by surrendering the Warrants for that number of shares of Class A Common Stock equal to the quotient obtained by dividing
(x) the product of the number of shares of Class A Common Stock underlying the Warrants, multiplied by the difference between the exercise price of the Warrants and the “fair
market value” (defined below) by (y) the fair market value. The “fair market value” for this purpose shall mean the average reported last sale price of the shares of Class A Common
Stock for the 10 trading days ending on the third trading day prior to the date on which the notice of redemption is sent to the holders of Warrants.
The Warrants were issued in registered form under a warrant agreement between Continental Stock Transfer & Trust Company, as warrant agent, and us. The warrant agreement
provides that the terms of the Warrants may be amended without the consent of any holder to cure any ambiguity or correct any defective provision, but requires the approval, by
written consent or vote, of the holders of at least a majority of the then outstanding Public Warrants and Private Warrants, if such modification or amendment is being undertaken prior
to, or in connection with, the closing, or Warrants, if such modification or amendment is being undertaken after the closing, in order to make any change that adversely affects the
interests of the registered holders.
The exercise price and number of shares of Class A Common Stock issuable on exercise of the Warrants may be adjusted in certain circumstances including in the event of a stock
dividend, extraordinary dividend or our recapitalization, reorganization, merger or consolidation. The Warrants will not be adjusted for issuances of shares of Class A Common Stock
at a price below their respective exercise prices.
The Warrants may be exercised upon surrender of the warrant certificate on or prior to the expiration date at the office of the warrant agent, with the subscription form, as set forth in
the warrant, duly executed, accompanied by full payment of the exercise price, by certified or official bank check payable to the order of the warrant agent, for the number of Warrants
being exercised. The warrant holders do not have the rights or privileges of holders of shares of Class A Common Stock and any voting rights until they exercise their Warrants and
receive shares of Class A Common Stock. After the issuance of shares of Class A Common Stock upon exercise of the Warrants, each holder will be entitled to one vote for each share
held of record on all matters to be voted on by stockholders.
Anti-Takeover Provisions
Section 203 of the Delaware General Corporation Law
We are subject to Section  203 of the DGCL, which generally prohibits a publicly held Delaware corporation from engaging in any business combination with any interested
stockholder for a period of three years after the date that such stockholder became an interested stockholder, with the following exceptions:
●
before such date, the board of directors of the corporation approved either the business combination or the transaction that resulted in the stockholder becoming an interested
stockholder;
●
upon completion of the transaction that resulted in the stockholder becoming an interested stockholder, the interested stockholder owned at least 85% of the voting stock of
the corporation outstanding at the time the transaction began, excluding for purposes of determining the voting stock outstanding, but not the outstanding voting stock owned
by the interested stockholder, those shares owned (1) by persons who are directors and also officers and (2) employee stock plans in which employee participants do not have
the right to determine confidentially whether shares held subject to the plan will be tendered in a tender or exchange offer; or
●
on or after such date, the business combination is approved by the board of directors and authorized at an annual or special meeting of the stockholders, and not by written
consent, by the affirmative vote of at least 662/3% of the outstanding voting stock that is not owned by the interested stockholder.




Table of Contents
In general, Section 203 defines a “business combination” to include the following:
●
any merger or consolidation involving the corporation and the interested stockholder;
●
any sale, transfer, pledge or other disposition of 10% or more of the assets of the corporation involving the interested stockholder;
●
subject to certain exceptions, any transaction that results in the issuance or transfer by the corporation of any stock of the corporation to the interested stockholder;
●
any transaction involving the corporation that has the effect of increasing the proportionate share of the stock or any class or series of the corporation beneficially owned by
the interested stockholder; or
●
the receipt by the interested stockholder of the benefit of any loans, advances, guarantees, pledges or other financial benefits by or through the corporation.
In general, Section 203 defines an “interested stockholder” as an entity or person who, together with the person’s affiliates and associates, beneficially owns or within three years prior
to the time of determination of interested stockholder status did own, 15% or more of the outstanding voting stock of the corporation.
A Delaware corporation may “opt out” of these provisions with an express provision in its original certificate of incorporation or an express provision in its amended and restated
certificate of incorporation or amended and restated bylaws resulting from a stockholders’ amendment approved by at least a majority of the outstanding voting shares. We have not
opted out of these provisions. As a result, mergers or other takeover or change in control attempts of us may be discouraged or prevented.
Certificate of Incorporation and Bylaws
Among other things, our Certificate of Incorporation and our Bylaws:
●
permit our board of directors to issue up to 10,000,000 shares of preferred stock, with any rights, preferences and privileges as they may designate, including the right to
approve an acquisition or other change of control;
●
provides that the authorized number of directors may be changed only by resolution of our board of directors;
●
provides that, subject to the rights of any series of preferred stock to elect directors, directors may only be removed with or without cause, which removal may be effected,
subject to any limitation imposed by law, by the holders of at least 662/3% of the voting power of all of our then-outstanding shares of the capital stock entitled to vote
generally at an election of directors;
●
provide that all vacancies, including newly created directorships, may, except as otherwise required by law, be filled by the affirmative vote of a majority of directors then in
office, even if less than a quorum;
●
require that any action to be taken by our stockholders must be effected at a duly called annual or special meeting of stockholders and not be taken by written consent or
electronic transmission;
●
provide that stockholders seeking to present proposals before a meeting of stockholders or to nominate candidates for election as directors at a meeting of stockholders must
provide advance notice in writing, and also specify requirements as to the form and content of a stockholder’s notice;
●
provide that special meetings of our stockholders may be called only by the chairperson of our board of directors, our chief executive officer or by our board of directors
pursuant to a resolution adopted by a majority of the total number of authorized directors; and


- 99 -
●
does not provide for cumulative voting rights, therefore allowing the holders of a majority of the shares of Class A Common Stock entitled to vote in any election of directors
to elect all of the directors standing for election, if they should so choose.


Table of Contents
The amendment of any of these provisions would require approval by the holders of at least 662/3% of the voting power of all of our then-outstanding capital stock entitled to vote
generally in the election of directors, voting together as a single class.
The combination of these provisions may make it more difficult for our existing stockholders to replace our board of directors as well as for another party to obtain control of us by
replacing our board of directors. Since our board of directors has the power to retain and discharge our officers, these provisions could also make it more difficult for existing
stockholders or another party to effect a change in management. In addition, the authorization of undesignated preferred stock makes it possible for our board of directors to issue
preferred stock with voting or other rights or preferences that could impede the success of any attempt to change our control.
These provisions are intended to enhance the likelihood of continued stability in the composition of our board of directors and its policies and to discourage coercive takeover
practices and inadequate takeover bids. These provisions are also designed to reduce our vulnerability to hostile takeovers and to discourage certain tactics that may be used in proxy
fights. However, such provisions could have the effect of discouraging others from making tender offers for our shares and may have the effect of delaying changes in our control or
management. As a consequence, these provisions may also inhibit fluctuations in the market price of our stock.
Our Certificate of Incorporation provides that the Court of Chancery of the State of Delaware will be the exclusive forum for actions or proceedings brought under Delaware statutory
or common law:
●
any derivative action or proceeding brought on our behalf;
●
any action asserting a breach of fiduciary duty owed by any current or former director, officer or stockholder of the Company, to the Company or the Company’s
stockholders;
●
any action asserting a claim against us arising under the Delaware General Corporation Law;
●
any action regarding our Certificate of Incorporation or our Bylaws (as either may be amended from time to time);
●
any action as to which the Delaware General Corporate Law confers jurisdiction to the Court of Chancery of the State of Delaware;
●
any action asserting a claim against us that is governed by the internal affairs doctrine, in all cases to the fullest extent permitted by law and subject to the court having
personal jurisdiction over the indispensable parties named as defendants.
Our Certificate of Incorporation further provides that the federal district courts of the United States of America will be the exclusive forum for resolving any complaint asserting a
cause of action arising under the Securities Act.
Section 27 of the Exchange Act creates exclusive federal jurisdiction over all suits brought to enforce any duty or liability created by the Exchange Act or the rules and regulations
thereunder. As a result, the exclusive forum provision of our Certificate of Incorporation will not apply to suits brought to enforce any duty or liability created by the Exchange Act or
any other claim for which the federal courts have exclusive jurisdiction.
Although we believe this provision benefits us by providing increased consistency in the application of Delaware law in the types of lawsuits to which it applies, a court may
determine that this provision is unenforceable, and to the extent it is enforceable, the provision may have the effect of discouraging lawsuits against our directors and officers,
although our stockholders will not be deemed to have waived our compliance with federal securities laws and the rules and regulations thereunder and therefore bring a claim in
another appropriate forum. Additionally, we cannot be certain that a court will decide that this provision is either applicable or enforceable, and if a court were to find the choice of
forum provision contained in our Certificate of Incorporation to be inapplicable or unenforceable in an action, we may incur additional costs associated with resolving such action in
other jurisdictions, which could harm our business, operating results and financial condition.
Limitations of Liability and Indemnification


- 100 -
See “Management – Limitation on Liability and Indemnification of Directors and Officers”.


Table of Contents
- 101 -
Rule 144
Pursuant to Rule 144 under the Securities Act (“Rule 144”), a person who has beneficially owned restricted Common Stock or Warrants for at least six months would be entitled to
sell their securities provided that (i) such person is not deemed to have been one of our affiliates at the time of, or at any time during the three months preceding, a sale and (ii) we are
subject to the Exchange Act periodic reporting requirements for at least three months before the sale and has filed all required reports under Section 13 or 15(d) of the Exchange Act
during the 12 months (or such shorter period as we were required to file reports) preceding the sale.
Persons who have beneficially owned restricted Common Stock or Warrants for at least six months but who are our affiliates at the time of, or at any time during the three months
preceding, a sale, would be subject to additional restrictions, by which such person would be entitled to sell within any three-month period only a number of securities that does not
exceed the greater of:
●
1% of the total number of shares of our Common Stock then outstanding; or
●
the average weekly reported trading volume of our Common Stock during the four calendar weeks preceding the filing of a notice on Form 144 with respect to the sale.
Sales by our affiliates under Rule 144 are also limited by manner of sale provisions and notice requirements and to the availability of current public information about us.
Restrictions on the Use of Rule 144 by Shell Companies or Former Shell Companies
Rule 144 is not available for the resale of securities initially issued by shell companies (other than business combination related shell companies) or issuers that have been at any time
previously a shell company. However, Rule 144 also includes an important exception to this prohibition if the following conditions are met:
●
the issuer of the securities that was formerly a shell company has ceased to be a shell company;
●
the average weekly reported trading volume of Atlas Common Stock during the four calendar weeks preceding the filing of a notice on Form 144 with respect to the sale;
●
the issuer of the securities is subject to the reporting requirements of Section 13 or 15(d) of the Exchange Act;
●
the issuer of the securities has filed all Exchange Act reports and material required to be filed, as applicable, during the preceding twelve months (or such shorter period that
the issuer was required to file such reports and materials), other than Form 8-K reports; and
●
at least one year has elapsed from the time that the issuer filed current Form 10 type information with the SEC reflecting its status as an entity that is not a shell company.
Common stock that stockholders of Legacy Archer received in connection with the Business Combination are freely tradable without restriction or further registration under the
Securities Act, except for certain shares of our Common Stock issued pursuant to the 2019 Plan and 2021 Plan, and any shares issued to our affiliates within the meaning of Rule 144.
As of the date of this prospectus, there are 25,398,947 Warrants outstanding, consisting of 16,666,667 Public Warrants and 8,000,000 Private Warrants. The Public Warrants are freely
tradable. In addition, we are obligated to use best efforts to file a registration statement under the Securities Act covering 16,666,667 shares of our Class A Common Stock that may be
issued upon the exercise of the Public Warrants no later than 15 business days after the Closing, and cause such registration statement to become effective and maintain the
effectiveness of such registration statement until the expiration of the Public Warrants.


Table of Contents
- 102 -
Registration Rights Agreement
In connection with the Closing of the Business Combination, we entered into the Registration Rights Agreement on September 16, 2021, pursuant to which the holders of Registrable
Securities (as defined therein) became entitled to, among other things, customary registration rights, including demand, piggy-back and shelf registration rights. The Registration
Rights Agreement also provides that we will pay certain expenses relating to such registrations and indemnify the registration rights holders against (or make contributions in respect
of) certain liabilities which may arise under the Securities Act.
For a detailed description of the Registration Rights Agreement, see the section titled “Certain Relationships and Related Party Transactions — Archer Related Agreements —
Registration Rights Agreement”.
Transfer Agent
The transfer agent for our securities is Continental Stock Transfer & Trust Company. The transfer agent’s address is One State Street Plaza, 30th Floor New York, NY 10004.


Table of Contents
PLAN OF DISTRIBUTION
We are registering the issuance by us of up to 25,398,947 shares of Class A Common Stock that are issuable upon the exercise of the Warrants by the holders thereof, consisting of (i)
8,732,280 shares of Class A Common Stock that are issuable upon the exercise of the Private Warrants by the holders thereof and (ii) 16,666,667 shares of Class A Common Stock that
are issuable upon the exercise of the Public Warrants by the holders thereof. We are also registering the resale by the selling securityholders or their permitted transferees from time to
time of (i) up to 165,425,700 shares of Class A Common Stock (including up to (a) 12,500,000 shares of Class A Common Stock issued as Sponsor Shares, (b) 61,512,500 shares of
Class A Common Stock, consisting of 60,000,000 PIPE Shares and 1,512,500 Class A Shares issued to satisfy certain fees related to the Business Combination and PIPE Financing,
(c) 8,732,280 shares of Class A Common Stock issuable upon the exercise of the Private Warrants, and (d) 82,680,920 shares of Class A Common Stock pursuant to that certain
Registration Rights Agreement) and (ii) up to 8,732,280 Private Warrants.
We are required to file this registration statement in accordance with our obligations set forth in the Registration Rights Agreement as more fully described in “Certain Relationships
and Related Party Transactions – Archer Related Agreements – Registration Rights Agreements”.
We are required to pay all fees and expenses incident to the registration of the securities to be offered and sold pursuant to this prospectus. The selling securityholders will bear all
commissions and discounts, if any, attributable to their sale of securities.
We will not receive any of the proceeds from the sale of the securities by the selling securityholders. We will receive proceeds from Warrants exercised in the event that such Warrants
are exercised for cash. The aggregate proceeds to the selling securityholders will be the purchase price of the securities less any discounts and commissions borne by the selling
securityholders.
The shares of Class A Common Stock beneficially owned by the selling securityholders covered by this prospectus may be offered and sold from time to time by the selling
securityholders. The term “selling securityholders” includes donees, pledgees, transferees or other successors in interest selling securities received after the date of this prospectus
from a selling securityholder as a gift, pledge, partnership distribution or other transfer. The selling securityholders will act independently of us in making decisions with respect to the
timing, manner and size of each sale. Such sales may be made on one or more exchanges or in the over-the-counter market or otherwise, at prices and under terms then prevailing or at
prices related to the then current market price or in negotiated transactions. The selling securityholders may sell their securities by one or more of, or a combination of, the following
methods:
●
purchases by a broker-dealer as principal and resale by such broker-dealer for its own account pursuant to this prospectus;
●
ordinary brokerage transactions and transactions in which the broker solicits purchasers;
●
block trades in which the broker-dealer so engaged will attempt to sell the shares as agent but may position and resell a portion of the block as principal to facilitate the
transaction;
●
an over-the-counter distribution in accordance with the rules of NYSE;
●
through trading plans entered into by a selling securityholder pursuant to Rule 10b5-1 under the Exchange Act, that are in place at the time of an offering pursuant to this
prospectus and any applicable prospectus supplement hereto that provide for periodic sales of their securities on the basis of parameters described in such trading plans;
●
short sales;
●
distribution to employees, members, limited partners or stockholders of the selling securityholders; through the writing or settlement of options or other hedging transaction,
whether through an options exchange or otherwise;
●
pledges to secure debts and other obligations;


- 103 -
●
delayed delivery arrangements;
●
to or through underwriters or broker-dealers;


Table of Contents
●
in “at the market” offerings, as defined in Rule 415 under the Securities Act, at negotiated prices, at prices prevailing at the time of sale or at prices related to such prevailing
market prices, including sales made directly on a national securities exchange or sales made through a market maker other than on an exchange or other similar offerings
through sales agents;
●
in privately negotiated transactions;
●
in options transactions;
●
through a combination of any of the above methods of sale; or
●
any other method permitted pursuant to applicable law.
In addition, any securities that qualify for sale pursuant to Rule 144 may be sold under Rule 144 rather than pursuant to this prospectus.
In addition, a selling securityholder that is an entity may elect to make a pro rata in-kind distribution of securities to its members, partners or stockholders pursuant to the registration
statement of which this prospectus is a part by delivering a prospectus with a plan of distribution. Such members, partners or stockholders would thereby receive freely tradeable
securities pursuant to the distribution through a registration statement. To the extent a distributee is an affiliate of ours (or to the extent otherwise required by law), we may, at our
option, file a prospectus supplement in order to permit the distributees to use the prospectus to resell the securities acquired in the distribution.
To the extent required, this prospectus may be amended or supplemented from time to time to describe a specific plan of distribution. In connection with distributions of the securities
or otherwise, the selling securityholders may enter into hedging transactions with broker-dealers or other financial institutions. In connection with such transactions, broker-dealers or
other financial institutions may engage in short sales of the securities in the course of hedging the positions they assume with selling securityholders. The selling securityholders may
also sell the securities short and redeliver the securities to close out such short positions. The selling securityholders may also enter into option or other transactions with broker-
dealers or other financial institutions which require the delivery to such broker-dealer or other financial institution of securities offered by this prospectus, which securities such
broker-dealer or other financial institution may resell pursuant to this prospectus (as supplemented or amended to reflect such transaction). The selling securityholders may also pledge
securities to a broker-dealer or other financial institution, and, upon a default, such broker- dealer or other financial institution, may effect sales of the pledged securities pursuant to
this prospectus (as supplemented or amended to reflect such transaction).
In effecting sales, broker-dealers or agents engaged by the selling securityholders may arrange for other broker-dealers to participate. Broker-dealers or agents may receive
commissions, discounts or concessions from the selling securityholders in amounts to be negotiated immediately prior to the sale.
In offering the securities covered by this prospectus, the selling securityholders and any broker-dealers who execute sales for the selling securityholders may be deemed to be
“underwriters” within the meaning of the Securities Act in connection with such sales. Any profits realized by the selling securityholders who are “underwriters,” and the
compensation of any broker-dealer who executes sales for them, may be deemed to be underwriting discounts and commissions.
In order to comply with the securities laws of certain states, if applicable, the securities must be sold in such jurisdictions only through registered or licensed brokers or dealers. In
addition, in certain states the securities may not be sold unless they have been registered or qualified for sale in the applicable state or an exemption from the registration or
qualification requirement is available and is complied with.
We have advised the selling securityholders that the anti-manipulation rules of Regulation M under the Exchange Act may apply to sales of securities in the market and to the
activities of the selling securityholders and their affiliates. In addition, we will make copies of this prospectus available to the selling securityholders for the purpose of satisfying the
prospectus delivery requirements of the Securities Act. The selling securityholders may indemnify any broker-dealer that participates in transactions involving the sale of the securities
against certain liabilities, including liabilities arising under the Securities Act.
At the time a particular offer of securities is made, if required, a prospectus supplement will be distributed that will set forth the number of securities being offered and the terms of the
offering, including the name of any underwriter, dealer or agent, the purchase price paid


- 104 -


Table of Contents
- 105 -
by any underwriter, any discount, commission and other item constituting compensation, any discount, commission or concession allowed or reallowed or paid to any dealer, and the
proposed selling price to the public.
A holder of Warrants may exercise its Warrants in accordance with the Warrant Agreement on or before the expiration date set forth therein by surrendering, at the office of the
Warrant Agent, Continental Stock Transfer & Trust Company, the certificate evidencing such Warrant, with the form of election to purchase set forth thereon, properly completed and
duly executed, accompanied by full payment of the exercise price and any and all applicable taxes due in connection with the exercise of the Warrant, subject to any applicable
provisions relating to cashless exercises in accordance with the Warrant Agreement.
We have agreed to indemnify the selling securityholders against certain liabilities, including liabilities under the Securities Act and state securities laws, relating to the registration of
the Warrants or shares offered by this prospectus.
We have agreed with the selling securityholders to keep the registration statement of which this prospectus constitutes a part effective until such time as all of the securities covered by
this prospectus have been disposed of pursuant to and in accordance with the registration statement or such securities have been withdrawn or, in the case of shares issued pursuant to
the Subscription Agreements, until three years from the effective date of this registration statement.


Table of Contents
- 106 -
LEGAL MATTERS
The validity of the securities offered hereby will be passed upon for us by Cooley LLP.
EXPERTS
The financial statements of Atlas as of December 31, 2020, and for the period from August 26, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020 appearing in this prospectus have been
audited by Marcum LLP, independent registered public accounting firm, as set forth in their reports thereon, appearing herein, and are included in reliance upon such report given on
the authority of such firm as experts in auditing and accounting.
The financial statements of Archer as of December 31, 2020 and 2019 and for each of the two years in the period ended December 31, 2020 included in this prospectus have been so
included in reliance on the report (which contains an explanatory paragraph relating to Archer’s ability to continue as a going concern as described in Note 2 to the financial
statements) of PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP, an independent registered public accounting firm, given on the authority of said firm as experts in auditing and accounting.
WHERE YOU CAN FIND MORE INFORMATION
We have filed with the SEC a registration statement on Form S-1 under the Securities Act, with respect to the securities being offered by this prospectus. This prospectus, which
constitutes part of the registration statement, does not contain all of the information in the registration statement and its exhibits. For further information with respect to us and our
securities offered by this prospectus, we refer you to the registration statement and its exhibits. Statements contained in this prospectus as to the contents of any contract or any other
document referred to are not necessarily complete, and in each instance, we refer you to the copy of the contract or other document filed as an exhibit to the registration statement.
Each of these statements is qualified in all respects by this reference. You can read our SEC filings, including the registration statement, over the internet at the SEC’s website at
www.sec.gov.
We are subject to the information reporting requirements of the Exchange Act, and we file reports, proxy statements and other information with the SEC. These reports, proxy
statements and other information will be available for review at the SEC’s website at www.sec.gov. We also maintain a website at www.archer.com, at which you may access these
materials free of charge as soon as reasonably practicable after they are electronically filed with, or furnished to, the SEC. The information contained in, or that can be accessed
through, our website is not part of this prospectus.


Table of Contents
UNAUDITED PRO FORMA CONDENSED COMBINED FINANCIAL INFORMATION
Defined terms included below have the same meaning as terms defined and included elsewhere in the Current Report on Form 8-K (the “Form 8-K”) filed by the Company with the
Securities and Exchange Commission (the “SEC”) on September 21, 2021. Unless the context otherwise requires, “Legacy Archer” refers to Archer Aviation Inc. prior to the Closing
Date, the “Company” refers to Archer Aviation Inc. (“Archer”) (f/k/a Atlas Crest Investment Corp.) after the Closing, and Atlas Crest Investment Corp. (“Atlas”) prior to the Closing
Date.
The following unaudited pro forma condensed combined financial information has been prepared in accordance with Article 11 of Regulation S-X as amended by the final rule,
Release No. 33-10786 “Amendments to Financial Disclosures about Acquired and Disposed Businesses,” and presents the combination of the historical financial information of Atlas
and Archer adjusted to give effect to the Business Combination and related transactions.
Atlas is a blank check company formed for the purpose of acquiring, through a merger, share exchange, asset acquisition, stock purchase, reorganization, recapitalization, or other
similar business transaction, one or more operating businesses or entities.
The unaudited pro forma condensed combined balance sheet as of June 30, 2021 combines the historical balance sheet of Atlas and the historical balance sheet of Legacy Archer on a
pro forma basis as if the Business Combination and the related transactions contemplated by the Business Combination Agreement, summarized below, had been consummated on
June 30, 2021. The unaudited pro forma condensed combined statements of operations for the six months ended June 30, 2021 and for the year ended December 31, 2020, combines
the historical statements of operations of Atlas and Legacy Archer for such periods on a pro forma basis as if the Business Combination and the related transactions, summarized
below, had been consummated on January 1, 2020, the beginning of the earliest period presented.
The pro forma condensed combined financial information may not be useful in predicting the future financial condition and results of operations of Archer. The actual financial
position and results of operations may differ significantly from the pro forma amounts reflected herein due to a variety of factors.
The historical financial information of Atlas was derived from the unaudited condensed financial statements of Atlas as of and for the six months ended June 30, 2021 and the audited
financial statements for the period from August  26, 2020 (inception) through December  31, 2020. The historical financial information of Legacy Archer was derived from the
unaudited condensed financial statements of Legacy Archer as of and for the six months ended June 30, 2021 and the audited financial statements for the year ended December 31,
2020. This information should be read together with Atlas’ and Archer’s audited financial statements and related notes, the sections titled “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of
Financial Condition and Results of Operations of Atlas,” and “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations of Archer” contained in
Atlas’ Proxy Statement/Prospectus filed on August 10, 2021, the section titled “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” included in
the Form 8-K.
Accounting for the Business Combination
The Business Combination has been accounted for as a reverse recapitalization, with no goodwill or other intangible assets recorded, in accordance with GAAP. Under this method of
accounting, Atlas has been treated as the “accounting acquiree” and Archer as the “accounting acquirer” for financial reporting purposes. Archer was determined to be the accounting
acquirer primarily because Legacy Archer stakeholders collectively own a majority of the outstanding shares of the combined company as of the closing of the merger, they have
nominated six of the seven board of directors as of the closing of the merger, and Legacy Archer’s management continue to manage the combined company. Additionally, Legacy
Archer’s business comprises the ongoing operations of the combined company immediately following the consummation of the Business Combination. Accordingly, for accounting
purposes, the Business Combination has been treated as the equivalent of Archer issuing shares for the net assets of Atlas, followed by a recapitalization. Accordingly, the consolidated
assets, liabilities, and results of operations of Archer is the historical financial statements of the surviving company, and Atlas’ assets, liabilities and results of operations has been
consolidated with Archer beginning on the acquisition date.
These unaudited pro forma condensed combined financial statements are for informational purposes only. They do not purport to indicate the results that would have been obtained
had the Business Combination and related transactions actually been completed on the assumed date or for the periods presented, or which may be realized in the future. The
pro forma adjustments are based on the information currently available and the assumptions and estimates underlying the pro forma adjustments are described in the


- 107 -


Table of Contents
- 108 -
accompanying notes. Actual results may differ materially from the assumptions within the accompanying unaudited pro forma condensed combined financial information.
The Business Combination and Related Transactions
On February 10, 2021, Atlas entered into the Business Combination Agreement (as amended and restated on July 29, 2021), by and among Atlas, Merger Sub, and Legacy Archer.
In accordance with the terms and subject to the conditions of the Business Combination Agreement, at the effective time of the Merger, (i) outstanding shares of common stock and
preferred stock of Legacy Archer have been converted into a right to receive a number of Archer Class B Shares determined on the basis of an implied Legacy Archer equity value of
$1,480 million (the “Implied Equity Value”), (ii) all stock awards (whether vested or unvested) to purchase Legacy Archer common stock have been converted into stock awards with
respect to a number of Archer Class B Shares based on the final exchange ratio and (iii) outstanding warrants (whether vested or unvested) to purchase Legacy Archer common stock
have been converted into warrants to purchase a number of Archer Class A Shares or Archer Class B Shares, as applicable, determined on the basis of the Implied Equity Value. The
Legacy Archer equityholders have the right to convert their Archer Class B Shares into Archer Class A Shares pursuant to the terms of the Archer Charter.
Concurrently with the execution of the Business Combination Agreement, Atlas entered into the Subscription Agreements with certain investors, pursuant to which, on the Closing
Date (as defined in the Business Combination Agreement), and concurrently with the closing of the Business Combination, investors purchased an aggregate of 60,000,000 Atlas
Class A Shares at a price of $10.00 per share, for aggregate gross proceeds of $600.0 million (the “PIPE Financing”). The Subscription Agreements provide that Atlas have granted the
investors in the PIPE Financing certain customary registration rights.
Pursuant to the terms of the Business Combination Agreement, and subject to their continued employment through immediately prior to Closing, Brett Adcock and Adam Goldstein
(the “Archer Founders”) were allocated 40,018,450 restricted stock units (the “Archer Founder Grants”) immediately prior to Closing. The Archer Founder Grants have been issued
under the Archer Aviation Inc. 2019 Stock Plan, as amended, and are a size that, when taken together with their existing equity ownership, resulted in each of the Archer Founders
owning up to 18% of the “Total Outstanding Capitalization”, which is defined as all outstanding shares of capital stock of Archer following Closing (assuming the exercise, exchange
or conversion in full of all outstanding exercisable, exchangeable or convertible securities, including options, restricted stock units, or warrants, in each case of Archer outstanding as
of immediately prior to the Closing), but not including any (1) shares reserved for issuance under equity incentive or similar plans or (2) shares underlying (or shares subsequently
issued in respect of) any warrants or other exercisable, exchangeable or convertible securities of Atlas that are outstanding immediately prior to the Closing and following the Closing,
are subject to certain vesting conditions. One-quarter of each Archer Founder Grant will vest upon the achievement (within seven years following the Closing) of the earlier to occur
of (i) a price-based milestone or (ii) a performance-based milestone, with a different set of such price and performance-based milestones applying to each quarter of the Archer
Founder Grant. The vesting is generally subject to the Founder’s continued employment with Archer through the vesting date. However, if the Archer Founder’s employment is
terminated by Archer without “cause” or by the Archer Founder for “good reason” (with such terms as defined in the employment agreements to be entered into with each Archer
Founder) the Archer Founder Grants will remain outstanding and eligible to vest for a period of 15 months following such termination of employment.
Of the 12,500,000 Sponsor Shares held by Atlas Crest Investment LLC, a Delaware limited liability company (the “Sponsor”), 1,875,000 Sponsor Shares are subject to vesting and
forfeiture provisions (the “Sponsor Earn Out Shares”) beginning on the Closing Date and ending on and including the date of the three-year anniversary of the Closing Date (the
“Sponsor Earn Out Period”) based on the Sponsor Earn Out Trigger Event. The “Sponsor Earn Out Trigger Event” means the first date on which the Atlas VWAP over any 10 Trading
Days within the preceding 20 Trading Day period during the Sponsor Earn Out Period is greater than or equal to $12.00. If the Sponsor Earn Out Trigger Event does not occur during
the Sponsor Earn Out Period, the Sponsor Earn Out Shares that were eligible to vest shall not vest and shall be deemed transferred by the forfeiting holder to Atlas and shall be
canceled by Atlas and cease to exist. The accounting treatment of the Sponsor Shares subject to the Sponsor Earn Out Trigger Event is expected to be recognized at fair value upon the
closing of the Business Combination and classified in stockholders’ equity. The unaudited pro forma condensed combined financial information does not reflect pro forma adjustments
related to the recognition of these shares because there is no net impact on additional paid-in capital on a pro forma combined basis.
The pro forma adjustments giving effect to the Business Combination and related transactions are summarized below, and are discussed further in the footnotes to these unaudited
pro forma condensed combined financial statements:
●
the consummation of the Business Combination and reclassification of cash held in Atlas’ Trust Account to cash and cash equivalents, net of redemptions (see below);




Table of Contents
- 109 -
●
the consummation of the PIPE Financing;
●
the accounting for deferred offering costs and transaction costs incurred by both Atlas and Legacy Archer; and
●
the accounting for the issuance of restricted stock units in connection with the Archer Founder Grants as stipulated in the Business Combination Agreement.
The unaudited pro forma condensed combined financial information reflects Atlas stockholders’ approval of the Business Combination on September 14, 2021, and that Atlas’ public
stockholders holding 24,239,307 shares have elected to redeem their shares prior to the Closing Date.
The following summarizes the pro forma Archer ownership immediately after the Business Combination:
​
    
    
​
    
Percentage 
  
of 
Class A 
Class B 
Outstanding 
Shares
Shares
Shares
Former holders of Legacy Archer common and preferred stock﻿
(4)
 57,218,767
 73,636,982
 55 %  
Atlas Sponsor Shares(1)
 10,625,000
 —
 4 %  
Legacy Archer Founder Grants(3)
 —
 10,004,613
 4 %  
Atlas public stockholders
 
 25,760,693  
 —  
 11 %  
PIPE and other investors(2)
 
 61,512,500  
 —  
 26 %  
Pro forma ownership at June 30, 2021
 
 155,116,960  
 83,641,595  
 100 %  
(1) The Atlas Class B Shares will automatically convert into Atlas Class A Shares upon the consummation of a Business Combination on a one-for-one basis, and each Atlas Class A
Share will be reclassified, on a one for one basis, as one New Archer Class A Share. Excludes 1,875,000 Sponsor Earn Out Shares as the earnout contingency has not yet been
met.
(2) Investors in the PIPE Financing have purchased an aggregate of 60,000,000 New Archer Class A Shares for a purchase price of $10.00 per share, for aggregate gross proceeds of
$600.0 million. Includes 1,512,500 Class A common stock (based on the assumed price of $10.00 per share of common stock) to be issued to satisfy fees related to the Business
Combination and PIPE Financing.
(3) This number represents 25% of the New Archer Class B Shares underlying the Archer Founder Grants to be issued to the Archer Founders in conjunction with the Business
Combination, representing the Archer Founder Grants expected to vest upon the achievement of a performance-based milestone at the closing of the Business Combination.
(4) Excludes the impact of 4,319,093 options to purchase a number of New Archer Class B Shares and 12,772,625 warrants to purchase a number of New Archer Class A Shares or
New Archer Class B shares, as applicable, in accordance with the terms of such warrants; determined on the basis of the Implied Equity Value. The warrants exclude 732,280
warrants that upon close of the Business Combination were exchanged for public warrants.
The following unaudited pro forma condensed combined balance sheet as of June 30, 2021, and the unaudited pro forma condensed combined statements of operations for the
six months ended June 30, 2021 and for the year ended December 31, 2020 are based on the historical financial statements of Atlas and Legacy Archer. The unaudited pro forma
adjustments are based on information currently available, assumptions, and estimates underlying the unaudited pro forma adjustments are described in the accompanying notes. Actual
results may differ materially from the assumptions used to present the accompanying unaudited pro forma condensed combined financial information.


Table of Contents
UNAUDITED PRO FORMA CONDENSED COMBINED BALANCE SHEET
AS OF JUNE 30, 2021
(in thousands, except share and per share data)
Atlas Crest
Transaction
Legacy Archer
Investment Corp.
Accounting
Pro Forma
(Historical)
(Historical)
Adjustments
Combined
Assets
    
      
      
      
      
  
Current assets:
 
   
   
   
   
  
Cash and cash equivalents
$
 5,937
$
 297
$
 500,143  
3A
$
 828,016
 
 (242,421) 
3B
 
 600,000  
3D
 
 (55,640) 
3G
 
 20,000  
3J
 
 (300) 
3L
Prepaid expenses
 
 542
 
 252
 
 —  
  
 
 794
Other current assets
 
 199
 
 —
 
 —  
  
 
 199
Total current assets
 
 6,678
 
 549
 
 821,782  
  
 
 829,009
Property and equipment, net
 
 3,572
 
 —
 
 —  
  
 
 3,572
Intangible assets, net
 
 481
 
 —
 
 —  
  
 
 481
Right of use asset
 
 2,687
 
 —
 
 —  
  
 
 2,687
Investments held in Trust Account
 
 —
 
 500,143
 
 (500,143) 
3A
 
 —
Other long-term assets
 
 235
 
 79
 
 —  
  
 
 314
Total assets
$
 13,653
$
 500,771
$
 321,639  
  
$
 836,063
Liabilities, Convertible Preferred Stock, and Stockholders’ Equity (Deficit)
 
  
 
  
 
   
  
 
  
Current liabilities:
 
  
 
  
 
   
  
 
  
Accounts payable and accrued expenses
$
 21,710
$
 7,454
$
 (8,361) 
3G
$
 20,803
Lease liability
 
 1,329
 
 —
 
 —  
  
 
 1,329
Promissory note – related party
 
 —
 
 300
 
 (300) 
3L
 
 —
Other current liabilities
 
 667
 
 103
 
 2,500  
3J
 
 3,270
Total current liabilities
 
 23,706
 
 7,857
 
 (6,161) 
  
 
 25,402
Notes payable, net of current portion
 
 —
 
 —
 
 —  
  
 
 —
Lease liability, net of current portion
 
 1,385
 
 —
 
 —  
  
 
 1,385
Other long-term liabilities
 
 215
 
 —
 
 16,925  
3J
 
 17,140
Warrant liabilities
 
 —
 
 38,227
 
 575  
3J
 
 38,802
Total liabilities
 
 25,306
 
 46,084
 
 11,339  
  
 
 82,729
Commitments and contingencies
 
  
 
  
 
   
  
 
  
Redeemable convertible preferred stock
 
  
 
  
 
   
  
 
  
Series Seed redeemable convertible preferred stock
 
 5,943
 
 —
 
 (5,943) 
3E
 
 —
Series A redeemable convertible preferred stock
 
 55,589
 
 —
 
 (55,589) 
3E
 
 —
Class A common stock subject to possible redemption
 
 —
 
 500,143
 
 (500,143) 
3C
 
 —
Stockholders’ equity (deficit)
 
  
 
  
 
   
  
 
  
Preferred stock
 
 —
 
 —
 
 —  
  
 
 —
Class A common stock
 
 —
 
 —
 
 (2) 
3B
 
 15
 
 5  
3C
 
 6  
3D
 
 5  
3E
 
 1  
3H
Class B common stock
 
 —
 
 1
 
 7  
3E
 
 8
 
 (1) 
3H
 
 1  
3I
Common stock
 
 5
 
 —
 
 (5) 
3E
 
 —
Additional paid-in capital
 
 80,408
 
 24
 
 (242,419) 
3B
 
 1,061,062
 
 500,138  
3C
 
 599,994  
3D
 
 61,525  
3E
 
 (45,481) 
3F
 
 (42,176) 
3G
 
 99,245  
3I
 
 39,104  
3K
 
 10,700  
3M


- 110 -
Accumulated deficit
 
 (153,598)
 
 (45,481)
 
 45,481  
3F
 
 (307,751)
 
 (5,103) 
3G
 
 (99,246) 
3I
 
 (39,104) 
3K
 
 (10,700) 
3M
Total stockholders’ equity (deficit)
 
 (73,185)
 
 (45,456)
 
 871,975  
  
 
 753,334
Total liabilities, redeemable convertible preferred stock and stockholders’ equity (deficit)
$
 13,653
$
 500,771
$
 321,639  
  
$
 836,063
See accompanying notes to unaudited pro forma condensed combined financial information.


Table of Contents
- 111 -
UNAUDITED PRO FORMA CONDENSED COMBINED STATEMENT OF OPERATIONS
FOR THE SIX MONTHS ENDED JUNE 30, 2021
(in thousands, except share and per share data)
Atlas Crest
Transaction
Legacy Archer
Investment Corp.
Accounting
Pro Forma
(Historical)
(Historical)
Adjustments
Combined
Operating expenses
    
      
      
      
      
  
Operating and formation costs
$
 —
$
 8,490
$
 —  
  
$
 8,490
Research and development
 
 21,514
 
 —
 
 —  
  
 
 21,514
General and administrative
 
 28,987
 
 —
 
 72,077  
3CC
 
 101,064
Other warrant expense
 
 78,208
 
 —
 
 —  
  
 
 78,208
Franchise tax expense
 
 —
 
 100
 
 —  
  
 
 100
Total operating expenses
 
 128,709
 
 8,590
 
 72,077  
  
 
 209,376
Loss from operations
 
 (128,709)
 
 (8,590)
 
 (72,077) 
  
 
 (209,376)
Change in fair value of warrant liabilities
 
 —
 
 9,280
 
 —  
  
 
 9,280
Interest expense, net
 
 1
 
 9
 
 —  
  
 
 10
Unrealized gain on investments held in Trust Account
 
 —
 
 135
 
 (135) 
3AA
 
 —
Other income, net
 
 912
 
 —
 
 —  
  
 
 912
Loss before income taxes
 
 (127,796)
 
 834
 
 (72,212) 
  
 
 (199,174)
Income tax expense
 
 (2)
 
 —
 
 —  
  
 
 (2)
Net loss
$
 (127,798)
$
 834
$
 (72,212) 
  
$
 (199,176)
Net loss per share
 
  
 
  
 
   
  
 
  
Basic and diluted weighted average shares outstanding, Class A common
stock
 
  
 
 50,000,000
 
   
  
 
  
Basic and diluted net loss per share, Class A common stock
 
  
$
 0.00
 
   
  
 
  
Basic and diluted weighted average shares outstanding, Class B common
stock
 
  
 
 12,500,000
 
   
  
 
  
Basic and diluted net loss per share, Class B common stock
 
  
$
 0.06
 
   
  
 
  
Basic and diluted weighted average shares outstanding, Archer Aviation
Inc. common stock
 
 56,774,344
 
  
 
   
  
 
  
Basic and diluted net loss per share, Archer Aviation Inc. common stock
$
 (2.25)
 
  
 
   
  
 
  
Basic and diluted weighted average shares outstanding, New Archer
common stock
 
  
 
  
 
   
  
 
 238,758,555
Basic and diluted net loss per share, New Archer common stock
 
  
 
  
 
   
  
$
 (0.83)
See accompanying notes to unaudited pro forma condensed combined financial information.




Table of Contents
UNAUDITED PRO FORMA CONDENSED COMBINED STATEMENT OF OPERATIONS
FOR THE YEAR ENDED DECEMBER 31, 2020
(in thousands, except share and per share data)
Atlas Crest
Transaction
Legacy Archer
Investment Corp.
Accounting
Pro Forma
(Historical)
(Historical as Restated)
Adjustments
Combined
Operating expenses
    
      
      
      
      
  
Operating and formation costs
$
 —
$
 160
$
 —  
  
$
 160
Research and development
 
 21,097
 
 —
 
 10,700  
3EE
 
 31,797
General and administrative
 
 3,491
 
 —
 
 14,814  
3BB
 
 300,008
 
 281,703  
3CC
Other warrant expense
 
 —
 
 —
 
 39,104  
3DD
 
 39,104
Franchise tax expense
 
 —
 
 70
 
 —  
  
 
 70
Total operating expenses
 
 24,588
 
 230
 
 346,321  
  
 
 371,139
Loss from operations
 
 (24,588)
 
 (230)
 
 (346,321) 
  
 
 (371,139)
Change in fair value of warrant liabilities
 
 —
 
 (9,933)
 
 —  
  
 
 (9,933)
Interest expense, net
 
 (232)
 
 —
 
 —  
  
 
 (232)
Loss on sale of private placement warrants
 
 —
 
 (240)
 
 —  
  
 
 (240)
Expensed offering costs
 
 —
 
 (546)
 
 —  
  
 
 (546)
Unrealized gain on investments held in Trust Account
 
 —
 
 99
 
 (99) 
3AA
 
 —
Other expense, net
 
 (2)
 
 —
 
 —  
  
 
 (2)
Loss before income taxes
 
 (24,822)
 
 (10,850)
 
 (346,420) 
  
 
 (382,092)
Income tax expense
 
 (1)
 
 —
 
 —  
  
 
 (1)
Net loss
$
 (24,823)
$
 (10,850)
$
 (346,420) 
  
$
 (382,093)
Net loss per share
 
  
 
  
 
   
  
 
  
Basic and diluted weighted average shares outstanding, Class A
common stock
 
  
 
 44,885,287
 
   
  
 
  
Basic and diluted net loss per share, Class A common stock
 
  
$
0.00
 
   
  
 
  
Basic and diluted weighted average shares outstanding, Class B
common stock
 
  
 
 17,614,713
 
   
  
 
  
Basic and diluted net loss per share, Class B common stock
 
  
$
 (0.62)
 
   
  
 
  
Basic and diluted weighted average shares outstanding, Archer Aviation
Inc. common stock
 
 50,164,360
 
  
 
   
  
 
  
Basic and diluted net loss per share, Archer Aviation Inc. common stock
$
 (0.49)
 
  
 
   
  
 
  
Basic and diluted weighted average shares outstanding, New Archer
common stock
 
  
 
  
 
   
  
 
 238,758,555
Basic and diluted net loss per share, New Archer common stock
 
  
 
  
 
   
  
$
 (1.60)
See accompanying notes to unaudited pro forma condensed combined financial information.


- 112 -


Table of Contents
NOTES TO UNAUDITED PRO FORMA CONDENSED COMBINED FINANCIAL INFORMATION
(in thousands, except share and per share data)
NOTE 1 — BASIS OF PRESENTATION
The Business Combination has been accounted for as a reverse recapitalization, with no goodwill or other intangible assets recorded, in accordance with GAAP. Under this method of
accounting, Atlas has been treated as the “accounting acquiree” and Archer as the “accounting acquirer” for financial reporting purposes. Accordingly, for accounting purposes, the
Business Combination has been treated as the equivalent of Archer issuing shares for the net assets of Atlas, followed by a recapitalization. The net assets of Legacy Atlas will be
stated at historical cost. Operations prior to the Business Combination will be those of Legacy Archer.
The unaudited pro forma condensed combined balance sheet as of June 30, 2021 assumes that the Business Combination and related transactions occurred on June 30, 2021. The
unaudited pro forma condensed combined statement of operations for the six months ended June 30, 2021 and the year ended December 31, 2020 gives pro forma effect to the
Business Combination as if it had been completed on January 1, 2020. These periods are presented on the basis that Archer is the acquirer for accounting purposes.
The pro  forma adjustments reflecting the consummation of the Business Combination and related transactions are based on certain currently available information and certain
assumptions and methodologies that Archer believes are reasonable under the circumstances. The unaudited condensed pro  forma adjustments, which are described in the
accompanying notes, may be revised as additional information becomes available and is evaluated. Therefore, it is likely that the actual adjustments will differ from the pro forma
adjustments and it is possible the difference may be material. Archer believes that its assumptions and methodologies provide a reasonable basis for presenting all of the significant
effects of the Business Combination and related transactions based on information available to management at the time and that the pro forma adjustments give appropriate effect to
those assumptions and are properly applied in the unaudited pro forma condensed combined financial information.
The unaudited pro forma condensed combined financial information does not give effect to any anticipated synergies, operating efficiencies, tax savings, or cost savings that may be
associated with the Business Combination. The unaudited pro forma condensed combined financial information is not necessarily indicative of what the actual results of operations
and financial position would have been had the Business Combination and related transactions taken place on the dates indicated, nor are they indicative of the future consolidated
results of operations or financial position of the post-combination company. They should be read in conjunction with the historical financial statements and notes thereto of Atlas and
Legacy Archer, included in the Form 8-K, and other financial information included elsewhere.
NOTE 2 — ACCOUNTING POLICIES AND RECLASSIFICATIONS
Upon consummation of the Business Combination, management is performing a comprehensive review of the two entities’ accounting policies. As a result of the review, management
may identify differences between the accounting policies of the two entities which, when conformed, could have a material impact on the financial statements of the post-combination
company. Based on its initial analysis, management did not identify any differences that would have a material impact on the unaudited pro forma condensed combined financial
information. As a result, the unaudited pro forma condensed combined financial information does not assume any differences in accounting policies.
As part of the preparation of these unaudited pro forma condensed combined financial statements, certain reclassifications were made to align Atlas’ financial statement presentation
with that of Archer.
NOTE 3 — ADJUSTMENTS TO UNAUDITED PRO FORMA CONDENSED COMBINED FINANCIAL INFORMATION
The unaudited pro forma condensed combined financial information has been prepared to illustrate the effect of the Business Combination and related transactions and has been
prepared for informational purposes only.
The following unaudited pro forma condensed combined financial information has been prepared in accordance with Article 11 of Regulation S-X as amended by the final rule,
Release No. 33-10786 “Amendments to Financial Disclosures about Acquired and Disposed Businesses.” Release No. 33-10786 replaces the existing pro forma adjustment criteria
with simplified requirements to depict the accounting for the transaction (“Transaction Accounting Adjustments”) and present the reasonably estimable synergies and other transaction


- 113 -
effects that have occurred or are reasonably expected to occur (“Management’s Adjustments”). Atlas has elected not to present Management’s Adjustments and will only be presenting
Transaction Accounting Adjustments in the unaudited pro forma


Table of Contents
condensed combined financial information. Archer and Atlas have not had any historical relationship prior to the Business Combination. Accordingly, no pro forma adjustments were
required to eliminate activities between the companies.
The pro forma combined provision for income taxes does not necessarily reflect the amounts that would have resulted had the post-combination company filed consolidated income
tax returns during the periods presented. The pro  forma basic and diluted earnings per share amounts presented in the unaudited pro  forma condensed combined statement of
operations are based upon the number of Archer’s shares outstanding, assuming the Business Combination and related transactions occurred as of the beginning of the period
presented.
Adjustments to Unaudited Pro Forma Condensed Combined Balance Sheet
The adjustments included in the unaudited pro forma condensed combined balance sheet as of June 30, 2021 are as follows:
(A) Reflects the reclassification of $500.1 million held in the Trust Account to cash and cash equivalents.
(B) Reflects the redemption of 24.2 million Atlas Class A shares for $242.4 million allocated to Atlas Class A Shares and additional paid-in capital using par value $0.0001
per share at a redemption price of $10.00 per share.
(C) Reflects the reclassification of Atlas’ common stock subject to possible redemption into permanent equity.
(D) Reflects cash proceeds from the concurrent PIPE Financing in the amount of $600.0 million and corresponding offset to additional-paid-in-capital.
(E) Reflects the conversion of the shares of Legacy Archer stock into Archer Class B Shares upon consummation of the Business Combination in accordance with the
Business Combination Agreement.
(F) Reflects the reclassification of Atlas’ historical accumulated deficit.
(G) Reflects an adjustment of $71.8 million for transaction costs expected to be incurred by Atlas and Archer in relation to the Business Combination, marketing agreement
in connection with the Business Combination and PIPE Financing, including advisory, banking, printing, legal and accounting services. $4.3 million was expensed and
not yet recognized, and $9.4 million was accrued for in by Atlas and Legacy Archer as part of the Business Combination and recorded in accumulated deficit netted
against $1.1 million to be paid subsequent to Closing by Archer, and the remaining approximately $42.0 million was determined to be equity issuance costs and offset to
additional-paid-in-capital. 1,512,500 shares of Class A common stock will be issued in lieu of cash ($15.1 million) to satisfy fees related to the Business Combination
and PIPE Financing resulting in a net cash adjustment of $55.6 million for transaction costs and a net zero impact to additional-paid-in-capital.
(H) Reflects the conversion of Atlas Class B Shares into Atlas Class A Shares upon the consummation of the Business Combination on a one-for-one basis. Each Atlas
Class A Share has been reclassified, on a one for one basis, as one New Archer Class A Share.
(I)
Reflects compensation expense of $99.2 million recorded in additional-paid-in-capital and offset to accumulated deficit, related to the Archer Founder Grant restricted
stock units subject to vesting upon closing (which for purposes of the pro forma balance sheet is assumed to have occurred on the balance sheet date of June 30, 2021)
due to the acceptance of the G-1 Issue Paper by the Federal Aviation Administration (“FAA”) performance milestone. A 20% increase or decrease in the stock price
would change compensation expense by $19.8 million. The actual fair values of these awards and the related compensation expense are subject to change as additional
information becomes available and as additional analyses are performed, such changes could be material once the final valuation is determined at the Closing.
(J) Reflects the issuance of a note payable by Archer to Silicon Valley Bank as executed on July 9, 2021. The principal amount of the note is $20.0 million. Upon closing of
the Business Combination, warrants issued in conjunction with the note payable were exchanged for public warrants, which will share the terms of the public warrants.
As such, the value of the warrants were bifurcated from the debt resulting in a debt discount and an increase in the pro forma combined warrant liabilities. The related


- 114 -
interest expense is not included within the unaudited pro forma condensed combined statement of operations for the six months ended June 30, 2021 as it was not
considered material.


Table of Contents
- 115 -
(K) Reflects an adjustment to include the vesting of a portion of the United Airlines Ventures (“United”) warrant issued by Archer on January 29, 2021 in which one of the
four milestones is achieved upon the consummation of the Merger. The Company determined that the warrant will be classified as an equity award based on the criteria
of ASC 480 and ASC 718 and this milestone has a fair value of $39.1 million at its grant date. For purposes of the unaudited pro forma condensed combined balance
sheet, the $39.1 million of other warrant expense is recorded in additional-paid-in-capital with an offset in accumulated deficit.
(L) Represents the repayment of outstanding related party promissory note.
(M) Reflects an adjustment to include estimated warrant expense of $10.7 million recorded in additional paid-in-capital associated with the warrant issued to FCA Italy
S.p.A. (“FCA Italy”), an affiliate of FCA US LLC, in conjunction with the manufacturing consulting agreement entered into by Archer and FCA Italy in July 2021.
Warrant expense related to this arrangement assumes the arrangement was entered into on January 1, 2020 and represents the cost for the warrants that fully vested
during the year ended December 31, 2020 recorded in research and development expense with an offset to additional paid-in-capital.
Adjustments to Unaudited Pro Forma Condensed Combined Statement of Operations
The pro forma adjustments included in the unaudited pro forma condensed combined statement of operations for the six months ended June 30, 2021 and the year ended December 31,
2020 are as follows:
(AA) Elimination of unrealized gain on investments held in Trust Account.
(BB) Reflects a portion of the estimated transaction costs of approximately $14.8 million as if incurred on January 1, 2020, the date the Business Combination occurred for the
purposes of the unaudited pro forma condensed combined statement of operations. This is a non-recurring item.
(CC) Reflects estimated Archer Founder Grant restricted stock unit compensation expense of $72.1 million and $281.7 million for the six months ended June 30, 2021 and
the year ended December 31, 2020, respectively. Compensation expense in the unaudited pro forma condensed combined statement of operations assume the Business
Combination occurred on January 1, 2020 and includes the restricted stock units expected to vest upon closing as described in adjustment (I) above and the vesting of
restricted stock units with market conditions (price based milestones) that vest over a derived service period, which is assumed to begin on January 1, 2020, the first day of
the fiscal period presented. Management notes that with exception of the assumed achievement of the acceptance of the G-1 Issue Paper by the FAA performance milestone
in (I) above Management assumes the remaining performance milestones were not considered probable of being met during the six months ended June 30, 2021 and the year
ended December 31, 2020 pro forma periods, and as a result, the compensation expense during these periods reflects the assumed vesting of the aforementioned market
conditions. Of the $281.7  million for the  year ended December  31, 2020, $99.2  million relates to performance milestone vesting and $182.5  million relates to market
condition vesting. For the six months ended June 30, 2021, expenses relate entirely to market condition vesting, as the performance milestone is expected to have been
achieved at the assumed business combination on January 1, 2020. A 20% increase or decrease in the stock price would change compensation expense by $14.4 million and
$56.3  million, for the six  months ended June  30, 2021 and the  year ended December  31, 2020, respectively. The actual fair values of these awards and the related
compensation expense are subject to change as additional information becomes available and as additional analyses are performed, such changes could be material once the
final valuation is determined.
(DD) Reflects an adjustment to include the United other warrant expense of $39.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. Other warrant expense in the unaudited
pro forma condensed combined statement of operations assumes the Business Combination occurred on January 1, 2020 and includes the expense related to the vesting of the
portion of the warrant for one of the four milestones that will be achieved upon the consummation of the Merger. The other three milestones include the issuance of the
warrant in conjunction with the execution of the purchase and collaboration arrangements, the certification of the aircraft by the FAA, and the sale of aircraft to United. The
expense for the portion of the warrant that vests upon achievement of the milestone associated with the execution of the purchase and collaboration arrangement is recorded
as the $78.2 million in other warrant expense in Archer’s statement of operations for the six months ended June 30, 2021. The Company determined that the warrant will be
classified as an equity award based on the criteria of ASC 480 and ASC 718 and this milestone has a fair value of $39.1 million at its grant date.




Table of Contents
(EE) Reflects an adjustment to include estimated warrant expense of $10.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 related to the warrant issued to FCA Italy in conjunction
with the manufacturing consulting agreement entered into by Archer and FCA Italy in July 2021. Warrant expense related to this agreement assumes the agreement was
entered into on January 1, 2020, and represents expense incurred for the warrants that are fully vested by the end of the reporting period.
NOTE 4 — EARNINGS PER SHARE
Represents the net earnings per share calculated under the two-class method using the historical weighted average outstanding shares and the issuance of additional shares in
connection with the Business Combination and PIPE Financing, assuming the shares were outstanding since January l, 2020. The Company used the two-class method to compute net
income per common share, because it had issued multiple classes of common stock. The two-class method requires earnings for the period to be allocated between multiple classes of
common stock based upon their respective rights to receive distributed and undistributed earnings. As the Business Combination and PIPE Financing are being reflected as if they had
occurred as of January 1, 2020, the calculation of weighted average shares outstanding for basic and diluted net loss per share assumes that the shares issued in connection with the
Business Combination and PIPE Financing have been outstanding for the entire periods presented.
The unaudited pro forma condensed combined financial information has been prepared based on the following information:
For the Six Months Ended June 30, 2021
For the Year Ended December 31, 2020
Class A Shares
Class B Shares
Class A Shares
Class B Shares
(in thousands, except share data)
Numerator
    
      
      
      
  
Net loss allocated to each class (in thousands)
$
 (129,401)
$
 (69,775)
$
 (248,239)
$
 (133,854)
Former holders of Legacy Archer common and preferred stock(1)
 
 57,218,767
 
 73,636,982
 
 57,218,767
 
 73,636,982
Atlas Sponsor Shares(2)
 
 10,625,000
 
 —
 
 10,625,000
 
 —
Legacy Archer Founder Grants(3)
 
 —
 
 10,004,613
 
 —
 
 10,004,613
Atlas public stockholders
 
 25,760,693
 
 —
 
 25,760,693
 
 —
PIPE and other investors
 
 61,512,500
 
 —
 
 61,512,500
 
 —
 
 155,116,960
 
 83,641,595
 
 155,116,960
 
 83,641,595
Net income (loss) per share
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
Basic and diluted
$
 (0.83)
$
 (0.83)
$
 (1.60)
$
 (1.60)
(1) The combined pro forma net loss per share excludes the impact of 4,319,093 options to purchase a number of New Archer Class B Shares and 12,772,625 warrants to purchase a
number of New Archer Class A Shares or New Archer Class B shares, as applicable, in accordance with the terms of such warrants. The warrants exclude 732,280 warrants that
upon close of the Business Combination were exchanged for public warrants.
(2) The combined pro forma net loss per share excludes the impact of 1,875,000 Sponsor Earn Out Shares as the earnout contingency has not been met.
(3) Reflects 25% of the restricted stock units management expects to vest upon closing based on the achievement of the associated performance-based milestone.
There are 16,666,667 Public Warrants and 8,000,000 Private Placement Warrants issued. Each warrant entitles the holder to purchase one share of common stock at $11.50 per one
share. These warrants are exercisable 30 days after the consummation of the Business Combination. The unaudited pro forma condensed combined financial information assumes that
the Business Combination and related transactions occurred on June  30, 2021, therefore the warrants were not exercisable as of the pro  forma combined balance sheet date.
Additionally, as the combined company is in a net loss position for the year ended December 31, 2020 and the six months ended June 30, 2021, any shares issued upon exercise of
these warrants would have an anti-dilutive effect on earnings per share and, therefore, have not been considered in the calculation of pro forma net loss per common share.
In addition to the Public Warrants and Private Placement Warrants, Archer has issued 13,504,905 warrants. A portion of the warrants issued to United are not exercisable until
completion of specific aircraft development milestones identified under the Purchase Agreement and Collaboration Agreement which are expected to be achieved through
December 2022, therefore not all of the warrants were exercisable as of the pro forma combined balance sheet date. Upon closing of the Business Combination 732,280 warrants were


- 116 -


Table of Contents
- 117 -
exchanged for Public Warrants. Additionally, as the combined company is in a net loss position for the year ended December 31, 2020 and the six months ended June 30, 2021, any
shares issued upon exercise of these warrants would have an anti-dilutive effect on earnings per share and, therefore, have not been considered in the calculation of pro forma net loss
per common share.


Table of Contents
F-1
INDEX TO FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
ATLAS CREST INVESTMENT CORP.
Page
Audited Financial Statements
Report of Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm
F-2
Balance Sheet as of December 31, 2020
F-3
Statement of Operations for the period from August 26, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020
F-4
Statement of Changes in Shareholders’ Equity for the period from August 26, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020
F-5
Statement of Cash Flows from August 26, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020
F-6
Notes to Financial Statements
F-7
Unaudited Financial Statements
Condensed Balance Sheets as of June 30, 2021 and as of December 31, 2020
F-22
Condensed Statement of Operations for the six months ended June 30, 2021
F-23
Condensed Statement of Changes in Shareholders’ Equity for the six months ended June 30, 2021
F-24
Condensed Statement of Cash Flows for the six months ended June 30, 2021
F-25
Notes to Condensed Financial Statements
F-26
ARCHER AVIATION INC.
Page
Report of Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm
F-41
Financial Statements
Balance Sheets as of December 31, 2020 and 2019
F-42
Statements of Operations and Comprehensive Loss for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
F-43
Statements of Redeemable Convertible Preferred Stock and Stockholders’ Deficit for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
F-44
Statements of Cash Flows for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
F-45
Notes to Financial Statements
F-46
Unaudited Financial Statements
Condensed Balance Sheets as of June 30, 2021 and December 31, 2020
F-67
Condensed Statements of Operations and Comprehensive Loss for the six months ended June 30, 2021 and 2020
F-68
Condensed Statements of Redeemable Convertible Preferred Stock and Stockholders’ Deficit for the six months ended June 30, 2021 and 2020
F-69
Condensed Statements of Cash Flows for the six months ended June 30, 2021 and 2020
F-71
Notes to Condensed Financial Statements
F-72


Table of Contents
REPORT OF INDEPENDENT REGISTERED PUBLIC ACCOUNTING FIRM
To the Stockholders and Board of Directors of
Atlas Crest Investment Corp.
Opinion on the Financial Statements
We have audited the accompanying balance sheet of Atlas Crest Investment Corp. (the “Company”) as of December 31, 2020, the related statements of operations, changes in
stockholders’ equity and cash flows for the period from August 26, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020, and the related notes (collectively referred to as the “financial
statements”). In our opinion, the financial statements present fairly, in all material respects, the financial position of the Company as of December 31, 2020, and the results of its
operations and its cash flows for the period from August 26, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020, in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United
States of America.
Restatement of the 2020 Financial Statements
As discussed in Note 2 to the financial statements, the accompanying financial statements as of December 31, 2020 and for the period from August 26, 2020 (inception) through
December 31, 2020, have been restated.
Basis for Opinion
These financial statements are the responsibility of the Company’s management. Our responsibility is to express an opinion on the Company’s financial statements based on our audit.
We are a public accounting firm registered with the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board (United States) (“PCAOB”) and are required to be independent with respect to the
Company in accordance with the U.S. federal securities laws and the applicable rules and regulations of the Securities and Exchange Commission and the PCAOB.
We conducted our audit in accordance with the standards of the PCAOB. Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain reasonable assurance about whether the
financial statements are free of material misstatement, whether due to error or fraud. The Company is not required to have, nor were we engaged to perform, an audit of its internal
control over financial reporting. As part of our audit, we are required to obtain an understanding of internal control over financial reporting but not for the purpose of expressing an
opinion on the effectiveness of the Company’s internal control over financial reporting. Accordingly, we express no such opinion.
Our audit included performing procedures to assess the risks of material misstatement of the financial statements, whether due to error or fraud, and performing procedures that
respond to those risks. Such procedures included examining, on a test basis, evidence regarding the amounts and disclosures in the financial statements. Our audit also included
evaluating the accounting principles used and significant estimates made by management, as well as evaluating the overall presentation of the financial statements. We believe that our
audit provides a reasonable basis for our opinion.
/s/ Marcum LLP
Marcum LLP
We have served as the Company’s auditor since 2020.
New York, NY
March 8, 2021, except for the effects of the restatements discussed for warrants in Note 2, for which the date is May 24, 2021.


F-2


Table of Contents
ATLAS CREST INVESTMENT CORP.
BALANCE SHEET
DECEMBER 31, 2020
(As Restated)
Assets:
    
Current assets:
 
  
Cash
$
925,923
Prepaid expenses
 
463,999
Total current assets
 
1,389,922
Investments held in Trust Account
 
500,098,582
Total Assets
$
501,488,504
Liabilities and Stockholders’ Equity:
 
  
Current liabilities:
 
  
Accounts payable
$
10,991
Accrued expenses
 
48,022
Franchise tax payable
 
69,945
Total current liabilities
128,958
Warrant liabilities
47,506,670
Total Liabilities
 
47,635,628
Commitments and Contingencies (Note 7)
 
  
Class A common stock, $0.0001 par value, subject to possible redemption; 44,885,287 shares at redemption value
 
448,852,870
Stockholders’ Equity:
 
  
Preferred stock, $0.0001 par value; 1,000,000 shares authorized; none issued and outstanding
 
—
Class A common stock, $0.0001 par value; 200,000,000 shares authorized; 5,114,713 shares issued and outstanding (excluding 44,885,287 shares
subject to possible redemption)
 
511
Class B common stock, $0.0001 par value; 20,000,000 shares authorized; 12,500,000 shares issued and outstanding(1)
 
1,250
Additional paid-in capital
 
15,848,758
Accumulated deficit
 
(10,850,513)
Total stockholders’ equity
 
5,000,006
Total Liabilities and Stockholders’ Equity
$
501,488,504
(1)
Excludes 1,875,000 shares of Class B common stock that were forfeited by the underwriter due to expiration of over-allotment option occurring in December 2020 (see Note 6).
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these financial statements.


F-3


Table of Contents
F-4
ATLAS CREST INVESTMENT CORP.
STATEMENT OF OPERATIONS
FOR THE PERIOD FROM AUGUST 26, 2020 (INCEPTION) THROUGH DECEMBER 31, 2020
(As Restated)
Operating and formation costs
    
$
159,947
Franchise tax expense
 
69,945
Loss from operations
 
(229,892)
Unrealized gain on investments held in Trust Account
 
98,582
Loss on sale of private placement warrants
(240,000)
Expensed offering costs
(545,873)
Change in fair value of warrant liabilities
(9,933,330)
Net loss
$
(10,850,513)
Basic and diluted weighted average shares outstanding, Redeemable Class A Common Stock
 
44,885,287
Basic and diluted net earnings per share, Redeemable Class A Common Stock
$
0.00
Basic and diluted weighted average shares outstanding, Non-Redeemable Class A and Class B Common Stock
 
17,614,713
Basic and diluted net loss per share, Non-Redeemable Class A and Class B Common Stock
$
(0.62)
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these financial statements.


Table of Contents
F-5
ATLAS CREST INVESTMENT CORP.
STATEMENT OF CHANGES IN STOCKHOLDER’S EQUITY
FOR THE PERIOD FROM AUGUST 26, 2020 (INCEPTION) THROUGH DECEMBER 31, 2020
(As Restated)
    
    
    
    
Common Stock
Additional
Total
Class A
Class B
Paid-in
Retained
Stockholders’
    
Shares
    
Amount
    
Shares
    
Amount
    
Capital
    
Earnings
    
Equity
Balance – August 26, 2020
(inception)
—
$
—
—
$
—
$
—
$
—
$
—
Issuance of Class B common stock to
Sponsor(1)
—
—
14,375,000
1,438
23,562
—
25,000
Sale of 50,000,000 units in Initial
Public Offering, less fair value of
public warrants, net of offering costs,
as restated
 
50,000,000  
5,000  
—  
—  
464,673,389  
—  
464,678,389
Forfeiture of Class B common
stock(1)
 
—  
—  
(1,875,000) 
(188) 
188  
—  
—
Class A common stock subject to
possible redemption, as restated
 
(44,885,287) 
(4,489) 
—  
—  
(448,848,381) 
—  
(448,852,870)
Net loss, as restated
 
—  
—  
—  
—  
—  
(10,850,513) 
(10,850,513)
Balance – December 31, 2020, as
restated
 
5,114,713
$
511  
12,500,000
$
1,250
$
15,848,758
$
(10,850,513)
$
5,000,006
(1)
Includes up to 1,875,000 shares of Class B common stock subject to forfeiture if the over-allotment option is not exercised in full or in part by the underwriter.Upon the expiration
of the over-allotment option in December 2020, 1,875,000 shares of Class B common stock were forfeited (see Note 6).
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these financial statements.


Table of Contents
ATLAS CREST INVESTMENT CORP.
STATEMENT OF CASH FLOWS
FOR THE PERIOD FROM AUGUST 26, 2020 (INCEPTION) THROUGH DECEMBER 31, 2020
(As Restated)
Cash Flows from Operating Activities:
    
Net loss
$
(10,850,513)
Adjustments to reconcile net loss to net cash used in operating activities:
 
Expensed offering costs on issuance of Public Warrants
 
545,873
Unrealized gain on investments held in Trust Account
 
(98,582)
Loss on sale of private placement warrants
240,000
Change in fair value of warrant liabilities
 
9,933,330
Changes in operating assets and liabilities:
Prepaid expenses
 
(463,999)
Accounts payable
 
10,991
Accrued expenses
 
48,022
Franchise tax payable
 
69,945
Net cash used in operating activities
(564,933)
 
Cash Flows from Investing Activities:
 
Cash deposited in Trust Account
 
(500,000,000)
Net cash used in investing activities
(500,000,000)
 
Cash Flows from Financing Activities:
 
Proceeds from issuance of Class B common stock to Sponsor
 
25,000
Proceeds from issuance of promissory note
300,000
Repayment of promissory note
(300,000)
Proceeds from initial public offering, net of underwriter's discount paid
 
490,000,000
Proceeds from sale of private placement warrants
 
12,000,000
Offering costs paid
 
(534,144)
Net cash provided by financing activities
 
501,490,856
 
Net change in cash
925,923
 
Cash - beginning of period
—
Cash - end of period
$
925,923
Supplemental disclosure of noncash investing and financing activities:
Class A common stock subject to possible redemption
$
448,852,870
Initial classification of warrant liabilities
$
37,573,340
Forfeiture of Class B common stock
$
188


F-6
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these financial statements.


Table of Contents
ATLAS CREST INVESTMENT CORP.
NOTES TO FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
DECEMBER 31, 2020
NOTE 1. DESCRIPTION OF ORGANIZATION AND BUSINESS OPERATIONS
Atlas Crest Investment Corp. (the “Company” or “Atlas”) is a blank check company incorporated in Delaware on August 26, 2020. The Company was formed for the purpose of
effectuating a merger, capital stock exchange, asset acquisition, stock purchase, reorganization or other similar business combination with one or more businesses (the “Business
Combination”). The Company is an early stage and emerging growth company and, as such, the Company is subject to all of the risks associated with early stage and emerging growth
companies.
As of December 31, 2020, the Company had not commenced any operations. All activity for the period from August 26, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020 relates to the
Company’s formation, the initial public offering (“Initial Public Offering”) as described below, and since the closing of the Initial Public Offering, the search for a prospective initial
Business Combination. The Company will not generate any operating revenues until after the completion of its initial Business Combination, at the earliest. The Company will
generate non-operating income in the form of interest income or gains on investments on the cash and investments held in a trust account from the proceeds derived from the Initial
Public Offering.
The registration statement for the Company’s Initial Public Offering was declared effective on October 27, 2020. On October 30, 2020, the Company consummated the Initial Public
Offering of 50,000,000 units (the “Units” and, with respect to the shares of Class A common stock included in the Units sold, the “Public Shares”), at $10.00 per Unit, generating
gross proceeds of $500,000,000, which is discussed in Note 4.
Following the closing of the Initial Public Offering on October 30, 2020, an amount of $500,000,000 ($10.00 per Unit) from the net proceeds of the sale of the Units in the Initial
Public Offering and the sale of the Private Placement Warrants (as defined in Note 5) was placed in a trust account (the “Trust Account”), invested in U.S. government securities,
within the meaning set forth in Section 2(a)(16) of the Investment Company Act of 1940, as amended (the “Investment Company Act”), with a maturity of 185 days or less, or in any
open-ended investment company that holds itself out as a money market fund meeting the conditions of Rule 2a-7 of the Investment Company Act, as determined by the Company,
until the earlier of: (i) the consummation of a Business Combination or (ii) the distribution of the funds in the Trust Account to the Company’s stockholders, as described below.
Transaction costs related to the issuances described above amounted to $10,534,144, consisting of $10,000,000 of underwriting fees and $534,144 of other costs. In addition, at
December 31, 2020, $925,923 of cash was held outside of the Trust Account and is available for working capital purposes.
The Company’s management has broad discretion with respect to the specific application of the net proceeds of the Initial Public Offering and the sale of the Private Placement
Warrants, although substantially all of the net proceeds are intended to be applied generally toward consummating a Business Combination. New York Stock Exchange rules provide
that the Business Combination must be with one or more target businesses that together have a fair market value equal to at least 80% of the balance in the Trust Account (excluding
taxes payable on income earned on the Trust Account) at the time of the signing of a definitive agreement to enter a Business Combination. The Company will only complete a
Business Combination if the post-transaction company owns or acquires 50% or more of the outstanding voting securities of the target or otherwise acquires a controlling interest in
the target sufficient for it not to be required to register as an investment company under the Investment Company Act of 1940. There is no assurance that the Company will be able to
successfully effect a Business Combination.
The Company will provide its holders of the outstanding Public Shares (the “public stockholders”) with the opportunity to redeem all or a portion of their Public Shares upon the
completion of a Business Combination either (i) in connection with a stockholder meeting called to approve the Business Combination or (ii) by means of a tender offer. The decision
as to whether the Company will seek stockholder approval of a Business Combination or conduct a tender offer will be made by the Company, solely in its discretion. The public
stockholders are entitled to redeem their Public Shares for a pro rata portion of the amount then in the Trust Account (initially anticipated to be $10.00 per Public Share, plus any pro
rata interest earned on the funds held in the Trust Account and not previously released to the Company to pay its tax obligations). There will be no redemption rights upon the
completion of a Business Combination with respect to the Company’s warrants. The Public Shares subject to redemption are recorded at redemption value and classified as temporary


F-7
equity upon the completion of the Initial Public Offering in accordance with the Financial Accounting Standards Board’s Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) Topic 480,
Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity.


Table of Contents
ATLAS CREST INVESTMENT CORP.
NOTES TO FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
DECEMBER 31, 2020
The Company will proceed with the Business Combination only if the Company has net tangible assets of at least $5,000,001 either prior to or upon such consummation of a Business
Combination and, if the Company seeks stockholder approval, a majority of the shares voted are voted in favor of the Business Combination. If a stockholder vote is not required by
law and the Company does not decide to hold a stockholder vote for business or other reasons, the Company will, pursuant to its amended and restated Certificate of Incorporation,
conduct the redemptions pursuant to the tender offer rules of the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission (“SEC”) and file tender offer documents with the SEC prior to completing
a Business Combination. If, however, stockholder approval of the Business Combination is required by law, or the Company decides to obtain stockholder approval for business or
other reasons, the Company will offer to redeem shares in conjunction with a proxy solicitation pursuant to the proxy rules and not pursuant to the tender offer rules. If the Company
seeks stockholder approval in connection with a Business Combination, Atlas Crest Investment LLC (the "Sponsor") has agreed to vote its Founder Shares (as defined in Note 6) and
any Public Shares purchased during or after the Initial Public Offering in favor of approving a Business Combination. Additionally, each public stockholder may elect to redeem their
Public Shares irrespective of whether they vote for or against the proposed Business Combination or do not vote at all.
Notwithstanding the above, if the Company seeks stockholder approval of a Business Combination and it does not conduct redemptions pursuant to the tender offer rules, the amended
and restated Certificate of Incorporation provides that a public stockholder, together with any affiliate of such stockholder or any other person with whom such stockholder is acting in
concert or as a “group” (as defined under Section 13 of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended (the “Exchange Act”)), will be restricted from redeeming its shares with
respect to more than an aggregate of 15% or more of the Public Shares, without the prior consent of the Company.
The Sponsor has agreed (a)  to waive its redemption rights with respect to its Founder Shares and Public Shares held by it in connection with the completion of a Business
Combination, (b) to waive its liquidation rights with respect to the Founder Shares if the Company fails to complete a Business Combination within 24 months from the closing of the
Initial Public Offering and (c) not to propose an amendment to the amended and restated Certificate of Incorporation (i) to modify the substance or timing of the Company’s obligation
to allow redemption in connection with the Company’s initial Business Combination or to redeem 100% of its Public Shares if the Company does not complete a Business
Combination or (ii)  with respect to any other provision relating to stockholders’ rights or pre-initial business combination activity, unless the Company provides the public
stockholders with the opportunity to redeem their Public Shares in conjunction with any such amendment.
The Company will have until 24 months from the closing of the Initial Public Offering to complete a Business Combination (the “Combination Period”). If the Company is unable to
complete a Business Combination within the Combination Period, the Company will (i) cease all operations except for the purpose of winding up, (ii) as promptly as reasonably
possible but not more than ten business days thereafter, redeem the Public Shares, at a per-share price, payable in cash, equal to the aggregate amount then on deposit in the Trust
Account including interest earned on the funds held in the Trust Account and not previously released to the Company to pay its tax obligations (less up to $100,000 of interest to pay
dissolution expenses), divided by the number of then outstanding Public Shares, which redemption will completely extinguish public stockholders’ rights as stockholders (including
the right to receive further liquidating distributions, if any), and (iii)  as promptly as reasonably possible following such redemption, subject to the approval of the Company’s
remaining stockholders and the Company’s board of directors, dissolve and liquidate, subject in each case to the Company’s obligations under Delaware law to provide for claims of
creditors and the requirements of other applicable law. There will be no redemption rights or liquidating distributions with respect to the Company’s warrants, which will expire
worthless if the Company fails to complete a Business Combination within the Combination Period.
In order to protect the amounts held in the Trust Account, the Sponsor has agreed to be liable to the Company if and to the extent any claims by a third party for services rendered or
products sold to the Company, or a prospective target business with which the Company has discussed entering into a transaction agreement, reduce the amount of funds in the Trust
Account to below (1) $10.00 per Public Share or (2) the actual amount per Public Share held in the Trust Account as of the date of the liquidation of the Trust Account due to
reductions in the value of the trust assets, in each case net of the interest which may be withdrawn to pay our taxes. This liability will not apply with respect to any claims by a third
party who executed a waiver of any and all rights to seek access to the Trust Account and except as to any claims under the Company’s indemnity of the underwriters of the Initial
Public Offering against certain liabilities, including liabilities under the Securities Act of 1933, as amended (the “Securities Act”). Moreover, in the event that an executed waiver is
deemed to be unenforceable against a third party, the Sponsor will not be responsible to the extent of any liability for such third-party claims. The Company will seek to reduce the


F-8
possibility that the Sponsor will have to indemnify the Trust Account due to claims of creditors by endeavoring to have all vendors, service providers (except the Company’s
independent registered public accounting firm),


Table of Contents
ATLAS CREST INVESTMENT CORP.
NOTES TO FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
DECEMBER 31, 2020
prospective target businesses or other entities with which the Company does business, execute agreements with the Company waiving any right, title, interest or claim of any kind in
or to monies held in the Trust Account.
Liquidity
As of December 31, 2020, the Company had $925,923 in cash held outside of the Trust Account and working capital of $1,260,964.
The Company’s liquidity needs prior to the consummation of the Initial Public Offering were satisfied through the proceeds of $25,000 from the sale of the Founder Shares, and a loan
of $300,000 under an unsecured and non-interest bearing promissory note (see Note 6). Subsequent to the consummation of the Initial Public Offering, the Company’s liquidity will be
satisfied through the net proceeds from the private placement held outside of the Trust Account.
Based on the foregoing, management believes that the Company will have sufficient working capital and borrowing capacity to meet its needs through the earlier of the consummation
of a Business Combination or one year from this filing. Over this time period, the Company will be using the funds held outside of the Trust Account for paying existing accounts
payable and accrued liabilities, identifying and evaluating prospective initial Business Combination candidates, performing due diligence on prospective target businesses, paying for
travel expenditures, selecting the target business to merge with or acquire, and structuring, negotiating and consummating the Business Combination.
Risks and Uncertainties
Management is currently evaluating the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on the industry and has concluded that while it is reasonably possible that the virus could have a negative
effect on the Company’s financial position, results of its operations, and/or search for a target company, the specific impact is not readily determinable as of the date of these financial
statements. The financial statements do not include any adjustments that might result from the outcome of this uncertainty.
NOTE 2. RESTATEMENT OF PREVIOUSLY ISSUED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
On April 12, 2021, the Acting Director of the Division of Corporation Finance and Acting Chief Accountant of the SEC together issued a statement regarding the accounting and
reporting considerations for warrants issued by special purpose acquisition companies entitled “Staff Statement on Accounting and Reporting Considerations for Warrants Issued by
Special Purpose Acquisition Companies (“SPACs”)” (the “SEC Statement”). Specifically, the SEC Statement focused on certain settlement terms and provisions related to certain
tender offers following a business combination, which terms are similar to those contained in the warrant agreement governing the Company’s warrants. As a result of the SEC
Statement, the Company reevaluated the accounting treatment of (i) the 16,666,667 redeemable warrants (the “Public Warrants”) that were included in the units issued by the
Company in its initial public offering (the “IPO”) and (ii) the 8,000,000 redeemable warrants that were issued to the Company’s sponsor in a private placement that closed
concurrently with the closing of the Initial Public Offering (together with the Public Warrants, the “Warrants”). The Company previously accounted for the Warrants as components of
equity.
In further consideration of the guidance in Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) 815-40, Derivatives and Hedging — Contracts in Entity’s Own Equity ("ASC 815"), the
Company concluded that a provision in the warrant agreement related to certain tender or exchange offers precludes the Warrants from being accounted for as components of equity.
As the Warrants meet the definition of a derivative as contemplated in ASC 815, the Warrants should be recorded as derivative liabilities on the balance sheet and measured at fair
value at inception (on the date of the IPO) and at each reporting date in accordance with ASC 820, Fair Value Measurement ("ASC 820"), with changes in fair value recognized in the
Statements of Operations in the period of change.


F-9
In accordance with ASC Topic 340, Other Assets and Deferred Costs, as a result of the classification of the Warrants as derivative liabilities, the Company expensed a portion of the
offering costs originally recorded as a reduction in equity. The portion of offering costs that was expensed was determined based on the relative fair value of the Public Warrants and
shares of Class A common stock included in the Units.


Table of Contents
ATLAS CREST INVESTMENT CORP.
NOTES TO FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
DECEMBER 31, 2020
The Company’s accounting for the warrants as components of equity instead of as derivative liabilities did not have any effect on the Company’s previously reported cash flows or
cash.
The following tables summarize the effect of the restatement on each financial statement line item as of the dates, and for the period, indicated:
    
As Previously 
    
    
Reported
Adjustment
As Restated
Balance Sheet as of October 30, 2020 (audited)
Warrant liabilities
$
—
$
37,573,340
$
37,573,340
Total liabilities
 
—  
37,573,340  
37,573,340
Class A common stock subject to possible redemption
 
496,488,280  
(37,573,340) 
458,914,940
Class A common stock
 
35  
376  
411
Additional paid-in capital
 
5,001,103  
785,497  
5,786,600
Accumulated deficit
 
(2,568) 
(785,873) 
(788,441)
Balance Sheet as of December 31, 2020 (audited)
 
   
   
  
Warrant liabilities
$
—
$
47,506,670
$
47,506,670
Total liabilities
 
128,958
 
47,506,670
 
47,635,628
Class A common stock subject to possible redemption
 
496,359,540
 
(47,506,670)
 
448,852,870
Class A common stock
 
36
 
475
 
511
Additional paid-in capital
 
5,130,030
 
10,718,728
 
15,848,758
Accumulated deficit
 
(131,310)
 
(10,719,203)
 
(10,850,513)
Stockholders' equity
 
5,000,006
 
—
 
5,000,006
Statement of Operations for the period from August 26, 2020 (inception) to December 31, 2020 (audited)
 
  
 
  
 
  
Expensed offering costs
$
—
$
545,873
$
545,873
Loss on sale of private placement warrants
—
(240,000)
(240,000)
Change in fair value of warrant liabilities
—
(9,933,330)
(9,933,330)
Net loss
 
(131,310)
 
(10,719,203)
 
(10,850,513)
Basic and diluted net loss per share, Non-redeemable Class A and Class B common stock
 
(0.01)
 
(0.61)
 
(0.62)
Statement of Cash Flows for the period from August 26, 2020 (inception) to December 31, 2020 (audited)
 
  
 
  
 
  
Cash flow from operating activities:
 
  
 
  
 
  
Net loss
$
(131,310)
$
(10,719,203)
$
(10,850,513)
Adjustments to reconcile net loss to net cash used in operating activities:
 
  
 
  
 
  
Expensed offering costs in connection with the issuance of the Public Warrants included in the Units
 
—
 
545,873
 
545,873
Loss on sale of private placement warrants
—
240,000
240,000
Change in fair value of warrant liabilities
 
—
 
9,933,330
 
9,933,330
Supplemental disclosure of non-cash investing and financing activities:
 
  
 
  
 
  
Initial measurement of warrants issued in connection with the Initial Public Offering accounted for as liabilities
 
—
 
37,573,340
 
37,573,340
NOTE 3. SUMMARY OF SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING POLICIES
Basis of Presentation
The accompanying financial statements of the Company are presented in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America (“GAAP”) and
pursuant to the rules and regulations of the SEC.


F-10
Emerging Growth Company
The Company is an “emerging growth company,” as defined in Section 2(a) of the Securities Act, as modified by the Jumpstart Our Business Startups Act of 2012 (the “JOBS Act”),
and it may take advantage of certain exemptions from various reporting requirements that are applicable to other public companies that are not emerging growth companies including,
but not limited to, not being required to comply with the independent registered public accounting firm attestation requirements of Section 404 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act, reduced
disclosure obligations regarding executive compensation in its periodic reports and proxy statements, and exemptions from the


Table of Contents
ATLAS CREST INVESTMENT CORP.
NOTES TO FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
DECEMBER 31, 2020
requirements of holding a nonbinding advisory vote on executive compensation and stockholder approval of any golden parachute payments not previously approved.
Further, Section 102(b)(1) of the JOBS Act exempts emerging growth companies from being required to comply with new or revised financial accounting standards until private
companies (that is, those that have not had a Securities Act registration statement declared effective or do not have a class of securities registered under the Exchange Act) are required
to comply with the new or revised financial accounting standards. The JOBS Act provides that a company can elect to opt out of the extended transition period and comply with the
requirements that apply to non-emerging growth companies but any such election to opt out is irrevocable. The Company has elected not to opt out of such extended transition period,
which means that when a standard is issued or revised and it has different application dates for public or private companies, the Company, as an emerging growth company, can adopt
the new or revised standard at the time private companies adopt the new or revised standard. This may make comparison of the Company’s financial statements with another public
company, which is neither an emerging growth company nor an emerging growth company which has opted out of using the extended transition period difficult or impossible because
of the potential differences in accounting standards used.
Use of Estimates
The preparation of financial statements in conformity with GAAP requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities
and disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting period.
Making estimates requires management to exercise significant judgment. It is at least reasonably possible that the estimate of the effect of a condition, situation or set of circumstances
that existed at the date of the financial statements, which management considered in formulating its estimate, could change in the near term due to one or more future confirming
events. Accordingly, the actual results could differ significantly from those estimates.
Cash and Cash Equivalents
The Company considers all short-term investments with an original maturity of three months or less when purchased to be cash equivalents. The Company did not have any cash
equivalents as of December 31, 2020.
Investments Held in Trust Account
At December 31, 2020, the assets held in the Trust Account were held in U.S. Treasury securities and classified as trading.
Common Stock Subject to Possible Redemption
The Company accounts for its common stock subject to possible redemption in accordance with the guidance in ASC Topic 480, Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity. Common
stock subject to mandatory redemption is classified as a liability instrument and is measured at fair value. Conditionally redeemable common stock (including common stock that
features redemption rights that are either within the control of the holder or subject to redemption upon the occurrence of uncertain events not solely within the Company’s control) is
classified as temporary equity. At all other times, common stock is classified as stockholders’ equity. The Company’s common stock features certain redemption rights that are
considered to be outside of the Company’s control and subject to occurrence of uncertain future events. As of December 31, 2020, 44,885,287 shares of Class A common stock subject
to possible redemption are presented at redemption value as temporary equity, outside of the stockholders’ equity section of the Company’s balance sheet.
Offering Costs associated with the Initial Public Offering


F-11
The Company complies with the requirements of ASC  340-10-S99-1 and SEC Staff Accounting Bulletin Topic 5A - Expenses of Offering. Offering costs consist principally of
professional and registration fees incurred through the balance sheet date that are related to the Initial Public Offering. Offering costs directly attributable to the issuance of an equity
contract to be classified in equity are recorded as a reduction in equity. Offering costs for equity contracts that are classified as assets and liabilities are expensed immediately. The
Company incurred offering costs amounting to $10,534,144 as a result of the Initial Public Offering (consisting of a $10,000,000


Table of Contents
ATLAS CREST INVESTMENT CORP.
NOTES TO FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
DECEMBER 31, 2020
underwriting discount and $534,144 of other offering costs). The Company recorded $9,988,271 of offering costs as a reduction of equity in connection with the shares of Class A
common Stock included in the Units. The Company immediately expensed $545,873 of offering costs in connection with the Public Warrants and Private Placement Warrants that
were classified as liabilities.
Warrant Liabilities
The Company accounts for warrants as either equity-classified or liability-classified instruments based on an assessment of the warrant’s specific terms and applicable authoritative
guidance in ASC 480, Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity (“ASC 480”) and ASC 815, Derivatives and Hedging (“ASC 815”). The assessment considers whether the warrants are
freestanding financial instruments pursuant to ASC 480, meet the definition of a liability pursuant to ASC 480, and whether the warrants meet all of the requirements for equity
classification under ASC 815, including whether the warrants are indexed to the Company’s own common stock, among other conditions for equity classification. This assessment,
which requires the use of professional judgment, is conducted at the time of warrant issuance and as of each subsequent quarterly period end date while the warrants are outstanding.
For issued or modified warrants that meet all of the criteria for equity classification, the warrants are required to be recorded as a component of additional paid-in capital at the time of
issuance. For issued or modified warrants that do not meet all the criteria for equity classification, the warrants are required to be recorded at their initial fair value on the date of
issuance, and each balance sheet date thereafter. Changes in the estimated fair value of the warrants are recognized as a non-cash gain or loss on the statements of operations. The
initial fair value of the Public Warrants was estimated using a Monte Carlo simulation approach and the fair value of the Private Placement Warrants was estimated using a Modified
Black-Scholes model (see Note 11).
Income Taxes
The Company complies with the accounting and reporting requirements of ASC Topic 740, Income Taxes, which requires an asset and liability approach to financial accounting and
reporting for income taxes. Deferred income tax assets and liabilities are computed for differences between the financial statement and tax bases of assets and liabilities that will result
in future taxable or deductible amounts, based on enacted tax laws and rates applicable to the periods in which the differences are expected to affect taxable income. Valuation
allowances are established, when necessary, to reduce deferred tax assets to the amount expected to be realized.
ASC Topic 740 prescribes a recognition threshold and a measurement attribute for the financial statement recognition and measurement of tax positions taken or expected to be taken
in a tax return. For those benefits to be recognized, a tax position must be more-likely-than-not to be sustained upon examination by taxing authorities. The Company recognizes
accrued interest and penalties related to unrecognized tax benefits, if any, as income tax expense. There were no unrecognized tax benefits and no amounts accrued for interest and
penalties as of December 31, 2020. The Company is currently not aware of any issues under review that could result in significant payments, accruals or material deviation from its
position. The Company is subject to income tax examinations by major taxing authorities since inception.
Net Earnings ( Loss) Per Share
Net earnings (loss) per share is computed by dividing net earnings (loss) by the weighted-average number of shares of common stock outstanding during the period. The Company has
not considered the effect of the warrants sold in the Public Offering and Private Placement to purchase an aggregate of 24,666,667 shares in the calculation of diluted loss per share,
since the exercise of the warrants are contingent upon the occurrence of future events and the inclusion of such warrants would be anti-dilutive.
The Company’s statement of operations includes a presentation of income per share for common shares subject to possible redemption and applies the two-class method in calculating
income per share. Net earnings per common share, basic and diluted, for Class A redeemable common stock is calculated by dividing the allocable interest income earned on the Trust
Account, net of applicable franchise and income taxes, by the weighted average number of Class A redeemable common stock outstanding since original issuance. Net loss per share,


F-12
basic and diluted, for Class A and Class B non-redeemable common stock is calculated by dividing the net loss, adjusted for income attributable to Class A redeemable common stock,
by the weighted average number of Class B non-redeemable common stock outstanding for the period. Class B non-redeemable common stock includes the Founder Shares as these
shares do not have any redemption features and do not participate in the income earned on the Trust Account.


Table of Contents
ATLAS CREST INVESTMENT CORP.
NOTES TO FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
DECEMBER 31, 2020
The following table reflects the calculation of basic and diluted net earnings (loss) per common share (in dollars, except per share amounts):
For the Period from
August 26,2020
(Inception) through
December 31, 2020
Class A Common Stock subject to possible redemption
  
Numerator: Earnings attributable to Class A Common Stock subject to possible redemption
  
Unrealized gain on investments held in Trust Account
$
88,498
Less: Unrealized gain available to be withdrawn for payment of taxes
 
(62,790)
Net earnings attributable to Class A Common Stock subject to possible redemption
$
25,708
 
Denominator: Weighted average Class A Common Stock subject to possible redemption
 
Basic and diluted weighted average shares outstanding, Class A Common Stock subject to possible redemption
44,885,287
Basic and diluted net earnings per share, Class A Common Stock subject to possible redemption
$
0.00
 
Non-Redeemable Class A and Class B Common Stock
 
Numerator: Net loss minus net earnings
Net loss
$
(10,850,513)
Less: Net earnings attributable to Class A Common Stock subject to possible redemption
(25,708)
Non-redeemable net loss
$
(10,876,221)
Denominator: Weighted average Non-Redeemable Class A and Class B Common Stock
 
  
Basic and diluted weighted average shares outstanding, Non-Redeemable Class A and Class B Common Stock
 
17,614,713
Basic and diluted net loss per share, Non-Redeemable Class A and Class B Common Stock
$
(0.62)
Concentration of Credit Risk
Financial instruments that potentially subject the Company to concentration of credit risk consist of a cash account in a financial institution which, at times may exceed the Federal
depository insurance coverage of $250,000. The Company has not experienced losses on this account and management believes the Company is not exposed to significant risks on
such account.
Fair Value of Financial Instruments
The Company applies ASC 820, which establishes a framework for measuring fair value and clarifies the definition of fair value within that framework. ASC 820 defines fair value as
an exit price, which is the price that would be received for an asset or paid to transfer a liability in the Company’s principal or most advantageous market in an orderly transaction
between market participants on the measurement date. The fair value hierarchy established in ASC 820 generally requires an entity to maximize the use of observable inputs and
minimize the use of unobservable inputs when measuring fair value. Observable inputs reflect the assumptions that market participants would use in pricing the asset or liability and


F-13
are developed based on market data obtained from sources independent of the reporting entity. Unobservable inputs reflect the entity’s own assumptions based on market data and the
entity’s judgments about the assumptions that market participants would use in pricing the asset or liability and are to be developed based on the best information available in the
circumstances.
The carrying amounts reflected in the balance sheet for cash, prepaid expenses and accrued offering costs approximate fair value due to their short-term nature.
Level 1 — Assets and liabilities with unadjusted, quoted prices listed on active market exchanges. Inputs to the fair value measurement are observable inputs, such as quoted prices in
active markets for identical assets or liabilities.


Table of Contents
ATLAS CREST INVESTMENT CORP.
NOTES TO FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
DECEMBER 31, 2020
Level 2 — Inputs to the fair value measurement are determined using prices for recently traded assets and liabilities with similar underlying terms, as well as direct or indirect
observable inputs, such as interest rates and yield curves that are observable at commonly quoted intervals.
Level 3 — Inputs to the fair value measurement are unobservable inputs, such as estimates, assumptions, and valuation techniques when little or no market data exists for the assets or
liabilities.
See Note 11 for additional information on assets and liabilities measured at fair value.
Recent Accounting Standards
Management does not believe that any recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting standards, if currently adopted, would have a material effect on the Company’s financial
statements.
NOTE 4. INITIAL PUBLIC OFFERING
The registration statement for the Company’s Initial Public Offering was declared effective on October 27, 2020. On October 30, 2020, the Company completed its Initial Public
Offering of 50,000,000 Units, at $10.00 per Unit, generating gross proceeds of $500,000,000. Each Unit consisted of one share of Class A common stock, $0.0001 par value, and one-
third of one redeemable warrant (“Public Warrant”). Each Public Warrant entitles the holder to purchase one share of Class A common stock at an exercise price of $11.50 per whole
share (see Note 8).
The Company granted the underwriter a 45-day option to purchase up to 7,500,000 additional Units to cover over-allotments at the Initial Public Offering price, less the underwriting
discounts and commissions. The over-allotment option expired without being exercised in any part. The underwriter was paid a cash underwriting discount of $0.20 per Unit, or
$10,000,000 in the aggregate upon the closing of the Initial Public Offering.
NOTE 5. PRIVATE PLACEMENT
Simultaneously with the closing of the Initial Public Offering, the Company consummated the sale of 8,000,000 warrants at a price of $1.50 per warrant in a private placement (the
“Private Placement Warrants”) to the Sponsor, generating gross proceeds of $12,000,000. Each Private Placement Warrant is exercisable to purchase one share of Class A common
stock at a price of $11.50 per share. The proceeds from the sale of the Private Placement Warrants were added to the net proceeds from the Initial Public Offering held in the Trust
Account. If the Company does not complete a Business Combination within the Combination Period, the proceeds from the sale of the Private Placement Warrants will be used to
fund the redemption of the Public Shares (subject to the requirements of applicable law) and the Private Placement Warrants will expire worthless.
NOTE 6. RELATED PARTY TRANSACTIONS
Founder Shares
On September 4, 2020, the Sponsor paid $25,000 in consideration for 14,375,000 shares of Class B common stock (the “Founder Shares”). The Founder Shares included an aggregate
of up to 1,875,000 shares subject to forfeiture by the Sponsor to the extent that the underwriter’s over-allotment was not exercised in full or in part, so that the Sponsor would
collectively own, on an as-converted basis, 20% of the Company’s issued and outstanding shares after the Initial Public Offering (assuming the Sponsor did not purchase any Public


F-14
Shares in the Initial Public Offering). Upon the expiration of the over-allotment option in December 2020, 1,875,000 shares of Class B common stock were forfeited, resulting in an
aggregate of 12,500,000 Founder Shares outstanding.
The Sponsor has agreed not to transfer, assign or sell any of its Founder Shares until the earlier to occur of: (A) one year after the completion of a Business Combination, or (B) the
date on which the Company completes a liquidation, merger, capital stock exchange or similar transaction that results in the Company’s stockholders having the right to exchange
their shares of common stock for cash, securities or other property. Notwithstanding the foregoing, if the last sale price of the Company’s Class A common stock equals or


Table of Contents
ATLAS CREST INVESTMENT CORP.
NOTES TO FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
DECEMBER 31, 2020
exceeds $12.00 per share (as adjusted for stock splits, stock dividends, reorganizations, recapitalizations and the like) for any 20 trading days within any 30-trading day period
commencing at least 150 days after the Business Combination, the Founder Shares will be released from the lock-up.
Promissory Note - Related Party
On September 11, 2020, the Company issued an unsecured promissory note to the Sponsor (the “Promissory Note”), pursuant to which the Company received proceeds of $300,000 to
cover expenses related to the Initial Public Offering. The Promissory Note was non-interest bearing and was payable on the earlier of March 31, 2021 or the completion of the Initial
Public Offering. The outstanding balance under the Promissory Note of $300,000 was repaid at the closing of the Initial Public Offering on October 30, 2020.
Administrative Support Agreement
The Company entered into an agreement, commencing on the effective date of the Initial Public Offering, to pay the Sponsor a total of $10,000 per month for office space, secretarial
and administrative support. Upon completion of the Business Combination or the Company’s liquidation, the Company will cease paying these monthly fees.
See Note 7, under Business Combination Marketing Agreement, for additional related party transactions.
NOTE 7. COMMITMENTS
Registration Rights
The holders of the Founder Shares, Private Placement Warrants and any warrants that may be issued upon conversion of the Working Capital Loans (as defined below) (and any shares
of Class A common stock issuable upon the exercise of the Private Placement Warrants and warrants that may be issued upon conversion of Working Capital Loans and upon
conversion of the Founder Shares) will be entitled to registration rights pursuant to a registration rights agreement to be signed prior to or on the effective date of the Initial Public
Offering, requiring the Company to register such securities for resale (in the case of the Founder Shares, only after conversion to Class A common stock). The holders of these
securities are entitled to make up to three demands, excluding short form demands, that the Company register such securities. In addition, the holders have certain “piggy-back”
registration rights with respect to registration statements filed subsequent to the completion of a Business Combination. The registration rights agreement does not contain liquidating
damages or other cash settlement provisions resulting from delays in registering the Company’s securities. The Company will bear the expenses incurred in connection with the filing
of any such registration statements.
Business Combination Marketing Agreement
The Company engaged the representative of the underwriters and Moelis & Company LLC, an affiliate of the Sponsor, in connection with a Business Combination to assist the
Company in holding meetings with its stockholders to discuss the potential Business Combination and the target business’ attributes, introduce the Company to potential investors that
are interested in purchasing the Company’s securities in connection with a Business Combination, assist the Company in obtaining stockholder approval for the Business Combination
and assist the Company with its press releases and public filings in connection with the Business Combination. The Company will pay the representative of the underwriters and
Moelis & Company LLC a cash fee for such services upon the consummation of the Business Combination of 2.25% ($11,250,000) and 1.25% ($6,250,000), respectively, or 3.5%
($17,500,000), in the aggregate, of the gross proceeds of the offering including the gross proceeds from the full or partial exercise of the underwriters’ over-allotment option. A portion
of such fee may be re-allocated or paid to members that assist the Company in consummating its Business Combination.
Related Party Loans


F-15
In order to finance transaction costs in connection with a Business Combination, the Sponsor or an affiliate of the Sponsor or certain of the Company’s directors and officers may, but
are not obligated to, loan the Company funds as may be required (“Working Capital Loans”). If the Company completes a Business Combination, the Company would repay the
Working Capital Loans out of the proceeds


Table of Contents
ATLAS CREST INVESTMENT CORP.
NOTES TO FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
DECEMBER 31, 2020
of the Trust Account released to the Company. Otherwise, the Working Capital Loans would be repaid only out of funds held outside the Trust Account. In the event that a Business
Combination does not close, the Company may use a portion of proceeds held outside the Trust Account to repay the Working Capital Loans, but no proceeds held in the Trust
Account would be used to repay the Working Capital Loans.
NOTE 8. WARRANTS
Public Warrants may only be exercised for a whole number of shares. No fractional shares are issued upon exercise of the Public Warrants. The Public Warrants are exercisable on the
later of (a)  30 days  after the consummation of a Business Combination or (b)  12 months  from the closing of the Initial Public Offering. The Public Warrants will expire five
years from the consummation of a Business Combination or earlier upon redemption or liquidation.
The Company will not be obligated to deliver any Class A common stock pursuant to the exercise of a Public Warrant and will have no obligation to settle such Public Warrant
exercise unless a registration statement under the Securities Act covering the issuance of the Class A common stock issuable upon exercise of the Public Warrants is then effective and
a prospectus relating thereto is current, subject to the Company satisfying its obligations with respect to registration. No warrant will be exercisable and the Company will not be
obligated to issue shares of Class A common stock upon exercise of a warrant unless Class A common stock issuable upon such warrant exercise has been registered, qualified or
deemed to be exempt under the securities laws of the state of residence of the registered holder of the warrants.
The Company has agreed that as soon as practicable, but in no event later than 15 business days after the closing of a Business Combination, it will use its best efforts to file with the
SEC a registration statement for the registration, under the Securities Act, of the Class A common stock issuable upon exercise of the warrants. The Company will use its best efforts
to cause the same to become effective and to maintain the effectiveness of such registration statement, and a current prospectus relating thereto, until the expiration of the warrants in
accordance with the provisions of the warrant agreement. If a registration statement covering the shares of Class A common stock issuable upon exercise of the warrants is not
effective by the sixtieth (60th) business day after the closing of a Business Combination, warrant holders may, until such time as there is an effective registration statement and during
any period when the Company will have failed to maintain an effective registration statement, exercise warrants on a “cashless basis” in accordance with Section 3(a)(9) of the
Securities Act or another exemption. Notwithstanding the above, if the Class A common stock are at the time of any exercise of a warrant not listed on a national securities exchange
such that they satisfy the definition of a “covered security” under Section 18(b)(1) of the Securities Act, the Company may, at its option, require holders of Public Warrants who
exercise their warrants to do so on a “cashless basis” in accordance with Section 3(a)(9) of the Securities Act and, in the event the Company so elect, the Company will not be required
to file or maintain in effect a registration statement, and in the event the Company does not so elect, the Company will use its best efforts to register or qualify the shares under
applicable blue sky laws to the extent an exemption is not available.
Once the Public Warrants become exercisable, the Company may call the Public Warrants for redemption:
●
in whole and not in part;
●
at a price of $0.01 per Public Warrant;
●
upon not less than 30 days’ prior written notice of redemption to each warrant holder; and
●
if, and only if, the closing price of the common stock equals or exceeds $18.00 per share (as adjusted for stock splits, stock dividends, reorganizations, recapitalizations and
the like) for any 20 trading days within a 30-trading day period commencing after the warrants become exercisable and ending three business days before the Company
sends the notice of redemption to the warrant holders.


F-16
If and when the warrants become redeemable by the Company, the Company may exercise its redemption right even if the Company is unable to register or qualify the underlying
securities for sale under all applicable state securities laws.


Table of Contents
ATLAS CREST INVESTMENT CORP.
NOTES TO FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
DECEMBER 31, 2020
The exercise price and number of Class A common stock issuable upon exercise of the Public Warrants may be adjusted in certain circumstances including in the event of a share
dividend, extraordinary dividend or recapitalization, reorganization, merger or consolidation. However, except as described below, the Public Warrants will not be adjusted for
issuances of Class A common stock at a price below its exercise price. Additionally, in no event will the Company be required to net cash settle the Public Warrants. If the Company is
unable to complete a Business Combination within the Combination Period and the Company liquidates the funds held in the Trust Account, holders of Public Warrants will not
receive any of such funds with respect to their Public Warrants, nor will they receive any distribution from the Company’s assets held outside of the Trust Account with respect to such
Public Warrants. Accordingly, the Public Warrants may expire worthless.
In addition, if (x) the Company issues additional shares of Class A common stock or equity-linked securities for capital raising purposes in connection with the closing of its initial
Business Combination at an issue price or effective issue price of less than $9.20 per share of Class A common stock (with such issue price or effective issue price to be determined in
good faith by the Company’s board of directors and, in the case of any such issuance to the Sponsor or its affiliates, without taking into account any Founder Shares held by the
Sponsor or such affiliates, as applicable, prior to such issuance) (the “Newly Issued Price”), (y) the aggregate gross proceeds from such issuances represent more than 60% of the total
equity proceeds, and interest thereon, available for the funding of the Company’s initial Business Combination on the date of the consummation of such initial Business Combination
(net of redemptions), and (z) the volume weighted average trading price of the Company’s common stock during the 20 trading day period starting on the trading day prior to the day
on which the Company consummates its initial Business Combination (such price, the “Market Value”) is below $9.20 per share, the exercise price of the warrants will be adjusted (to
the nearest cent) to be equal to 115% of the higher of the Market Value and the Newly Issued Price and the $18.00 per share redemption trigger price described above will be adjusted
(to the nearest cent) to be equal to 180% of the higher of the Market Value and the Newly Issued Price.
The Private Placement Warrants are identical to the Public Warrants underlying the Units sold in the Initial Public Offering, except that the Private Placement Warrants will and the
common shares issuable upon the exercise of the Private Placement Warrants will not be transferable, assignable or salable until 30 days  after the completion of a Business
Combination, subject to certain limited exceptions. Additionally, the Private Placement Warrants will be exercisable on a cashless basis and will be non-redeemable so long as they are
held by the initial purchasers or their permitted transferees. If the Private Placement Warrants are held by someone other than the initial purchasers or their permitted transferees, the
Private Placement Warrants will be redeemable by the Company and exercisable by such holders on the same basis as the Public Warrants.
As of December 31, 2020, there were 16,666,667 Public Warrants and 8,000,000 Private Placement Warrants outstanding. The Company classifies the outstanding Public Warrants
and Private Placement Warrants as warrant liabilities on the Balance Sheet in accordance with the guidance contained in ASC 815-40.
The warrant liabilities are initially measured at fair value upon the closing of the Initial Public Offering and subsequently re-measured at each reporting period using a Monte-Carlo
model. The Public Warrants were allocated a portion of the proceeds from the issuance of the Units equal to its fair value. The Company recognized gains in connection with changes
in the fair value of warrant liabilities of $9,933,330 within change in fair value of warrant liabilities in the Statement of Operations during the year ended December 31, 2020.
NOTE 9. STOCKHOLDERS’ EQUITY
Preferred stock — The Company is authorized to issue 1,000,000 shares of $0.0001 par value preferred stock. At December 31, 2020, there were no shares of preferred stock issued
or outstanding.
Class A Common Stock — The Company is authorized to issue up to 200,000,000 shares of Class A, $0.0001 par value common stock. Holders of the Company’s common stock are
entitled to one vote for each share. At December 31, 2020, there were 5,114,713 shares of Class A common stock issued and outstanding.
Class B Common Stock — The Company is authorized to issue up to 20,000,000 shares of Class B, $0.0001 par value common stock. Holders of the Company’s common stock are
entitled to one vote for each share. At December 31, 2020, there were 12,500,000 shares of Class B common stock issued and outstanding. In December 2020, the underwriters’ over-


F-17
allotment option expired and as a result the Sponsor forfeited 1,875,000 shares of Class B common stock.


Table of Contents
ATLAS CREST INVESTMENT CORP.
NOTES TO FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
DECEMBER 31, 2020
Holders of Class A common stock and Class B common stock will vote together as a single class on all other matters submitted to a vote of shareholders, except as required by law.
The shares of Class B common stock will automatically convert into shares of Class A common stock upon the consummation of a Business Combination on a one-for-one basis,
subject to adjustment. In the case that additional shares of Class A common stock or equity-linked securities are issued or deemed issued in connection with a Business Combination,
the number of shares of Class A common stock issuable upon conversion of all Founder Shares will equal, in the aggregate, on an as-converted basis, 20% of the total number of
shares of Class A common stock outstanding after such conversion, including the total number of shares of Class A common stock issued, or deemed issued or issuable upon
conversion or exercise of any equity-linked securities or rights issued or deemed issued, by the Company in connection with or in relation to the consummation of a Business
Combination, excluding any shares of Class A common stock or equity-linked securities or rights exercisable for or convertible into shares of Class A common stock issued, or to be
issued, to any seller in a Business Combination and any Private Placement Warrants issued to the Sponsor, officers or directors upon conversion of Working Capital Loans, provided
that such conversion of Founder Shares will never occur on a less than one-for-one basis.
NOTE 10. INCOME TAX
The Company’s net deferred tax assets (liabilities) as of December 31, 2020 is as follows:
Deferred tax assets:
    
  
Start-up costs
$
33,188
Net operating loss carryforwards
 
14,688
Total deferred tax assets
 
47,876
Valuation allowance
 
(27,174)
Deferred tax liabilities:
 
  
Unrealized gain on investments
 
(20,702)
Total deferred tax liabilities
 
(20,702)
Deferred tax assets, net of allowance
$
—
The income tax provision for the period from August 26 (inception) through December 31, 2020 consists of the following:
Federal
    
  
Current
$
—
Deferred
 
(27,174)
State
 
  
Current
 
—
Deferred
 
—
Change in valuation allowance
 
27,174
Income tax provision
$
—
As of December 31, 2020, the Company has available U.S. federal operating loss carry forwards of approximately $70,000 that may be carried forward indefinitely.


F-18
In assessing the realization of deferred tax assets, management considers whether it is more likely than not that some portion or all of the deferred tax assets will not be realized. The
ultimate realization of deferred tax assets is dependent upon the generation of future taxable income during the periods in which temporary differences representing future deductible
amounts become deductible. Management considers the scheduled reversal of deferred tax assets, projected future taxable income and tax planning strategies in making this
assessment. After consideration of all the information available, management believes that significant uncertainty exists with respect to future realization of the deferred tax assets and
has therefore established a full valuation allowance. For the period ended December 31, 2020, the valuation allowance was $27,174.


Table of Contents
ATLAS CREST INVESTMENT CORP.
NOTES TO FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
DECEMBER 31, 2020
A reconciliation of the federal income tax rate to the Company’s effective tax rate at December 31, 2020 is as follows:
Statutory federal income tax rate
    
21.0 %
State taxes, net of federal tax benefit
 
0.0 %
Change in fair value of derivative warrant liabilities
(19.2)%
Non-deductible transaction costs
(1.5)%
Change in valuation allowance
 
(0.3)%
Income tax provision
 
0.0 %
The Company files income tax returns in the U.S. federal jurisdiction, and New York which remain open and subject to examination.
NOTE 11. FAIR VALUE MEASUREMENTS
The following table presents information about the Company’s financial assets that are measured at fair value on a recurring basis at December 31, 2020, and indicates the fair value
hierarchy of the valuation inputs the Company utilized to determine such fair value:
Description
    
Level 1
    
Level 2
    
Level 3
Assets
 
   
   
  
Investments held in Trust Account:
Money Market investments
$
500,098,582
$
—
$
—
Liabilities
Warrant liability - Public Warrants
$
31,666,670
$
—
$
—
Warrant liability - Private Placement Warrants
$
—
$
—
$
15,840,000


F-19
The Company utilized a Monte Carlo simulation model for the initial valuation the Public Warrants. The subsequent measurement of the Public Warrants as of December 31, 2020 is
classified as Level 1 due to the use of an observable market quote in an active market under the ticker ACIC WS. The quoted price of the Public Warrants was $1.90 per warrant as of
December 31, 2020.
The Company utilizes a Modified Black-Scholes model to value the Private Placement Warrants at each reporting period, with changes in fair value recognized in the statement of
operations. The estimated fair value of the Private Placement warrant liability is determined using Level 3 inputs. Inherent in a binomial options pricing model are assumptions related
to expected share-price volatility, expected life, risk-free interest rate and dividend yield. The Company estimates the volatility of its common stock based on historical volatility that
matches the expected remaining life of the warrants. The risk-free interest rate is based on the U.S. Treasury zero-coupon yield curve on the grant date for a maturity similar to the
expected remaining life of the warrants. The expected life of the warrants is assumed to be equivalent to their remaining contractual term. The dividend rate is based on the historical
rate, which the Company anticipates to remain at zero.
The aforementioned warrant liabilities are not subject to qualified hedge accounting.
Transfers to/from Levels 1, 2 and 3 are recognized at the end of the reporting period. The estimated fair value of the Public Warrants transferred from a Level 3 measurement to a
Level 1 fair value measurement in December 2020 when the Public Warrants were separately listed and traded.


Table of Contents
ATLAS CREST INVESTMENT CORP.
NOTES TO FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
DECEMBER 31, 2020
The following table provides the significant inputs to the Monte Carlo Simulation for the initial measurement of the fair value of the Public Warrants:
    
At October 30,
2020 (Initial
Measurement)
Stock price
$
9.93
Strike price
$
11.50
Probability of completing a Business Combination
 
 
86.0 %
Term (in years)
 
 
6.1
Volatility
 
 
4.5% pre-merger / 26.0% post-merger
Risk-free rate
 
 
0.5 %
Fair value of warrants
 
$
1.52
The following table provides the significant inputs to the Modified Black-Scholes model for the fair value of the Private Placement Warrants:
    
At October 30,
    
 
2020 (Initial
As of December 31,
Measurement)
2020
Stock price
$
9.93
$
10.06  
Strike price
$
11.50
$
11.50  
Probability of completing a Business Combination
86.0 %  
86.0 %
Dividend yield
 
— %  
— %
Term (in years)
 
6.1  
5.9
Volatility
 
22.8 %  
28.0 %
Risk-free rate
 
0.5 %  
0.5 %
Fair value of warrants
$
1.53
$
1.98
The following table presents the changes in the fair value of warrant liabilities:
    
Private
    
    
Warrant
Placement
Public
Liabilities
Fair value as of August 26, 2020
$
—
—
$
—
Initial measurement at October 30, 2020
12,240,000
25,333,340
37,573,340
Change in valuation inputs or other assumptions
3,600,000  
6,333,330  
9,933,330
Fair value as of December 31, 2020
$
15,840,000  
31,666,670
$
47,506,670
The Company recognized losses in connection with changes in the fair value of warrant liabilities of $9,933,330 within change in fair value of warrant liabilities in the Statement of
Operations during the year ended December 31, 2020.


F-20
NOTE 12. SUBSEQUENT EVENTS
Business Combination Agreement
On February 10, 2021, the Company entered into a Business Combination Agreement (as it may be amended, supplemented or otherwise modified from time to time, the “Business
Combination Agreement”), by and among the Company, Artemis Acquisition Sub  Inc., a Delaware corporation (“Artemis Merger Sub”), and Archer Aviation  Inc., a Delaware
corporation (“Archer”).
The Business Combination Agreement and the transactions contemplated thereby were approved by the boards of directors of each of the Company and Archer.


Table of Contents
ATLAS CREST INVESTMENT CORP.
NOTES TO FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
DECEMBER 31, 2020
F-21
The Business Combination Agreement provides for, among other things, the following transactions on the date of closing of the Business Combination (the “Closing”): (i) Atlas will
amend and restate its certificate of incorporation (the “Post-Closing Atlas Certificate of Incorporation”), pursuant to which, among other things, Atlas will have a dual-class share
structure with (A) shares of Class A common stock that will carry voting rights in the form of one vote per share (the “New Class A Common Stock”), and (B) shares of Class B
common stock that will carry voting rights in the form of ten votes per share (the “New Class B Common Stock” and, together with the New Class A Common Stock, the “New Atlas
Common Stock”), and (ii) Artemis Merger Sub will merge with and into Archer, with Archer as the surviving company in the merger and, after giving effect to such merger,
continuing as a wholly-owned subsidiary of Atlas (the “Merger”).
The Merger and the other transactions contemplated by the Business Combination Agreement are hereinafter referred to as the “Business Combination”.
The Business Combination is subject to customary closing conditions, including, without limitation, the receipt of the required approval by Atlas’ stockholders.
In accordance with the terms and subject to the conditions of the Business Combination Agreement, at the effective time of the Merger, (i) outstanding shares of common stock and
preferred stock of Archer will be converted into a right to receive a number of shares of New Class B Common Stock determined on the basis of an implied Archer equity value of
$2,525,000,000 (the “Implied Equity Value”), (ii) all stock awards (whether vested or unvested) to purchase Archer common stock will be converted into stock awards to purchase a
number of shares of New Class B Common Stock based on an exchange ratio derived from the Implied Equity Value, and (iii) outstanding warrants (whether vested or unvested) to
purchase Archer common stock will be converted into warrants to purchase a number of shares of New Class B Common Stock determined on the basis of the Implied Equity Value.
The former Archer equity holders will have the right to convert their shares of New Class B Common Stock into shares of New Class A Common Stock pursuant to the Post-Closing
Atlas Certificate of Incorporation.
PIPE Financing (Private Placement)
Concurrently with the execution of the Business Combination Agreement, the Company entered into subscription agreements (the “Subscription Agreements”) with certain investors.
Pursuant to the Subscription Agreements, each investor agreed to subscribe for and purchase, and the Company agreed to issue and sell to such investors, on the Closing Date (as
defined in the Business Combination Agreement) substantially concurrently with the Closing (as defined in the Business Combination Agreement), an aggregate of 60,000,000 shares
of the Company’s Class A Common Stock for a purchase price of $10.00 per share, for aggregate gross proceeds of $600 million (the “PIPE Financing”).
The closing of the PIPE Financing is contingent upon, among other things, the substantially concurrent consummation of the Business Combination. The Subscription Agreements
provide that Atlas will grant the investors in the PIPE Financing certain customary registration rights.


Table of Contents
ATLAS CREST INVESTMENT CORP.
CONDENSED BALANCE SHEETS
    
June 30, 2021
    
December 31, 2020
(Unaudited)
ASSETS
Current assets:
Cash
$
297,376
$
925,923
Prepaid expenses
 
251,628
 
463,999
Total Current Assets
549,004
1,389,922
Investments held in Trust Account
500,143,016
500,098,582
Prepaid insurance - non-current
78,569
—
Total Assets
$
500,770,589
$
501,488,504
 
 
LIABILITIES AND STOCKHOLDERS' (DEFICIT) EQUITY
 
  
 
  
Current liabilities:
Accounts payable
$
77,617
$
10,991
Accrued expenses
7,376,317
48,022
Franchise tax payable
98,907
69,945
Promissory note - related party
300,000
—
Other current liabilities
4,404
—
Total Current Liabilities
 
7,857,245
 
128,958
Warrant liabilities
 
38,226,667
 
47,506,670
Total Liabilities
 
46,083,912
 
47,635,628
 
  
 
  
Commitments and Contingencies
 
  
 
  
Class A common stock, $0.0001 par value, subject to possible redemption; 50,000,000 and 44,885,287 shares at redemption
value at June 30, 2021 and December 31, 2020, respectively
500,143,016
448,852,870
 
  
 
  
Stockholders’ (Deficit) Equity:
 
  
 
  
Preferred stock, $0.0001 par value; 1,000,000 shares authorized; none issued and outstanding at June 30,2021 and December
31,2020
 
—
 
—
Class A common stock, $0.0001 par value; 200,000,000 shares authorized; 50,000,000 shares issued; none and 5,114,713
shares outstanding at June 30, 2021 and December 31, 2020, respectively (excluding 50,000,000 and 44,885,287 shares
subject to possible redemption) at June 30, 2021 and December 31, 2020, respectively
 
—
 
511
Class B common stock, $0.0001 par value; 20,000,000 shares authorized; 12,500,000 shares issued and outstanding at June
30, 2021 and December 31, 2020
 
1,250
 
1,250
Additional paid-in capital
 
23,750
 
15,848,758
Accumulated deficit
 
(45,481,339)
 
(10,850,513)
Total Stockholders' (Deficit) Equity
 
(45,456,339)
 
5,000,006
Total Liabilities and Stockholders' (Deficit) Equity
$
500,770,589
$
501,488,504


F-22
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these financial statements.


Table of Contents
F-23
ATLAS CREST INVESTMENT CORP.
CONDENSED STATEMENT OF OPERATIONS
(UNAUDITED)
Three Months Ended
Six Months Ended
June 30, 
June 30, 
    
2021
    
2021
Operating costs
$
3,764,636
$
8,489,653
Franchise tax expense
49,726
100,209
Loss from operations
(3,814,362)
(8,589,862)
Unrealized gain on investments held in Trust Account
5,002
135,027
Interest and dividend income on investments held in Trust Account
8,633
8,633
Change in fair value of warrant liabilities
7,053,334
9,280,003
Net income
$
3,252,607
$
833,801
 
 
Basic and diluted weighted average shares outstanding, Redeemable Class A Common Stock
 
50,000,000
 
50,000,000
Basic and diluted net earnings per share, Redeemable Class A Common Stock
$
0.00
$
0.00
Basic and diluted weighted average shares outstanding, Non-Redeemable Class B Common Stock
 
12,500,000
 
12,500,000
Basic and diluted net income per share, Non-Redeemable Class B Common Stock
$
0.26
$
0.06
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these financial statements.


Table of Contents
F-24
ATLAS CREST INVESTMENT CORP.
CONDENSED STATEMENT OF CHANGES IN STOCKHOLDERS’ EQUITY (DEFICIT)
(UNAUDITED)
Common Stock
Additional
Class A
Class B
Paid-in
Accumulated
Total
    
Shares
    
Amount     
Shares
    
Amount
    
Capital
    
Deficit
    
Stockholders’
Balance — December 31, 2020
5,114,713
$
511
12,500,000
$
1,250
$
15,848,758
$
(10,850,513)
$
5,000,006
Measurement adjustment on redeemable common stock
(5,114,713)
(511)
—
—
(15,825,008)
(35,478,970)
(51,304,489)
Net loss
 
—
 
—
—
—
 
—
 
(2,418,806)
 
(2,418,806)
Balance — March 31, 2021
 
—
—
12,500,000
1,250
23,750
(48,748,289)
(48,723,289)
Measurement adjustment on redeemable common stock
—
—
—
—
—
14,343
14,343
Net income
—
—
—
—
—
3,252,607
3,252,607
Balance - June 30, 2021
—
$
—
12,500,000
$
1,250
$
23,750
$
(45,481,339)
$
(45,456,339)
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these financial statements.


Table of Contents
F-25
ATLAS CREST INVESTMENT CORP.
CONDENSED STATEMENT OF CASH FLOWS
FOR THE SIX MONTHS ENDED JUNE 30, 2021
(UNAUDITED)
Cash Flows from Operating Activities:
    
  
Net income
$
833,801
Adjustments to reconcile net income to net cash used in operating activities:
 
Unrealized gain on investments held in Trust Account
(135,027)
Interest and dividend income on investments held in Trust Account
(8,633)
Change in fair value of warrant liabilities
(9,280,003)
Changes in operating assets and liabilities:
 
  
Prepaid expenses
133,802
Accounts payable
66,626
Accrued expenses
 
7,328,295
Franchise tax payable
28,962
Other current liabilities
4,404
Net cash used in operating activities
 
(1,027,773)
Cash Flows from Investing Activities:
Cash withdrawn from Trust Account to pay taxes
99,226
Net cash provided by investing activities
99,226
 
  
Cash Flows from Financing Activities:
 
  
Proceeds from issuance of promissory note
 
300,000
Net cash provided by financing activities
 
300,000
 
  
Net change in cash
 
(628,547)
Cash — beginning of period
 
925,923
Cash — end of period
$
297,376
 
Supplemental disclosure of noncash investing and financing activities:
 
Change in value of Class A common stock subject to possible redemption
$
51,290,146
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these financial statements.


Table of Contents
ATLAS CREST INVESTMENT CORP.
NOTES TO CONDENSED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
JUNE 30, 2021
(UNAUDITED)
NOTE 1. DESCRIPTION OF ORGANIZATION AND BUSINESS OPERATIONS
Atlas Crest Investment Corp. (the “Company” or “Atlas”) is a blank check company incorporated in Delaware on August 26, 2020. The Company was formed for the purpose of
effectuating a merger, capital stock exchange, asset acquisition, stock purchase, reorganization or other similar business combination with one or more businesses (the “Business
Combination”). The Company is an early stage and emerging growth company and, as such, the Company is subject to all of the risks associated with early stage and emerging growth
companies.
As of June 30, 2021, the Company had not commenced any operations. All activity through June 30, 2021 relates to the Company's formation, the initial public offering (“Initial
Public Offering”) as described below, and since the closing of the Initial Public Offering, the search for a prospective initial Business Combination. The Company will not generate
any operating revenues until after the completion of its initial Business Combination, at the earliest. The Company will generate non-operating income in the form of interest income
or gains on investments on the cash and investments held in a trust account from the proceeds derived from the Initial Public Offering.
The registration statement for the Company’s Initial Public Offering was declared effective on October 27, 2020. On October 30, 2020, the Company consummated the Initial Public
Offering of 50,000,000 units (the “Units” and, with respect to the shares of Class A common stock included in the Units sold, the “Public Shares”), at $10.00 per Unit, generating
gross proceeds of $500,000,000, which is discussed in Note 3.
Following the closing of the Initial Public Offering on October 30, 2020, an amount of $500,000,000 ($10.00 per Unit) from the net proceeds of the sale of the Units in the Initial
Public Offering and the sale of the Private Placement Warrants (as defined in Note 4) was placed in a trust account (the “Trust Account”), invested in U.S. government securities,
within the meaning set forth in Section 2(a)(16) of the Investment Company Act of 1940, as amended (the “Investment Company Act”), with maturities of 185 days or less, or in any
open-ended investment company that holds itself out as a money market fund meeting the conditions of Rule 2a-7 of the Investment Company Act, as determined by the Company,
until the earlier of: (i) the consummation of a Business Combination or (ii) the distribution of the funds in the Trust Account to the Company’s stockholders, as described below.
Transaction costs related to the issuances described above amounted to $10,534,144, consisting of $10,000,000 of underwriting fees and $534,144 of other costs. In addition, at
June 30, 2021, $297,376 of cash was held outside of the Trust Account and is available for working capital purposes.
The Company’s management has broad discretion with respect to the specific application of the net proceeds of the Initial Public Offering and the sale of the Private Placement
Warrants, although substantially all of the net proceeds are intended to be applied generally toward consummating a Business Combination. New York Stock Exchange rules provide
that the Business Combination must be with one or more target businesses that together have a fair market value equal to at least 80% of the balance in the Trust Account (excluding
taxes payable on income earned on the Trust Account) at the time of the signing of a definitive agreement to enter a Business Combination. The Company will only complete a
Business Combination if the post-transaction company owns or acquires 50% or more of the outstanding voting securities of the target or otherwise acquires a controlling interest in
the target sufficient for it not to be required to register as an investment company under the Investment Company Act of 1940. There is no assurance that the Company will be able to
successfully effect a Business Combination.
The Company will provide its holders of the outstanding Public Shares (the “public stockholders”) with the opportunity to redeem all or a portion of their Public Shares upon the
completion of a Business Combination either (i) in connection with a stockholder meeting called to approve the Business Combination or (ii) by means of a tender offer. The decision
as to whether the Company will seek stockholder approval of a Business Combination or conduct a tender offer will be made by the Company, solely in its discretion. The public
stockholders are entitled to redeem their Public Shares for a pro rata portion of the amount then in the Trust Account (initially anticipated to be $10.00 per Public Share, plus any pro


F-26
rata interest earned on the funds held in the Trust Account and not previously released to the Company to pay its tax obligations). There will be no redemption rights upon the
completion of a Business Combination with respect to the Company’s warrants. The Public Shares subject to redemption are recorded at redemption value and classified as


Table of Contents
ATLAS CREST INVESTMENT CORP.
NOTES TO CONDENSED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
JUNE 30, 2021
(UNAUDITED)
temporary equity in accordance with the Financial Accounting Standards Board's Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) Topic 480, Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity.
The Company will proceed with the Business Combination only if the Company has net tangible assets of at least $5,000,001 either prior to or upon such consummation of a Business
Combination and, if the Company seeks stockholder approval, a majority of the shares voted are voted in favor of the Business Combination. If a stockholder vote is not required by
law and the Company does not decide to hold a stockholder vote for business or other reasons, the Company will, pursuant to its amended and restated Certificate of Incorporation,
conduct the redemptions pursuant to the tender offer rules of the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission (“SEC”) and file tender offer documents with the SEC prior to completing
a Business Combination. If, however, stockholder approval of the Business Combination is required by law, or the Company decides to obtain stockholder approval for business or
other reasons, the Company will offer to redeem shares in conjunction with a proxy solicitation pursuant to the proxy rules and not pursuant to the tender offer rules. If the Company
seeks stockholder approval in connection with a Business Combination, Atlas Crest Investment LLC (the “Sponsor”) has agreed to vote its Founder Shares (as defined in Note 6) and
any Public Shares purchased during or after the Initial Public Offering in favor of approving a Business Combination. Additionally, each public stockholder may elect to redeem their
Public Shares irrespective of whether they vote for or against the proposed Business Combination or do not vote at all.
Notwithstanding the above, if the Company seeks stockholder approval of a Business Combination and it does not conduct redemptions pursuant to the tender offer rules, the amended
and restated Certificate of Incorporation provides that a public stockholder, together with any affiliate of such stockholder or any other person with whom such stockholder is acting in
concert or as a “group” (as defined under Section 13 of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended (the “Exchange Act”)), will be restricted from redeeming its shares with
respect to more than an aggregate of 15% or more of the Public Shares, without the prior consent of the Company.
The Sponsor has agreed (a)  to waive its redemption rights with respect to its Founder Shares and Public Shares held by it in connection with the completion of a Business
Combination, (b) to waive its liquidation rights with respect to the Founder Shares if the Company fails to complete a Business Combination within 24 months from the closing of the
Initial Public Offering and (c) not to propose an amendment to the amended and restated Certificate of Incorporation (i) to modify the substance or timing of the Company’s obligation
to allow redemption in connection with the Company’s initial Business Combination or to redeem 100% of its Public Shares if the Company does not complete a Business
Combination or (ii)  with respect to any other provision relating to stockholders’ rights or pre-initial business combination activity, unless the Company provides the public
stockholders with the opportunity to redeem their Public Shares in conjunction with any such amendment.
The Company will have until 24 months from the closing of the Initial Public Offering to complete a Business Combination (the “Combination Period”). If the Company is unable to
complete a Business Combination within the Combination Period, the Company will (i) cease all operations except for the purpose of winding up, (ii) as promptly as reasonably
possible but not more than ten business days thereafter, redeem the Public Shares, at a per-share price, payable in cash, equal to the aggregate amount then on deposit in the Trust
Account including interest earned on the funds held in the Trust Account and not previously released to the Company to pay its tax obligations (less up to $100,000 of interest to pay
dissolution expenses), divided by the number of then outstanding Public Shares, which redemption will completely extinguish public stockholders’ rights as stockholders (including
the right to receive further liquidating distributions, if any), and (iii)  as promptly as reasonably possible following such redemption, subject to the approval of the Company’s
remaining stockholders and the Company’s board of directors, dissolve and liquidate, subject in each case to the Company’s obligations under Delaware law to provide for claims of
creditors and the requirements of other applicable law. There will be no redemption rights or liquidating distributions with respect to the Company’s warrants, which will expire
worthless if the Company fails to complete a Business Combination within the Combination Period.
In order to protect the amounts held in the Trust Account, the Sponsor has agreed to be liable to the Company if and to the extent any claims by a third party for services rendered or
products sold to the Company, or a prospective target business with which the Company has discussed entering into a transaction agreement, reduce the amount of funds in the Trust
Account to below (1) $10.00 per Public Share or (2) the actual amount per Public Share held in the Trust Account as of the date of the liquidation of the Trust Account due to
reductions in the value of the trust assets, in each case net of the interest which may be withdrawn to pay our taxes. This liability will not apply with respect to any claims by a third


F-27
party who executed a waiver of any and all rights to seek access to the Trust Account and except as to any claims under the Company’s indemnity of the underwriters of the Initial
Public Offering against certain liabilities,


Table of Contents
ATLAS CREST INVESTMENT CORP.
NOTES TO CONDENSED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
JUNE 30, 2021
(UNAUDITED)
including liabilities under the Securities Act of 1933, as amended (the “Securities Act”). Moreover, in the event that an executed waiver is deemed to be unenforceable against a third
party, the Sponsor will not be responsible to the extent of any liability for such third-party claims. The Company will seek to reduce the possibility that the Sponsor will have to
indemnify the Trust Account due to claims of creditors by endeavoring to have all vendors, service providers (except the Company’s independent registered public accounting firm),
prospective target businesses or other entities with which the Company does business, execute agreements with the Company waiving any right, title, interest or claim of any kind in
or to monies held in the Trust Account.
Business Combination Agreement
On February 10, 2021, the Company entered into a Business Combination Agreement (as amended and restated on July 29, 2021 and as it may be further amended, supplemented or
otherwise modified from time to time, the “Business Combination Agreement”), by and among the Company, Artemis Acquisition Sub Inc., a Delaware corporation (“Artemis Merger
Sub”), and Archer Aviation Inc., a Delaware corporation (“Archer”).
The Business Combination Agreement and the transactions contemplated thereby were approved by the boards of directors of each of the Company and Archer.
The Business Combination Agreement provides for, among other things, the following transactions on the date of closing of the Business Combination (the “Closing”): (i) Atlas will
amend and restate its certificate of incorporation (the “Post-Closing Atlas Certificate of Incorporation”), pursuant to which, among other things, Atlas will have a dual class share
structure with (A) shares of Class A common stock that will carry voting rights in the form of one vote per share (the “New Class A Common Stock”), and (B) shares of Class B
common stock that will carry voting rights in the form of ten votes per share (the “New Class B Common Stock” and, together with the New Class A Common Stock, the “New Atlas
Common Stock”), and (ii) Artemis Merger Sub will merge with and into Archer, with Archer as the surviving company in the merger and, after giving effect to such merger,
continuing as a wholly-owned subsidiary of Atlas (the “Merger”).
The Merger and the other transactions contemplated by the Business Combination Agreement are hereinafter referred to as the “Business Combination”.
The Business Combination is subject to customary closing conditions, including, without limitation, the required approval by Atlas’ stockholders.
In accordance with the terms and subject to the conditions of the Business Combination Agreement, at the effective time of the Merger, (i) outstanding shares of common stock and
preferred stock of Archer will be converted into a right to receive a number of shares of New Class B Common Stock determined on the basis of an implied Archer equity value of
$1,480,000,000 (the “Implied Equity Value”), (ii) all stock awards (whether vested or unvested) to purchase Archer common stock will be converted into stock awards to purchase a
number of shares of New Class B Common Stock based on an exchange ratio derived from the Implied Equity Value, and (iii) outstanding warrants (whether vested or unvested) to
purchase Archer common stock will be converted into warrants to purchase a number of shares of New Archer Class A Shares or New Class B Common Stock, as applicable,
determined on the basis of the Implied Equity Value. The former Archer equity holders will have the right to convert their shares of New Class B Common Stock into shares of New
Class A Common Stock pursuant to the Post-Closing Atlas Certificate of Incorporation.
The Business Combination Agreement contains representations, warranties and covenants of each of the parties thereto that are customary for transactions of this type. Atlas has also
agreed to take all action within its power as may be necessary or appropriate such that, effective immediately after the Closing, the Atlas board of directors will be divided into three
classes and be composed of a total of seven directors, which directors shall include an individual designated by Atlas, three individuals designated by Archer and three individuals to
be identified by Archer in consultation with Atlas who qualify as “independent directors” under the listing rules of the New York Stock Exchange.


F-28
The obligations of Atlas and Archer to consummate the Business Combination are subject to certain closing conditions, including, but not limited to, (i) the expiration or termination
of the applicable waiting period under the Hart-Scott-Rodino Antitrust Improvements


Table of Contents
ATLAS CREST INVESTMENT CORP.
NOTES TO CONDENSED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
JUNE 30, 2021
(UNAUDITED)
F-29
Act of 1976, as amended, (ii) the absence of any law or governmental order or other legal restraint or prohibition preventing the consummation of the Business Combination, (iii) the
Registration Statement (as defined below) being declared effective under the Securities Act of 1933, as amended (the “Securities Act”), (iv) the shares of New Class A Common Stock
to be issued in connection with the Business Combination having been approved for listing on the New York Stock Exchange, (v) the approval of Atlas’ stockholders, (vi) the approval
of Archer’s stockholders and (vii) Atlas having at least $5,000,001 of net tangible assets (as determined in accordance with Rule 3a51-1(g)(1) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934,
as amended) remaining after the Closing.
In addition, the obligation of Archer to consummate the Business Combination is subject to, among other conditions, the aggregate cash proceeds from Atlas’ trust account, together
with the proceeds from the PIPE Financing (as defined below), equaling no less than $600,000,000 (after deducting any amounts paid to Atlas shareholders that exercise their
redemption rights in connection with the Business Combination).
The Business Combination will be accounted for as a reverse recapitalization, with no goodwill or other intangible assets recorded, in accordance with GAAP. Under this method of
accounting, Atlas will be treated as the “accounting acquiree” and Archer as the “accounting acquirer” for financial reporting purposes.
PIPE Financing (Private Placement)
Concurrently with the execution of the Business Combination Agreement, the Company entered into subscription agreements (the “Subscription Agreements”) with certain investors.
Pursuant to the Subscription Agreements, each investor agreed to subscribe for and purchase, and the Company agreed to issue and sell to such investors, on the Closing Date (as
defined in the Business Combination Agreement) substantially concurrently with the Closing (as defined in the Business Combination Agreement), an aggregate of 60,000,000 shares
of the Company’s Class A Common Stock for a purchase price of $10.00 per share, for aggregate gross proceeds of $600 million (the “PIPE Financing”).
The closing of the PIPE Financing is contingent upon, among other things, the substantially concurrent consummation of the Business Combination. The Subscription Agreements
provide that Atlas will grant the investors in the PIPE Financing certain customary registration rights.
Going Concern Consideration
As of June 30, 2021, the Company had $297,376 in cash held outside of the Trust Account and a working capital deficit of $7,308,241. The Company has incurred and expects to
continue to incur significant costs in pursuit of its acquisition plans. These conditions raise substantial doubt about the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern for a period
of time within one year after the date that the financial statements are issued. Management plans to address this uncertainty through the Business Combination as discussed above.
There is no assurance that the Company’s plans to consummate the Business Combination will be successful or successful within the Combination Period. The financial statements do
not include any adjustments that might result from the outcome of this uncertainty.
Risks and Uncertainties
Management continues to evaluate the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on the industry and has concluded that while it is reasonably possible that the virus could have a negative
effect on the Company’s financial position, results of its operations, and/or search for a target company, the specific impact is not readily determinable as of the date of these financial
statements. The financial statements do not include any adjustments that might result from the outcome of this uncertainty.




Table of Contents
ATLAS CREST INVESTMENT CORP.
NOTES TO CONDENSED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
JUNE 30, 2021
(UNAUDITED)
NOTE 2. SUMMARY OF SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING POLICIES
Basis of Presentation
The accompanying financial statements of the Company are presented in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America (“GAAP”) and
pursuant to the rules and regulations of the SEC. Certain information or footnote disclosures normally included in financial statements prepared in accordance with GAAP have been
condensed or omitted, pursuant to the rules and regulations of the SEC for interim financial reporting. Accordingly, they do not include all the information and footnotes necessary for
a comprehensive presentation of financial position, results of operations, or cash flows. In the opinion of management, the accompanying unaudited condensed financial statements
include all adjustments, consisting of a normal recurring nature, which are necessary for a fair presentation of the financial position, operating results and cash flows for the periods
presented. The accompanying unaudited condensed financial statements should be read in conjunction with the Company’s Annual Report on Form 10-K as filed with the SEC on
March 8, 2021 and the Company’s Amended Annual Report on Form 10-K/A filed with the SEC on May 24, 2021. The interim results for the periods presented are not necessarily
indicative of the results to be expected for the year ending December 31, 2021 or for any future interim periods.
Emerging Growth Company
The Company is an “emerging growth company,” as defined in Section 2(a) of the Securities Act, as modified by the Jumpstart Our Business Startups Act of 2012 (the “JOBS Act”),
and it may take advantage of certain exemptions from various reporting requirements that are applicable to other public companies that are not emerging growth companies including,
but not limited to, not being required to comply with the independent registered public accounting firm attestation requirements of Section 404 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act, reduced
disclosure obligations regarding executive compensation in its periodic reports and proxy statements, and exemptions from the requirements of holding a nonbinding advisory vote on
executive compensation and stockholder approval of any golden parachute payments not previously approved.
Further, Section 102(b)(1) of the JOBS Act exempts emerging growth companies from being required to comply with new or revised financial accounting standards until private
companies (that is, those that have not had a Securities Act registration statement declared effective or do not have a class of securities registered under the Exchange Act) are required
to comply with the new or revised financial accounting standards. The JOBS Act provides that a company can elect to opt out of the extended transition period and comply with the
requirements that apply to non-emerging growth companies but any such election to opt out is irrevocable. The Company has elected not to opt out of such extended transition period,
which means that when a standard is issued or revised and it has different application dates for public or private companies, the Company, as an emerging growth company, can adopt
the new or revised standard at the time private companies adopt the new or revised standard. This may make comparison of the Company’s financial statements with another public
company, which is neither an emerging growth company nor an emerging growth company which has opted out of using the extended transition period difficult or impossible because
of the potential differences in accounting standards used.
Use of Estimates
The preparation of financial statements in conformity with GAAP requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities
and disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting period.
Making estimates requires management to exercise significant judgment. It is at least reasonably possible that the estimate of the effect of a condition, situation or set of circumstances
that existed at the date of the financial statements, which management considered in formulating its estimate, could change in the near term due to one or more future confirming
events. Accordingly, the actual results could differ significantly from those estimates.


F-30


Table of Contents
ATLAS CREST INVESTMENT CORP.
NOTES TO CONDENSED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
JUNE 30, 2021
(UNAUDITED)
F-31
Cash and Cash Equivalents
The Company considers all short-term investments with an original maturity of three months or less when purchased to be cash equivalents. The Company did not have any cash
equivalents as of June 30, 2021 and December 31, 2020.
Investments Held in Trust Account
At June 30, 2021 and December 31, 2020, substantially all of the assets held in the Trust Account were held in money market funds, which are invested in U.S. Treasury securities.
Common Stock Subject to Possible Redemption
The Company accounts for its common stock subject to possible redemption in accordance with the guidance in Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) Topic 480,
Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity. Common stock subject to mandatory redemption is classified as a liability instrument and is measured at fair value. Conditionally redeemable
common stock (including common stock that features redemption rights that are either within the control of the holder or subject to redemption upon the occurrence of uncertain
events not solely within the Company’s control) is classified as temporary equity. At all other times, common stock is classified as stockholders’ equity. The Company’s common
stock features certain redemption rights that are considered to be outside of the Company’s control and subject to occurrence of uncertain future events. As of June 30, 2021 and
December 31, 2020, 50,000,000 and 44,885,287 shares of Class A common stock subject to possible redemption are presented at redemption value as temporary equity, outside of the
stockholders’ equity section of the Company’s condensed balance sheet, respectively.
Offering Costs associated with the Initial Public Offering
The Company complies with the requirements of ASC 340-10-S99-1 and SEC Staff Accounting Bulletin Topic 5A - Expenses of Offering. Offering costs consist principally of
professional and registration fees incurred through the balance sheet date that are related to the Initial Public Offering. Offering costs directly attributable to the issuance of an equity
contract to be classified in equity are recorded as a reduction in equity. Offering costs for equity contracts that are classified as assets and liabilities are expensed immediately. The
Company incurred offering costs amounting to $10,534,144 as a result of the Initial Public Offering (consisting of a $10,000,000 underwriting discount and $534,144 of other offering
costs). The Company recorded $9,988,271 of offering costs as a reduction of equity in connection with the shares of Class A common Stock included in the Units. The Company
immediately expensed $545,873 of offering costs in connection with the Public Warrants and Private Placement Warrants that were classified as liabilities.
Warrant Liabilities
The Company accounts for warrants as either equity-classified or liability-classified instruments based on an assessment of the warrant’s specific terms and applicable authoritative
guidance in ASC 480, Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity (“ASC 480”) and ASC 815, Derivatives and Hedging (“ASC 815”). The assessment considers whether the warrants are
freestanding financial instruments pursuant to ASC 480, meet the definition of a liability pursuant to ASC 480, and whether the warrants meet all of the requirements for equity
classification under ASC 815, including whether the warrants are indexed to the Company’s own common stock, among other conditions for equity classification. This assessment,
which requires the use of professional judgment, is conducted at the time of warrant issuance and as of each subsequent quarterly period end date while the warrants are outstanding.




Table of Contents
ATLAS CREST INVESTMENT CORP.
NOTES TO CONDENSED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
JUNE 30, 2021
(UNAUDITED)
F-32
For issued or modified warrants that meet all of the criteria for equity classification, the warrants are required to be recorded as a component of additional paid-in capital at the time of
issuance. For issued or modified warrants that do not meet all the criteria for equity classification, the warrants are required to be recorded at their initial fair value on the date of
issuance, and each balance sheet date thereafter. Changes in the estimated fair value of the warrants are recognized as a non-cash gain or loss on the statements of operations. The
initial fair value of the Public Warrants was estimated using a Monte Carlo simulation approach and the fair value of the Private Placement Warrants was estimated using a Modified
Black-Scholes model (see Note 9).
Income Taxes
The Company complies with the accounting and reporting requirements of ASC 740, Income Taxes, which requires an asset and liability approach to financial accounting and
reporting for income taxes. Deferred income tax assets and liabilities are computed for differences between the financial statement and tax bases of assets and liabilities that will result
in future taxable or deductible amounts, based on enacted tax laws and rates applicable to the periods in which the differences are expected to affect taxable income. Valuation
allowances are established, when necessary, to reduce deferred tax assets to the amount expected to be realized.
ASC 740 prescribes a recognition threshold and a measurement attribute for the financial statement recognition and measurement of tax positions taken or expected to be taken in a
tax return. For those benefits to be recognized, a tax position must be more-likely-than-not to be sustained upon examination by taxing authorities. The Company recognizes accrued
interest and penalties related to unrecognized tax benefits, if any, as income tax expense. There were no unrecognized tax benefits and no amounts accrued for interest and penalties as
of June 30, 2021 and December 31, 2020. The Company is currently not aware of any issues under review that could result in significant payments, accruals or material deviation
from its position. The Company is subject to income tax examinations by major taxing authorities since inception.
Net Income Per Share of Common Stock
Net income per common share is computed by dividing net income by the weighted-average number of shares of common stock outstanding during the period. The Company has not
considered the effect of the warrants sold in the Initial Public Offering and Private Placement to purchase an aggregate of 24,666,667 shares in the calculation of diluted income per
share, since the warrants are contingently exercisable, and the contingencies have not yet been met.
The Company’s statement of operations includes a presentation of income per share for common shares subject to possible redemption and applies the two-class method in calculating
income per share. Net earnings per common share, basic and diluted, for Class A redeemable common stock is calculated by dividing the allocable unrealized gain on investments held
in the Trust Account and interest and dividend income on investments held in the Trust Account, net of applicable franchise and income taxes, by the weighted average number of
Class A common stock subject to possible redemption outstanding for the period. Net income per share, basic and diluted, for Class B non-redeemable common stock is calculated by
dividing the net income, adjusted for income attributable to Class A redeemable common stock, by the weighted average number of Class B non-redeemable common stock
outstanding for the period. Class B non-redeemable common stock includes the Founder Shares (as defined in Note 5) as these shares do not have any redemption features and do not
participate in the income earned on the Trust Account.


Table of Contents
ATLAS CREST INVESTMENT CORP.
NOTES TO CONDENSED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
JUNE 30, 2021
(UNAUDITED)
The following table reflects the calculation of basic and diluted net income per common share (in dollars, except share and per share amounts):
Three Months Ended
Six Months Ended
June 30,
June 30,
    
2021
    
2021
Class A Common Stock subject to possible redemption
Numerator: Earnings attributable to Class A Common Stock subject to possible redemption
 
Unrealized gain on investments held in Trust Account
$
5,002
$
135,027
Interest and dividend income on investments held in Trust Account
8,633
8,633
Less: Income available to be withdrawn for payment of taxes
(13,635)
(100,209)
Net earnings attributable to Class A Common Stock subject to possible redemption
$
—
$
43,451
Denominator: Weighted average Class A Common Stock subject to possible redemption
Basic and diluted weighted average shares outstanding, Class A Common Stock subject to possible redemption
50,000,000
50,000,000
Basic and diluted net earnings per share, Class A Common Stock subject to possible redemption
$
0.00
$
0.00
Non-Redeemable Class B Common Stock
 
Numerator: Non-redeemable net income
Net income
$
3,252,607
$
833,801
Less: Net earnings attributable to Class A Common Stock subject to possible redemption
—
(43,451)
Non-redeemable net income
$
3,252,607
$
790,350
Denominator: Weighted average Non-Redeemable Class B Common Stock
Basic and diluted weighted average shares outstanding, Non-Redeemable Class B Common Stock
 
12,500,000
 
12,500,000
Basic and diluted net income per share, Non-Redeemable Class B Common Stock
$
0.26
$
0.06
Concentration of Credit Risk
Financial instruments that potentially subject the Company to concentration of credit risk consist of a cash account in a financial institution which, at times may exceed the Federal
depository insurance coverage of $250,000. The Company has not experienced losses on this account and management believes the Company is not exposed to significant risks on
such account.
Fair Value of Financial Instruments
The Company applies ASC Topic 820, Fair Value Measurement (“ASC 820”), which establishes a framework for measuring fair value and clarifies the definition of fair value within
that framework. ASC 820 defines fair value as an exit price, which is the price that would be received for an asset or paid to transfer a liability in the Company’s principal or most
advantageous market in an orderly transaction between market participants on the measurement date. The fair value hierarchy established in ASC 820 generally requires an entity to


F-33
maximize the use of observable inputs and minimize the use of unobservable inputs when measuring fair value. Observable inputs reflect the assumptions that market participants
would use in pricing the asset or liability and are developed based on market data obtained from sources independent of the reporting entity. Unobservable inputs reflect the entity’s
own assumptions based on market data and the entity’s judgments about the assumptions that market participants would use in pricing the asset or liability and are to be developed
based on the best information available in the circumstances.


Table of Contents
ATLAS CREST INVESTMENT CORP.
NOTES TO CONDENSED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
JUNE 30, 2021
(UNAUDITED)
The carrying amounts reflected in the balance sheet for cash, prepaid expenses and accrued offering costs approximate fair value due to their short-term nature.
Level 1 — Assets and liabilities with unadjusted, quoted prices listed on active market exchanges. Inputs to the fair value measurement are observable inputs, such as quoted prices in
active markets for identical assets or liabilities.
Level 2 — Inputs to the fair value measurement are determined using prices for recently traded assets and liabilities with similar underlying terms, as well as direct or indirect
observable inputs, such as interest rates and yield curves that are observable at commonly quoted intervals.
Level 3 — Inputs to the fair value measurement are unobservable inputs, such as estimates, assumptions, and valuation techniques when little or no market data exists for the assets or
liabilities.
See Note 9 for additional information on assets and liabilities measured at fair value.
Recent Accounting Standards
In August 2020, the Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) issued Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) 2020-06, Debt — Debt with Conversion and Other Options
(Subtopic 470-20) and Derivatives and Hedging — Contracts in Entity’s Own Equity (Subtopic 815-40) (“ASU 2020-06”) to simplify accounting for certain financial instruments.
ASU 2020-06 eliminates the current models that require separation of beneficial conversion and cash conversion features from convertible instruments and simplifies the derivative
scope exception guidance pertaining to equity classification of contracts in an entity’s own equity. The new standard also introduces additional disclosures for convertible debt and
freestanding instruments that are indexed to and settled in an entity’s own equity. ASU 2020-06 amends the diluted earnings per share guidance, including the requirement to use the
if-converted method for all convertible instruments. ASU 2020-06 is effective January 1, 2022 and should be applied on a full or modified retrospective basis, with early adoption
permitted beginning on January 1, 2021. The Company is currently assessing the impact, if any, that ASU 2020-06 would have on its financial position, results of operations or cash
flows.
Management does not believe that any other recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting standards, if currently adopted, would have a material effect on the Company’s financial
statements.
NOTE 3. INITIAL PUBLIC OFFERING
The registration statement for the Company’s Initial Public Offering was declared effective on October 27, 2020. On October 30, 2020, the Company completed its Initial Public
Offering of 50,000,000 Units, at $10.00 per Unit, generating gross proceeds of $500,000,000. Each Unit consisted of one share of Class A common stock, $0.0001 par value, and one-
third of one redeemable warrant (“Public Warrant”). Each Public Warrant entitles the holder to purchase one share of Class A common stock at an exercise price of $11.50 per whole
share (see Note 7).
NOTE 4. PRIVATE PLACEMENT
Simultaneously with the closing of the Initial Public Offering, the Company consummated the sale of 8,000,000 warrants at a price of $1.50 per warrant in a private placement (the
“Private Placement Warrants”) to the Sponsor, generating gross proceeds of $12,000,000. Each Private Placement Warrant is exercisable to purchase one share of Class A common


F-34
stock at a price of $11.50 per share. The proceeds from the sale of the Private Placement Warrants were added to the net proceeds from the Initial Public Offering held in the Trust
Account. If the Company does not complete a Business Combination within the Combination Period, the proceeds from the sale of the Private Placement Warrants will be used to
fund the redemption of the Public Shares (subject to the requirements of applicable law) and the Private Placement Warrants will expire worthless.


Table of Contents
ATLAS CREST INVESTMENT CORP.
NOTES TO CONDENSED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
JUNE 30, 2021
(UNAUDITED)
NOTE 5. RELATED PARTY TRANSACTIONS
Founder Shares
On September 4, 2020, the Sponsor paid $25,000 in consideration for 14,375,000 shares of Class B common stock (the “Founder Shares”). The Founder Shares included an aggregate
of up to 1,875,000 shares subject to forfeiture by the Sponsor to the extent that the underwriter’s over-allotment was not exercised in full or in part, so that the Sponsor would
collectively own, on an as-converted basis, 20% of the Company’s issued and outstanding shares after the Initial Public Offering (assuming the Sponsor did not purchase any Public
Shares in the Initial Public Offering). Upon the expiration of the over-allotment option in December 2020, 1,875,000 shares of Class B common stock were forfeited, resulting in an
aggregate of 12,500,000 Founder Shares outstanding.
The Sponsor has agreed not to transfer, assign or sell any of its Founder Shares until the earlier to occur of: (A) one year after the completion of a Business Combination, or (B) the
date on which the Company completes a liquidation, merger, capital stock exchange or similar transaction that results in the Company’s stockholders having the right to exchange
their shares of common stock for cash, securities or other property. Notwithstanding the foregoing, if the last sale price of the Company’s Class A common stock equals or exceeds
$12.00 per share (as adjusted for stock splits, stock dividends, reorganizations, recapitalizations and the like) for any 20 trading days within any 30-trading day period commencing at
least 150 days after the Business Combination, the Founder Shares will be released from the lock-up.
Promissory Notes — Related Party
On September 11, 2020, the Company issued an unsecured promissory note to the Sponsor, pursuant to which the Company received proceeds of $300,000 to cover expenses related
to the Initial Public Offering. The promissory note was non-interest bearing and was payable on the earlier of March 31, 2021 or the completion of the Initial Public Offering. The
outstanding balance under the promissory note of $300,000 was repaid at the closing of the Initial Public Offering on October 30, 2020.
The Company issued an unsecured promissory note to the Sponsor (the “Promissory Note”) effective June 25, 2021, pursuant to which the Company can borrow an aggregate of up to
$300,000 to cover expenses related to an initial Business Combination and general working capital. The Promissory Note is non-interest bearing and payable upon the consumation of
a Business Combination. As of June 30, 2021, there was $300,000 outstanding under the Promissory Note.
Administrative Support Agreement
The Company entered into an agreement, commencing on the effective date of the Initial Public Offering, to pay the Sponsor a total of $10,000 per month for office space, secretarial
and administrative support. Upon completion of the Business Combination or the Company’s liquidation, the Company will cease paying these monthly fees. During the three and six
months ended June 30, 2021, the Company incurred expenses of $30,000 and $60,000, respectively, under the agreement.
See Note 6, under Business Combination Marketing Agreement, for additional related party transactions.
NOTE 6. COMMITMENTS
Registration Rights


F-35
The holders of the Founder Shares, Private Placement Warrants and any warrants that may be issued upon conversion of the Working Capital Loans (as defined below) (and any shares
of Class A common stock issuable upon the exercise of the Private Placement Warrants and warrants that may be issued upon conversion of Working Capital Loans and upon
conversion of the Founder Shares) are entitled to registration rights pursuant to a registration rights agreement signed on the effective date of the Initial Public Offering, requiring the
Company to register such securities for resale (in the case of the Founder Shares, only after conversion to Class A common stock). The holders of these securities are entitled to make
up to three demands, excluding short form demands, that the Company register such securities. In addition, the holders have certain “piggy-back” registration rights with respect to
registration statements filed subsequent


Table of Contents
ATLAS CREST INVESTMENT CORP.
NOTES TO CONDENSED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
JUNE 30, 2021
(UNAUDITED)
F-36
to the completion of a Business Combination. The registration rights agreement does not contain liquidating damages or other cash settlement provisions resulting from delays in
registering the Company’s securities. The Company will bear the expenses incurred in connection with the filing of any such registration statements.
Business Combination Marketing Agreement
The Company engaged the representative of the underwriters and Moelis & Company LLC, an affiliate of the Sponsor, in connection with a Business Combination to assist the
Company in holding meetings with its stockholders to discuss the potential Business Combination and the target business’ attributes, introduce the Company to potential investors that
are interested in purchasing the Company’s securities in connection with a Business Combination, assist the Company in obtaining stockholder approval for the Business Combination
and assist the Company with its press releases and public filings in connection with the Business Combination. The Company will pay the representative of the underwriters and
Moelis & Company LLC a fee for such services upon the consummation of the Business Combination of 2.25% ($11,250,000) and 1.25% ($6,250,000), respectively, or 3.5%
($17,500,000), in the aggregate, of the gross proceeds of the Initial Public Offering including the gross proceeds from the full or partial exercise of the underwriters’ over-allotment
option. A portion of such fee may be re-allocated or paid to members of FINRA that assist the Company in consummating its Business Combination.
Related Party Loans
In order to finance transaction costs in connection with a Business Combination, the Sponsor or an affiliate of the Sponsor or certain of the Company’s directors and officers may, but
are not obligated to, loan the Company funds as may be required (“Working Capital Loans”). If the Company completes a Business Combination, the Company would repay the
Working Capital Loans out of the proceeds of the Trust Account released to the Company. Otherwise, the Working Capital Loans would be repaid only out of funds held outside the
Trust Account. In the event that a Business Combination does not close, the Company may use a portion of proceeds held outside the Trust Account to repay the Working Capital
Loans, but no proceeds held in the Trust Account would be used to repay the Working Capital Loans. Except for the foregoing, the terms of such Working Capital Loans, if any, have
not been determined and no written agreements exist with respect to such loans. The Working Capital Loans would either be repaid upon consummation of a Business Combination,
without interest, or, at the lender’s discretion, up to $1,500,000 of such Working Capital Loans may be convertible into warrants of the post-Business Combination entity at a price of
$1.50 per warrant. The warrants would be identical to the Private Placement Warrants. No Working Capital Loans were outstanding as of and during the three and six months ended
June 30, 2021.
NOTE 7. WARRANTS
Public Warrants may only be exercised for a whole number of shares. No fractional shares are issued upon exercise of the Public Warrants. The Public Warrants are exercisable on the
later of (a)  30 days  after the consummation of a Business Combination or (b)  12 months  from the closing of the Initial Public Offering. The Public Warrants will expire five
years from the consummation of a Business Combination or earlier upon redemption or liquidation.
The Company will not be obligated to deliver any Class A common stock pursuant to the exercise of a Public Warrant and will have no obligation to settle such Public Warrant
exercise unless a registration statement under the Securities Act covering the issuance of the Class A common stock issuable upon exercise of the Public Warrants is then effective and
a prospectus relating thereto is current, subject to the Company satisfying its obligations with respect to registration. No warrant will be exercisable and the Company will not be
obligated to issue shares of Class A common stock upon exercise of a warrant unless Class A common stock issuable upon such warrant exercise has been registered, qualified or
deemed to be exempt under the securities laws of the state of residence of the registered holder of the warrants.




Table of Contents
ATLAS CREST INVESTMENT CORP.
NOTES TO CONDENSED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
JUNE 30, 2021
(UNAUDITED)
The Company has agreed that as soon as practicable, but in no event later than 15 business days after the closing of a Business Combination, it will use its best efforts to file with the
SEC a registration statement for the registration, under the Securities Act, of the Class A common stock issuable upon exercise of the warrants. The Company will use its best efforts
to cause the same to become effective and to maintain the effectiveness of such registration statement, and a current prospectus relating thereto, until the expiration of the warrants in
accordance with the provisions of the warrant agreement. If a registration statement covering the shares of Class A common stock issuable upon exercise of the warrants is not
effective by the sixtieth (60th) business day after the closing of a Business Combination, warrant holders may, until such time as there is an effective registration statement and during
any period when the Company will have failed to maintain an effective registration statement, exercise warrants on a “cashless basis” in accordance with Section 3(a)(9) of the
Securities Act or another exemption. Notwithstanding the above, if the Class A common stock are at the time of any exercise of a warrant not listed on a national securities exchange
such that they satisfy the definition of a “covered security” under Section 18(b)(1) of the Securities Act, the Company may, at its option, require holders of Public Warrants who
exercise their warrants to do so on a “cashless basis” in accordance with Section 3(a)(9) of the Securities Act and, in the event the Company so elect, the Company will not be required
to file or maintain in effect a registration statement, and in the event the Company does not so elect, the Company will use its best efforts to register or qualify the shares under
applicable blue sky laws to the extent an exemption is not available.
Once the Public Warrants become exercisable, the Company may call the Public Warrants for redemption:
●
in whole and not in part;
●
at a price of $0.01 per Public Warrant;
●
upon not less than 30 days’ prior written notice of redemption to each warrant holder; and
●
if, and only if, the closing price of the common stock equals or exceeds $18.00 per share (as adjusted for stock splits, stock dividends, reorganizations, recapitalizations and
the like) for any 20 trading days within a 30-trading day period commencing after the warrants become exercisable and ending three business days before the Company
sends the notice of redemption to the warrant holders.
If and when the warrants become redeemable by the Company, the Company may exercise its redemption right even if the Company is unable to register or qualify the underlying
securities for sale under all applicable state securities laws.
The exercise price and number of Class A common stock issuable upon exercise of the Public Warrants may be adjusted in certain circumstances including in the event of a share
dividend, extraordinary dividend or recapitalization, reorganization, merger or consolidation. However, except as described below, the Public Warrants will not be adjusted for
issuances of Class A common stock at a price below its exercise price. Additionally, in no event will the Company be required to net cash settle the Public Warrants. If the Company is
unable to complete a Business Combination within the Combination Period and the Company liquidates the funds held in the Trust Account, holders of Public Warrants will not
receive any of such funds with respect to their Public Warrants, nor will they receive any distribution from the Company’s assets held outside of the Trust Account with respect to such
Public Warrants. Accordingly, the Public Warrants may expire worthless.
In addition, if (x) the Company issues additional shares of Class A common stock or equity-linked securities for capital raising purposes in connection with the closing of its initial
Business Combination at an issue price or effective issue price of less than $9.20 per share of Class A common stock (with such issue price or effective issue price to be determined in
good faith by the Company’s board of directors and, in the case of any such issuance to the Sponsor or its affiliates, without taking into account any Founder Shares held by the
Sponsor or such affiliates, as applicable, prior to such issuance) (the “Newly Issued Price”), (y) the aggregate gross proceeds from such issuances represent more than 60% of the total
equity proceeds, and interest thereon, available for the funding of the Company’s initial Business Combination on the date of the consummation of such initial Business Combination


F-37
(net of redemptions), and (z) the volume weighted average trading price of the Company’s common stock during the 20 trading day period starting on the trading day prior to the day
on which the Company consummates its initial Business Combination (such price, the “Market Value”) is below $9.20 per share, the exercise price of the warrants will be adjusted (to
the nearest cent) to be equal to 115% of the higher of the Market Value


Table of Contents
ATLAS CREST INVESTMENT CORP.
NOTES TO CONDENSED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
JUNE 30, 2021
(UNAUDITED)
and the Newly Issued Price and the $18.00 per share redemption trigger price described above will be adjusted (to the nearest cent) to be equal to 180% of the higher of the Market
Value and the Newly Issued Price.
The Private Placement Warrants are identical to the Public Warrants underlying the Units sold in the Initial Public Offering, except that the Private Placement Warrants will and the
common shares issuable upon the exercise of the Private Placement Warrants will not be transferable, assignable or salable until 30 days  after the completion of a Business
Combination, subject to certain limited exceptions. Additionally, the Private Placement Warrants will be exercisable on a cashless basis and will be non-redeemable so long as they are
held by the initial purchasers or their permitted transferees. If the Private Placement Warrants are held by someone other than the initial purchasers or their permitted transferees, the
Private Placement Warrants will be redeemable by the Company and exercisable by such holders on the same basis as the Public Warrants.
At June 30, 2021 and December 31, 2020, there were 16,666,667 Public Warrants and 8,000,000 Private Placement Warrants outstanding. The Company accounts for the Public
Warrants and Private Placement Warrants in accordance with the guidance contained in ASC 815-40. Such guidance provides that because the warrants do not meet the criteria for
equity treatment thereunder, each warrant must be recorded as a liability (see Note 9).
The accounting treatment of derivative financial instruments required that the Company record the warrants as derivative liabilities at fair value upon the closing of the Initial Public
Offering. The Public Warrants were allocated a portion of the proceeds from the issuance of the Units equal to its fair value. The warrant liabilities are subject to re-measurement at
each balance sheet date. With each such re-measurement, the warrant liabilities are adjusted to current fair value, with the change in fair value recognized in the Company’s statement
of operations. The Company will reassess the classification at each balance sheet date. If the classification changes as a result of events during the period, the warrants will be
reclassified as of the date of the event that causes the reclassification.
NOTE 8. STOCKHOLDERS’ EQUITY
Preferred stock — The Company is authorized to issue 1,000,000 shares of $0.0001 par value preferred stock. At June 30, 2021 and December 31, 2020, there were no shares of
preferred stock issued or outstanding.
Class A common stock — The Company is authorized to issue up to 200,000,000 shares of Class A, $0.0001 par value common stock. Holders of the Company's common stock are
entitled to one vote for each share. At June 30, 2021 and December 31, 2020, there were 50,000,000 shares issued and no shares and 5,114,713 shares of Class A common stock
outstanding, respectively, excluding 50,000,000 and   44,885,287 shares of Class A common stock subject to possible redemption at June 30, 2021 and December 31, 2020,
respectively.
The Company determined the Class A common stock subject to redemption to be equal to the redemption value of approximately $10 per share of Class A common stock while also
taking into consideration a redemption cannot result in net tangible assets being less than $5,000,001. Upon considering the impact of the PIPE Financing and associated Subscription
Agreements that will close substantially concurrent with an initial Business Combination (see Note 1), which would result in an additional $600,000,000 in net tangible assets, it was
concluded during the quarter ended March 31, 2021, that the redemption value would include all shares of Class A common stock resulting in the common stock subject to possible
redemption being equal to $500,143,016.  This resulted in a measurement adjustment to the initial carrying value of the Class A common stock subject to redemption with the offset
recorded to additional paid-in capital and accumulated deficit.
Class B common stock — The Company is authorized to issue up to 20,000,000 shares of Class B, $0.0001 par value common stock. Holders of the Company’s common stock are
entitled to one vote for each share. At June 30, 2021 and December 31, 2020, there were 12,500,000 shares of Class B common stock issued and outstanding.


F-38
Holders of Class A common stock and Class B common stock will vote together as a single class on all other matters submitted to a vote of shareholders, except as required by law.
The shares of Class B common stock will automatically convert into shares of Class A common stock upon the consummation of a Business Combination on a one-for-one basis,
subject to adjustment. In the case that additional shares of Class A common stock or


Table of Contents
ATLAS CREST INVESTMENT CORP.
NOTES TO CONDENSED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
JUNE 30, 2021
(UNAUDITED)
equity-linked securities are issued or deemed issued in connection with a Business Combination, the number of shares of Class A common stock issuable upon conversion of all
Founder Shares will equal, in the aggregate, on an as-converted basis, 20% of the total number of shares of Class A common stock outstanding after such conversion, including the
total number of shares of Class A common stock issued, or deemed issued or issuable upon conversion or exercise of any equity-linked securities or rights issued or deemed issued, by
the Company in connection with or in relation to the consummation of a Business Combination, excluding any shares of Class A common stock or equity-linked securities or rights
exercisable for or convertible into shares of Class A common stock issued, or to be issued, to any seller in a Business Combination and any Private Placement Warrants issued to the
Sponsor, officers or directors upon conversion of Working Capital Loans, provided that such conversion of Founder Shares will never occur on a less than one-for-one basis.
NOTE 9. FAIR VALUE MEASUREMENTS
The following table presents information about the Company’s financial assets that are measured at fair value on a recurring basis at June 30, 2021, and indicates the fair value
hierarchy of the valuation inputs the Company utilized to determine such fair value:
Amount at Fair
Description
    
Value
    
Level 1
    
Level 2
    
Level 3
June 30, 2021
Assets
Investments held in Trust Account:
 
  
   
  
  
Money Market investments
$
500,143,016
$
500,143,016
$
—
$
—
Liabilities
Warrant liability – Public Warrants
$
25,666,667
$
25,666,667
$
—
$
—
Warrant liability – Private Placement Warrants
$
12,560,000
$
—
$
—
$
12,560,000
December 31, 2020
Assets
Investments held in Trust Account:
Money Market investments
$
500,098,582
$
500,098,582
$
—
$
—
Liabilities
Warrant liability – Public Warrants
$
31,666,670
$
31,666,670
$
—
$
—
Warrant liability – Private Placement Warrants
$
15,840,000
$
—
$
—
$
15,840,000
The Company utilized a Monte Carlo simulation model for the initial valuation of the Public Warrants. The subsequent measurement of the Public Warrants as of June 30, 2021 and
December 31, 2020 is classified as Level 1 due to the use of an observable market quote in an active market under the ticker ACIC WS. The quoted prices of the Public Warrants were
$1.54 and $1.90 per warrant as of June 30, 2021 and December 31, 2020, respectively.
The Company utilizes a Modified Black-Scholes model to value the Private Placement Warrants at each reporting period, with changes in fair value recognized in the statement of
operations. The estimated fair value of the Private Placement warrant liability is determined using Level 3 inputs. Inherent in a binomial options pricing model are assumptions related
to expected share-price volatility, expected life, risk-free interest rate and dividend yield. The Company estimates the volatility of its common stock based on historical volatility that
matches the expected remaining life of the warrants. The risk-free interest rate is based on the U.S. Treasury zero-coupon yield curve on the grant date for a maturity similar to the


F-39
expected remaining life of the warrants. The expected life of the warrants is assumed to be equivalent to their remaining contractual term. The dividend rate is based on the historical
rate, which the Company anticipates to remain at zero.
The aforementioned warrant liabilities are not subject to qualified hedge accounting.


Table of Contents
ATLAS CREST INVESTMENT CORP.
NOTES TO CONDENSED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
JUNE 30, 2021
(UNAUDITED)
Transfers to/from Levels 1, 2 and 3 are recognized at the end of the reporting period. The estimated fair value of the Public Warrants transferred from a Level 3 measurement to a
Level 1 fair value measurement in December 2020 when the Public Warrants were separately listed and traded. There were no transfers between Levels 1, 2 or 3 during the three and
six months ended June 30, 2021.
The following table provides the significant inputs to the Modified Black-Scholes model for the fair value of the Private Placement Warrants:
As of
As of
    
June 30, 2021
    
December 31, 2020
 
Stock price
$
9.96
$
10.06
 
Strike price
$
11.50
$
11.50
Probability of completing a Business Combination
 
*
 
86.0 %
Dividend yield
 
— %    
— %
Term (in years)
 
5.26
 
5.91
Volatility
 
21.5 %    
28.0 %
Risk-free rate
 
0.91 %    
0.49 %
Fair value of warrants
$
1.57
$
1.98
*The probability of completing a Business Combination is considered within the volatility implied by the traded price of the Public Warrants which is used to value the Private
Placement Warrants.
The following table presents the changes in the fair value of warrant liabilities:
    
Private
Warrant
    
Placement
    
Public
    
 Liabilities
Fair value as of December 31, 2020
$
15,840,000
$
31,666,670
$
47,506,670
Change in valuation inputs or other assumptions
 
(3,280,000) 
(6,000,003) 
(9,280,003)
Fair value as of June 30, 2021
$
12,560,000
$
25,666,667
$
38,226,667
The Company recognized income in connection with changes in the fair value of warrant liabilities of $7,053,334 and $9,280,003  within change in fair value of warrant liabilities in 
the Statement of Operations during the three and six months ended June 30, 2021, respectively.
NOTE 10. SUBSEQUENT EVENTS
The Company evaluated subsequent events and transactions that occurred after the balance sheet date up to the date that the condensed financial statements were issued. Based upon
this review, the Company did not identify any subsequent events that would have required adjustment or disclosure in the condensed financial statements except as disclosed in Note 1
under Business Combination Agreement.


F-40


Table of Contents
F-41
Report of Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm
To the Board of Directors and Stockholders of Archer Aviation Inc.
Opinion on the Financial Statements
We have audited the accompanying balance sheets of Archer Aviation Inc. (the “Company”) as of December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, and the related statements of operations
and comprehensive loss, of redeemable convertible preferred stock and stockholders’ deficit and of cash flows for the years then ended, including the related notes (collectively
referred to as the “financial statements”). In our opinion, the financial statements present fairly, in all material respects, the financial position of the Company as of December 31, 2020
and December 31, 2019, and the results of its operations and its cash flows for the years then ended in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of
America.
Substantial Doubt about the Company’s Ability to Continue as a Going Concern
The accompanying financial statements have been prepared assuming that the Company will continue as a going concern. As discussed in Note 2 to the financial statements, the
Company has suffered recurring losses from operations and has cash outflows from operating activities that raise substantial doubt about its ability to continue as a going concern.
Management’s plans in regard to these matters are also described in Note 2. The financial statements do not include any adjustments that might result from the outcome of this
uncertainty.
Basis for Opinion
These financial statements are the responsibility of the Company’s management. Our responsibility is to express an opinion on the Company’s financial statements based on our
audits. We are a public accounting firm registered with the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board (United States) (PCAOB) and are required to be independent with respect to
the Company in accordance with the U.S. federal securities laws and the applicable rules and regulations of the Securities and Exchange Commission and the PCAOB.
We conducted our audits of these financial statements in accordance with the standards of the PCAOB and in accordance with auditing standards generally accepted in the United
States of America. Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain reasonable assurance about whether the financial statements are free of material misstatement,
whether due to error or fraud.
Our audits included performing procedures to assess the risks of material misstatement of the financial statements, whether due to error or fraud, and performing procedures that
respond to those risks. Such procedures included examining, on a test basis, evidence regarding the amounts and disclosures in the financial statements. Our audits also included
evaluating the accounting principles used and significant estimates made by management, as well as evaluating the overall presentation of the financial statements. We believe that our
audits provide a reasonable basis for our opinion.
/s/ PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP
Irvine, California
March 8, 2021
We have served as the Company’s auditor since 2020.




Table of Contents
Archer Aviation Inc.
Balance Sheets
(In thousands, except share and per share data)
    
As of December 31, 
    
2020
    
2019
Assets
  
  
Current assets
Cash and cash equivalents
$
36,564
$
10,149
Prepaid expenses
 
762
 
6
Other current assets
 
43
 
7
Total current assets
 
37,369
 
10,162
Property and equipment, net
 
1,613
 
4
Intangible assets, net
 
497
 
—
Right-of-use asset
 
2,300
 
—
Total assets
$
41,779
$
10,166
Liabilities, Redeemable Convertible Preferred Stock, and Stockholders’ Deficit
 
  
 
  
Current liabilities
 
  
 
  
Accounts payable
$
2,103
$
110
Lease liability
 
816
 
—
Notes payable
 
645
 
—
Other current liabilities
 
279
 
43
Total current liabilities
 
3,843
 
153
Notes payable, net of current portion
 
260
 
—
Lease liability, net of current portion
 
1,485
 
—
Convertible promissory notes due to related parties
 
—
 
4,995
Other long-term liabilities
 
268
 
47
Total liabilities
 
5,856
 
5,195
Commitments and contingencies (Note 8)
 
  
 
  
Series Seed redeemable convertible preferred stock, $0.0001 par value; liquidation value of $6,004; 18,193,515 shares authorized,
issued and outstanding as of December 31, 2020 and 2019, stated at
 
5,943
 
5,943
Series A redeemable convertible preferred stock, $0.0001 par value; liquidation value of $55,734; 46,732,728 shares authorized;
46,267,422 shares issued and outstanding as of December 31, 2020, stated at
 
55,589
 
—
Stockholders’ deficit
 
  
 
  
Common stock, $0.0001 par value; 143,677,090 shares authorized; 51,321,752 shares issued and outstanding as of December 31,
2020 and 77,285,983 shares authorized; 50,000,000 shares issued and outstanding as of December 31, 2019
 
5
 
5
Additional paid-in capital
 
186
 
—
Accumulated deficit
 
(25,800)
 
(977)
Total stockholders’ deficit
 
(25,609)
 
(972)
Total liabilities, redeemable convertible preferred stock, and stockholders’ deficit
$
41,779
$
10,166
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these financial statements.


F-42


Table of Contents
F-43
Archer Aviation Inc.
Statements of Operations and Comprehensive Loss
(In thousands, except share and per share data)
Year Ended December 31, 
    
2020
    
2019
Operating expenses
Research and development
$
21,097
$
769
General and administrative
 
3,491
 
122
Total operating expenses
 
24,588
 
891
Loss from operations
 
(24,588)
 
(891)
Other expense, net
 
(2)
 
—
Interest expense, net
 
(232)
 
(53)
Loss before income taxes
 
(24,822)
 
(944)
Income tax expense
 
(1)
 
—
Net loss and comprehensive loss
$
(24,823)
$
(944)
Net loss per share, basic and diluted
$
(0.49)
$
(0.02)
Weighted-average common shares, basic and diluted
 
50,164,360
 
50,000,000
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these financial statements.


Table of Contents
F-44
Archer Aviation Inc.
Statements of Redeemable Convertible Preferred Stock and Stockholders’ Deficit
(In thousands, except share data)
Redeemable Convertible Preferred Stock
Series Seed
Series A
Common Stock
Additional
Paid-in
Accumulated
    
Shares
    
Amount
    
Shares
    
Amount
     
Shares
    
Amount
    
  Capital
    
 Deficit
    
Total
Balance as of January 1, 2019
—
$
—
—
$
—
50,000,000
$
5
$
—
$
(33)
$
(28)
Conversion of notes and accrued
interest to preferred stock
1,829,880  
604  
—  
—
—  
—  
—  
—  
—
Issuance of preferred stock
 
16,363,635  
5,339  
—  
—
—  
—  
—  
—  
—
Net loss
 
—  
—  
—  
—
—  
—  
—  
(944) 
(944)
Balance as of December 31, 2019
 
18,193,515  
5,943  
—  
—
50,000,000  
5  
—  
(977) 
(972)
Issuance of preferred stock
 
—  
—  
41,872,399  
50,295
—  
—  
—  
—  
—
Conversion of notes and accrued
interest to preferred stock
 
—  
—  
4,395,023  
5,294
—  
—  
—  
—  
—
Issuance of restricted stock
 
—  
—  
—  
—
1,134,000  
—  
—  
—  
—
Exercise of stock options
 
—  
—  
—  
—
187,752  
—  
11  
—  
11
Stock-based compensation
 
—  
—  
—  
—
—  
—  
175  
—  
175
Net loss
 
—  
—  
—  
—
—  
—  
—  
(24,823) 
(24,823)
Balance as of December 31, 2020
 
18,193,515
$
5,943  
46,267,422
$
55,589
51,321,752
$
5
$
186
$
(25,800)
$
(25,609)
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these financial statements.


Table of Contents
Archer Aviation Inc.
Statements of Cash Flows
(In thousands)
    
Year Ended December 31, 
    
2020
    
2019
Cash flows from operating activities
  
  
Net loss
$
(24,823)
$
(944)
Adjustments to reconcile net loss to net cash used in operating activities:
 
  
 
  
Depreciation and amortization expense
 
142
 
—
Stock-based compensation
 
175
 
—
Non-cash interest
 
253
 
53
Non-cash lease expense
 
39
 
—
Changes in operating assets and liabilities:
 
  
 
  
Prepaid expenses
 
(755)
 
(6)
Other current assets
 
(36)
 
(7)
Accounts payable
 
1,644
 
109
Accounts payable to related parties
 
—
 
(57)
Other current liabilities
 
235
 
43
Operating lease liability
 
(38)
 
—
Other long-term liabilities
 
268
 
—
Net cash used in operating activities
 
(22,896)
 
(809)
Cash flows from investing activities
 
  
 
  
Purchase of property and equipment
 
(1,400)
 
(4)
Purchase of domain names
 
(500)
 
—
Net cash used in investing activities
 
(1,900)
 
(4)
Cash flows from financing activities
 
  
 
  
Proceeds from issuance of convertible debt
 
—
 
5,600
Payments of debt issuance costs
 
—
 
(8)
Proceeds from issuance of preferred stock, net
 
50,295
 
5,339
Proceeds from exercise of stock options
 
11
 
—
Proceeds from issuance of debt
 
905
 
—
Net cash provided by financing activities
 
51,211
 
10,931
Net increase in cash and cash equivalents
 
26,415
 
10,118
Cash and cash equivalents, beginning of period
 
10,149
 
31
Cash and cash equivalents, end of period
$
36,564
$
10,149
Supplemental disclosure of other noncash investing and financing activities
 
  
 
  
Promissory notes and interest settled with preferred shares
$
5,294
$
604
Property and equipment recorded in accounts payable
 
349
 
—
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these financial statements.


F-45


Table of Contents
Archer Aviation Inc.
Notes to Financial Statements
(in thousands, except share and per share data)
1.
Formation and Nature of Business
Formation and Nature of Business
Archer Aviation Inc. (the “Company” or “Archer”), headquartered in Palo Alto, California, is an aerospace company focused on the engineering, design, and development of all-
electric vertical takeoff and landing (“eVTOL”) aircraft with the objective of improving mobility in cities. The Company’s mission is to advance the benefits of sustainable air
mobility that saves people significant time compared to ground transportation. Archer’s vehicle performance is enabled by bringing together advances in key technologies such as high
specific energy batteries, high performance electric motors, an advanced fly-by-wire flight control system, and a lightweight and efficient structure.
In connection with the initial formation of the Company, Archer Aviation Inc. was incorporated in the State of Delaware and commenced operations on October 16, 2018.
COVID-19 Pandemic
The World Health Organization declared a global emergency on January 30, 2020 with respect to the outbreak of a novel strain of coronavirus, or COVID-19 pandemic. There are
many uncertainties regarding the current global COVID-19 pandemic, and the Company is closely monitoring the impact of the pandemic on all aspects of its business, including how
it will impact its employees, suppliers, vendors, and business partners.
The pandemic has resulted in government authorities implementing numerous measures to try to contain the virus, such as travel bans and restrictions, quarantines, stay-at-home or
shelter-in-place orders, and business shutdowns. For example, the Company’s employees based in California have been subject to periodic stay-at-home orders from state and local
governments. These measures may adversely impact the Company’s employees and operations and the operations of suppliers and business partners and could negatively impact the
construction schedule of the Company’s manufacturing facility and production schedule. In addition, various aspects of the Company’s business and manufacturing facility cannot be
conducted remotely. These measures by government authorities may continue to remain in place for a significant period of time and could adversely affect the Company’s construction
and manufacturing plans, sales and marketing activities, and business operations.
The evolution of the virus is unpredictable at this point and any resurgence may slow down the Company’s ability to ramp-up its production program on time to satisfy investors and
potential customers. Any delay to production will delay the Company’s ability to launch and begin generating revenue. The COVID-19 pandemic could limit the ability of suppliers
and business partners to perform, including third party suppliers’ ability to provide components and materials. The Company may also experience an increase in the cost of raw
materials. At the time of this report, the Company has not recorded any impairments as a result of COVID-19.
The full impact of the COVID-19 pandemic continues to evolve as of the date of this report. As such, it is uncertain as to the full magnitude that the pandemic will have on the
Company’s financial condition, liquidity, and future results of operations. Management is actively monitoring the situation on its financial condition, liquidity, operations, suppliers,
industry, and workforce.
2.
Liquidity and Going Concern
Since its formation, the Company has devoted substantial effort and capital resources to strategic planning, engineering, design, and development of its planned electric aircraft
platform, development of specific initial electric aircraft models, and capital raising. Funding of these activities has primarily been through the net proceeds received from the issuance
of related and third-party debt (Notes 6 and 7), and the sale of preferred and common stock to related and third parties (Note 9). For 2020 and 2019, Archer incurred net losses of
$24,823 and $944, respectively, and has recognized cash outflows from operating activities in each year of $22,896 and $809, respectively. As of December 31, 2020, Archer had cash


F-46
and cash equivalents of $36,564. Based on its recurring losses from operations, expectation of continuing operating losses for the foreseeable future, and need to raise additional
capital to finance future operations, management has concluded there is substantial doubt about the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern. Management’s plans


Table of Contents
Archer Aviation Inc.
Notes to Financial Statements
(in thousands, except share and per share data)
include the continued development of its electric aircraft platform and bringing initial aircraft models to market which will require the Company to continue to raise significant
amounts of capital through new financing arrangements or merging with a public entity.
There can be no assurance that the Company will be successful in achieving its strategic plans, that any additional financing will be available in a timely manner or on acceptable
terms, if at all, or that the Company’s planned merger (discussed further in Note 13) will be completed or will provide sufficient capital to support its ongoing operations. If the
Company is unable to raise sufficient capital when needed or events or circumstances occur such that the Company does not meet its strategic plans, the Company will be required to
reduce certain discretionary spending, alter or scale back aircraft development programs, be unable to develop new or enhanced production methods, or be unable to fund capital
expenditures, which would have a material adverse effect on the Company’s financial position, results of operations, cash flows, and ability to achieve its intended business objectives.
The financial statements have been prepared on a going concern basis and do not include any adjustments to the amounts and classification of assets and liabilities that may be
necessary in the event the Company can no longer continue as a going concern.
3.
Summary of Significant Accounting Policies
Basis of Presentation
The accompanying financial statements have been prepared in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America (“GAAP”) and include the
accounts of the Company.
Use of Estimates
The preparation of the financial statements in conformity with GAAP requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and
liabilities, disclosures of contingent liabilities, and the reported amounts of expenses during the reporting period. The Company bases these estimates on historical results and various
other assumptions believed to be reasonable, all of which form the basis for making estimates concerning the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily available from
other sources.
On an ongoing basis, management evaluates its estimates, including those related to the: (i) realization of tax assets and estimates of tax liabilities, (ii) valuation of common stock,
(iii) fair value of debt, (iv) fair value of share-based payments, (v) valuation of leased assets and liabilities, and (vi) estimated useful lives of long-lived assets. These estimates are
based on historical data and experience, as well as various other factors that management believes to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for
making judgments about the carrying value of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Such estimates often require the selection of appropriate valuation
methodologies and models and may involve significant judgment in evaluating ranges of assumptions and financial inputs. Actual results may differ from those estimates under
different assumptions, financial inputs, or circumstances. Given the global economic climate and unpredictable nature and unknown duration of the COVID-19 pandemic, estimates
are subject to additional volatility.
Cash and Cash Equivalents
Cash consists of cash on deposit with financial institutions. Cash equivalents consist of short-term, highly liquid financial instruments that are readily convertible to cash and have
maturities of three months or less from the date of purchase. Cash equivalents are recorded at fair value. As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, the Company held $34,377 and $0,
respectively, of cash equivalents consisting of Level 1 money market funds.


F-47
Fair Value Measurements
The Company applies the provisions of Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) 820, Fair Value Measurement, which defines a single authoritative definition of fair value, sets
out a framework for measuring fair value and expands on required disclosures about fair value measurements. The provisions of ASC 820 relate to financial assets and liabilities as
well as other assets and liabilities carried at


Table of Contents
Archer Aviation Inc.
Notes to Financial Statements
(in thousands, except share and per share data)
fair value on a recurring and nonrecurring basis. The standard clarifies that fair value is an exit price, representing the amount that would be received to sell an asset or paid to transfer
a liability in an orderly transaction between market participants. As such, fair value is a market-based measurement that should be determined based on assumptions that market
participants would use in pricing an asset or liability. As a basis for considering such assumptions, the standard establishes a three-tier value hierarchy, which prioritizes the inputs
used in measuring fair value as follows:
Level 1 Unadjusted quoted prices in active markets for identical assets or liabilities accessible to the reporting entity at the measurement date.
Level 2 Other than quoted prices included in Level 1 inputs that are observable for the asset or liability, either directly or indirectly, for substantially the full term of the asset or
liability.
Level 3 Unobservable inputs for the asset or liability used to measure fair value to the extent that observable inputs are not available, thereby allowing for situations in which
there is little, if any, market activity for the asset or liability at the measurement date.
The carrying amounts of the Company’s cash, accounts payable, accrued compensation and accrued liabilities approximate fair value due to the short-term nature of these instruments.
Level 1 instruments include investments in money market funds, which are valued based on inputs such as actual trade data, quoted market prices from brokers or other similar
sources.
Financial Instruments Not Recorded at Fair Value on a Recurring Basis
Certain financial instruments, including debt, are not measured at fair value on a recurring basis in the balance sheets. The fair value of debt as of December 31, 2020 approximates its
carrying value.
Assets and Liabilities Recorded at Fair Value on a Non-Recurring Basis
Certain assets and liabilities are subject to measurement at fair value on a non-recurring basis if there are indicators of impairment or if they are deemed to be impaired as a result of
an impairment review.
There were no assets or liabilities measured at fair value using Level 3 inputs for the periods presented.
Concentration of Credit Risk
Financial instruments, which subject the Company to concentrations of credit risk, consist primarily of cash, cash equivalents, and deposits. The Company’s cash and cash equivalents
are held at major financial institutions located in the United States of America. At times, cash account balances with any one financial institution may exceed Federal Deposit
Insurance Corporation (“FDIC”) insurance limits ($250 per depositor per institution). Management believes the financial institutions that hold the Company’s cash and cash
equivalents are financially sound and, accordingly, minimal credit risk exists with respect to cash and cash equivalents.
Prepaid Expenses and Other Current Assets
Prepaid expenses and other current assets consist primarily of prepaid payroll costs, rent, consulting, and subscriptions for brand development and research and development
(“R&D”).


F-48
Intangible Assets, Net
Intangible assets consist solely of domain names and are recorded at cost, net of accumulated amortization, and if applicable, impairment charges. Amortization of domain names is
provided over a 15-year estimated useful life on a straight-line basis or based on the pattern in which economic benefits are consumed, if reliably determinable. The Company reviews
intangible assets for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of an asset may not be recoverable. The Company has analyzed a


Table of Contents
Archer Aviation Inc.
Notes to Financial Statements
(in thousands, except share and per share data)
variety of factors in light of the known impact to date of the COVID-19 pandemic on its business to determine if a circumstance could trigger an impairment loss, and, at this time and
based on the information presently known, does not believe that it is more likely than not that an impairment loss has been incurred.
The Company capitalized domain names in 2020, and as of December 31, 2020, the gross carrying amount for domain names was $500 with $3 recorded in accumulated amortization.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company recognized amortization expense of $3, classified within general and administrative on the statements of operations and
comprehensive loss.
Property and Equipment, Net
Property and equipment are stated at historical cost less accumulated depreciation. Expenditures for major renewals and betterments are capitalized, while minor replacements,
maintenance, and repairs, which do not extend the asset lives, are charged to operations as incurred. Upon sale or disposition, the cost and related accumulated depreciation is
removed from the accounts, and any difference between the selling price and net carrying amount is recorded as a gain or loss in the statements of operations and comprehensive loss.
Depreciation on property and equipment is calculated using the straight-line method over the estimated useful lives of the assets as follows:
    
Useful Life
(in years)
Furniture, fixtures, and equipment
5
Computer hardware
3
Computer software
3
Website design
2
Leasehold improvements
Shorter of lease term or the asset standard life
Impairment of Long-Lived Assets
The Company reviews its long-lived assets, consisting primarily of property and equipment for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying
amount of such assets may not be recoverable. Such triggering events or changes in circumstances may include: a significant decrease in the market price of a long-lived asset, a
significant adverse change in the extent or manner in which a long- lived asset is being or intended to be used, a significant adverse change in legal factors or in the business climate,
the impact of competition or other factors that could affect the value of a long-lived asset, a significant adverse deterioration in the amount of revenue or cash flows expected to be
generated from an asset group, an accumulation of costs significantly in excess of the amount originally expected for the acquisition or development of a long-lived asset, current or
future operating or cash flow losses that demonstrate continuing losses associated with the use of a long-lived asset, or a current expectation that, more likely than not, a long-lived
asset will be sold or otherwise disposed of significantly before the end of its previously estimated useful life. The Company performs impairment testing at the asset group level that
represents the lowest level for which identifiable cash flows are largely independent of the cash flows of other assets and liabilities. Recoverability of these assets is determined by
comparing the forecasted undiscounted cash flows attributable to such assets including any cash flows upon their eventual disposition to their carrying value. If the carrying value of
the assets exceeds the forecasted undiscounted cash flows, then the assets are written down to their fair value. The Company determined there was no impairment of long-lived assets
during either period presented.
Other Current Liabilities


F-49
For the year ended December 31, 2020, other current liabilities primarily consist of accrued payroll costs, liabilities related to cash received for the early exercise of stock options
which may require repayment if the options do not vest, and accrued interest on the Company’s Paycheck Protection Program Loan. For the year ended December 31, 2019, other
current liabilities consist of accrued payroll costs.


Table of Contents
Archer Aviation Inc.
Notes to Financial Statements
(in thousands, except share and per share data)
Paycheck Protection Program Loan
On April 9, 2020, the Company received the proceeds from a loan in the amount of approximately $905 (the “PPP Loan”) from JPMorgan Chase Bank, N.A., as lender, pursuant to the
Paycheck Protection Program (“PPP”) of the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act (the “CARES Act”). The Company accounted for the PPP Loan as a financial
liability in accordance with ASC Topic 470, Debt. Accordingly, the PPP Loan was recognized within notes payable and notes payable, net of current portion, in the Company’s
balance sheet. In addition, related accrued interest is included within other current liabilities in the Company’s balance sheet. Refer to Note 7 for additional information.
Research and Development
R&D costs are expensed as incurred and are primarily comprised of personnel-related costs (including salaries, bonuses, benefits, and stock-based compensation) for employees
focused on R&D activities, other related costs, and an allocation of general overhead. In addition, R&D expense includes professional fees paid to outside contractors and depreciation
expense. R&D efforts are focused on design and development of our electric aircraft and continuing to prepare our prototype electric aircraft to achieve industry standards.
General and Administrative
General and administrative expenses are primarily comprised of personnel-related costs (including salaries, bonuses, benefits, and stock-based compensation) and overhead related
costs for employees in our executive, finance, information technology, or human resources departments. In addition, general and administrative expense includes fees for third-party
professional services (including consulting, legal, and audit services), other corporate expenses, allocated shared costs, and depreciation expense.
Stock-Based Compensation
The Company’s stock-based compensation awards consist of options granted to employees, directors, and non-employees for the purchase of ordinary shares and restricted shares. The
Company recognizes stock- based compensation expense in accordance with the provisions of ASC 718, Compensation — Stock Compensation. ASC 718 requires the measurement
and recognition of compensation expense for all stock- based compensation awards made to employees, directors, and non-employees to be based on the grant date fair values of the
awards.
The Company estimates the fair value of share options using the Black-Scholes option-pricing model. The value of the award is recognized as expense over the requisite service
period on a straight-line basis.
Determining the grant date fair value of the awards using the Black-Scholes option-pricing model requires management to make assumptions and judgments, including but not limited
to the following:
Expected term — The estimate of the expected term of employee awards is determined in accordance with the simplified method, which estimates the term based on an averaging of
the vesting period and contractual term of the option grant. The Company uses the contractual term for non-employee awards.
Expected volatility — Since the Company is a private entity without sufficient historical data on the volatility of its common stock, the expected volatility used is based on the
volatility of similar entities (referred to as “guideline companies”) for a period consistent with the expected term of the award.
Risk-free interest rate — The risk-free interest rate used to value awards is based on the United States Treasury yield in effect at the time of grant for a period consistent with the
expected term of the award.


F-50
Dividend yield — The Company has never declared or paid any cash dividends and does not presently plan to pay cash dividends in the foreseeable future.


Table of Contents
Archer Aviation Inc.
Notes to Financial Statements
(in thousands, except share and per share data)
Forfeiture rate — The Company has elected to account for forfeitures as they occur and will record stock- based compensation expense assuming all option holders will complete the
requisite service period. If an employee forfeits an award because they fail to complete the requisite service period, the Company will reverse stock-based compensation expense
previously recognized in the period the award is forfeited.
Fair value of common stock
The Company’s Board of Directors grants stock options with exercise prices equal to the fair value of the Company’s common stock on the date of grant.
Because there is no public market for the Company’s common stock, the Company has determined the fair value of its common stock at the time of the grant of stock options in
accordance with the American Institute of Certified Public Accountants Accounting and Valuation Guide (“AICPA”): Valuation of Privately- Held-Company Equity Securities Issued
as Compensation. The Company determined the fair value of its common stock based on a variety of factors including, but not limited to (i)  the results of contemporaneous
independent third-party valuations of the Company’s common stock and the prices, rights, preferences and privileges of the Company’s redeemable convertible preferred stock
relative to those of its common stock; (ii) the lack of marketability of the Company’s common stock; (iii) actual operating and financial results; (iv) current business conditions and
projections; (v) the likelihood of achieving a liquidity event, such as an IPO or sale of the Company, given prevailing market conditions, and (vi) precedent transactions involving the
Company’s shares.
In valuing the fair value of the Company’s common shares, the Company used the market approach, which uses prices and other relevant information generated by market transactions
involving identical or comparable assets, liabilities, or a group of assets and liabilities. Within the market approach, given that the Company had recent security transactions, the
subject company transaction method was used, which consists of examining prior transactions of the Company. According to the AICPA guidelines, under this method, recent
securities transactions in the Company’s stock should be considered as a relevant input for computing the enterprise valuation. Additionally, the Hybrid Backsolve methodology
specifically was selected to reflect the high risks in the eVTOL space, namely regulatory risk, the fact that there is currently no market for the product, and technology risk in this new
sector.
In conducting the valuations, the Company considered all objective and subjective factors that it believed to be relevant in the valuation conducted, including management’s best
estimate of the Company’s business condition, and prospects and operating performance at the valuation dates. There are significant judgments and estimates inherent in these
valuations.
Leases
The Company accounts for leases in accordance with ASC 842, Leases and determines if an arrangement is a lease at its inception. Right-of-use (“ROU”) assets and liabilities are
recognized at the lease commencement date based on the present value of lease payments over the lease term. The Company uses its estimated incremental borrowing rate in
determining the present value of lease payments considering the term of the lease, which is derived from information available at the lease commencement date. The incremental
borrowing rate is the rate of interest the Company would have to pay to borrow, on a collateralized basis, an amount equal to the lease payments for a term similar to the lease term in
a similar economic environment as the lease. The lease term includes renewal options when it is reasonably certain that the option will be exercised and excludes termination options.
To the extent that the Company’s agreements have variable lease payments, the Company includes variable lease payments that depend on an index or a rate and excludes those that
depend on facts or circumstances occurring after the commencement date, other than the passage of time.
Lease expense for these leases is recognized on a straight-line basis over the lease term. The Company has elected not to recognize ROU assets and lease liabilities that arise from
short-term (12 months or less) leases for any class of underlying asset. Operating leases are included in right-of-use asset, lease liability, and lease liability, net of current portion in the


F-51
Company’s balance sheet. In addition, the Company has elected as an accounting policy, the practical expedient to not separate lease and non-lease components within a contract and
instead treat it as a single-lease component.


Table of Contents
Archer Aviation Inc.
Notes to Financial Statements
(in thousands, except share and per share data)
F-52
Income Taxes
The Company accounts for its income taxes using the asset and liability method whereby deferred tax assets and liabilities are determined based on temporary differences between the
basis used for financial reporting and income tax reporting purposes. Deferred income taxes are provided based on the enacted tax rates in effect at the time such temporary
differences are expected to reverse. A valuation allowance is provided for deferred tax assets if it is more-likely-than-not that the Company will not realize those tax assets through
future operations. The carrying value of deferred tax assets reflects an amount that is more likely than not to be realized.
The Company utilizes the guidance in ASC 740-10, Income Taxes, to account for uncertain tax positions. ASC 740-10 contains a two-step approach to recognizing and measuring
uncertain tax positions. The first step is to evaluate the tax position for recognition by determining if the weight of available evidence indicates it is more likely than not that the
positions will be sustained on audit, including resolution of related appeals or litigation processes, if any. The second step is to measure the tax benefit as the largest amount which is
more-likely-than-not of being realized and effectively settled. An uncertain income tax position will not be recognized if it has less than a 50% likelihood of being sustained. The
Company considers many factors when evaluating and estimating its tax positions and tax benefits, which may require periodic adjustments and which may not accurately forecast
actual outcomes. The Company’s policy is to recognize interest and penalties related to uncertain tax positions, if any, in the income tax provision.
Net Loss Per Share Attributable to Ordinary Stockholders
The Company has one class of participating security (preferred shares) issued and outstanding as of December 31, 2020 and 2019. Losses are not attributed to the participating
security as the preferred stockholders are not contractually obligated to share in the Company’s losses. For all periods presented, the calculation of basic net loss per share excludes
shares issued upon the early exercise of stock options where the vesting conditions have not been satisfied.
Basic net loss attributable to common stockholders per share is calculated by dividing net loss attributable to ordinary stockholders by the weighted-average number of shares of
common shares outstanding.
Diluted net loss per share attributable to ordinary stockholders adjusts the basic net loss per share attributable to ordinary stockholders and the weighted-average number of shares of
ordinary shares outstanding for the potentially dilutive impact of stock options, using the treasury stock method.
Because the Company reported net losses for all periods presented, all potentially dilutive common stock equivalents are antidilutive and have been excluded from the calculation of
net loss per share.


Table of Contents
Archer Aviation Inc.
Notes to Financial Statements
(in thousands, except share and per share data)
The following table presents the number of antidilutive shares excluded from the calculation of diluted net loss per share:
    
As of December 31, 
    
2020
    
2019
Stock-based compensation awards — employees
11,167,089
—
Stock-based compensation awards — non-employees
 
3,614,888  
—
Series Seed redeemable convertible preferred stock
 
18,193,515  
18,193,515
Series A redeemable convertible preferred stock
 
46,267,422  
—
Total
 
79,242,914  
18,193,515
Segments
Operating segments are defined as components of an entity for which separate financial information is available and that is regularly reviewed by the Chief Operating Decision Maker
(“CODM”) in deciding how to allocate resources to an individual segment and in assessing performance. The Company’s CODM consists of its two founders. The Company has
determined that it operates as a single operating segment and one reportable segment, as the CODM reviews financial information presented on a combined basis for purposes of
making operating decisions, allocating resources, and evaluating financial performance. Given the Company’s pre-revenue operating stage, it currently has no concentration exposure
to products, services or customers.
Comprehensive Loss
There were no differences between net loss and comprehensive loss presented in the statements of operations and comprehensive loss for the years ended December 31, 2020 and
2019.
Recently adopted accounting pronouncements
In February 2016, the FASB issued ASU 2016-02, Leases (Topic 842) (“ASU 2016-02”), which outlines a comprehensive lease accounting model that supersedes the current lease
guidance. The new guidance requires lessees to recognize lease liabilities and corresponding right-of-use assets for all leases with lease terms greater than 12 months. It also changes
the definition of a lease and expands the disclosure requirements of lease arrangements. In July 2018, the FASB issued ASU 2018-11, which provides the option of an additional
transition method that allows entities to initially apply the new lease guidance at the adoption date and recognize a cumulative-effect adjustment to the opening balance of retained
earnings in the period of adoption. The Company entered into its first lease in July of 2020 and applied ASU 2016-02 to this lease and subsequent leases.
In August 2016, the FASB issued ASU 2016-15, Classification of Certain Cash Receipts and Cash Payments (Topic 230) (“ASU 2016-15”). The standard provides guidance on eight
specific cash flow issues, including debt prepayment or debt extinguishment costs. ASU 2016-15 is effective for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2017, and the amendments
should be applied using the retrospective transition method to each period presented. The Company has applied ASU 2016-15 to all periods presented.
In July  2017, the FASB issued ASU 2017-11, Earnings per share (Topic 260), Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity (Topic 480), and Derivatives and Hedging (Topic 815):
Accounting for Certain Financial Instruments with Down Round Features (“ASU 2017-11”). The update addresses the complexity of accounting for certain financial instruments with
“down round” features and the liability or equity classification of financial instruments with warrants or convertible features. The guidance eliminates the requirement to consider
“down round” features when determining whether certain equity-linked financial instruments or embedded features are indexed to an entity’s own stock. ASU 2017-11 is effective for


F-53
public business entities for annual periods beginning after December 15, 2018, and for interim periods within those years, with early adoption permitted. The Company has applied
ASU 2017-11 to all periods presented, and there was no adoption date impact to its financial statements.
In June 2018, the FASB issued ASU 2018-07, Compensation — Stock Compensation (Topic 718): Improvements to Nonemployee Share-Based Payment Accounting (“ASU 2018-07”).
This amendment expands the scope of Topic 718, Compensation — Stock Compensation (which only included share-based payments to employees) to include share-based payments
issued to nonemployees for goods or


Table of Contents
Archer Aviation Inc.
Notes to Financial Statements
(in thousands, except share and per share data)
F-54
services. Consequently, the accounting for share-based payments to nonemployees and employees is substantially aligned. ASU 2018-07 supersedes Subtopic 505-50, Equity —
Equity-Based Payments to Non-Employees and is effective for public business entities for fiscal  years beginning after December  15, 2018. Early adoption of ASU 2018-07 is
permitted and should be applied on a prospective basis. The Company began applying ASU 2018-07 during 2020 upon the Company’s first grant of share-based payment awards. No
share-based payments were granted prior to 2020.
In August 2018, the FASB issued ASU 2018-13, Fair Value Measurement (Topic 820) (“ASU 2018-13”), which modifies, removes, and adds certain disclosure requirements on fair
value measurements based on the FASB Concepts Statement, Conceptual Framework for Financial Reporting — Chapter 8: Notes to Financial Statements. The ASU is effective for
all entities for fiscal  years beginning after December  15, 2019. The amendments on changes in unrealized gains and losses, the range and weighted-average of significant
unobservable inputs used to develop Level 3 fair value measurements and the narrative description of measurement uncertainty should be applied prospectively for only the most
recent annual period presented in the initial fiscal year of adoption. All other amendments should be applied retrospectively to all periods presented upon their effective date. Early
adoption is permitted. The Company has applied ASU 2018-13 to all periods presented.
In December 2019, the FASB issued ASU 2019-12, Income Taxes (Topic 740): Simplifying the Accounting for Income Taxes (“ASU 2019-12”). This amendment was issued to
simplify the accounting for income taxes by removing certain exceptions for recognizing deferred taxes, performing intraperiod allocation, and calculating income taxes in interim
periods. Further, ASU 2019-12 adds guidance to reduce complexity in certain areas, including recognizing deferred taxes for tax basis goodwill and allocating taxes to members of a
consolidated group. ASU 2019-12 is effective for public business entities for fiscal periods beginning after December 15, 2020. The Company has applied ASU 2019-12 to all periods
presented, and there was no adoption date impact to its financial statements.
Recently issued accounting pronouncements not yet adopted
In August 2020, the FASB issued ASU 2020-06, Accounting for Convertible Instruments and Contracts in an Entity’s Own Equity. The ASU simplifies the accounting for convertible
instruments by removing certain separation models in ASC 470- 20, Debt — Debt with Conversion and Other Options, for convertible instruments. The ASU updates the guidance on
certain embedded conversion features that are not required to be accounted for as derivatives under Topic 815, Derivatives and Hedging, or that do not result in substantial premiums
accounted for as paid-in capital, such that those features are no longer required to be separated from the host contract. The convertible debt instruments will be accounted for as a
single liability measured at amortized cost. Further, the ASU made amendments to the EPS guidance in Topic 260 for convertible instruments, the most significant impact of which is
requiring the use of the if-converted method for diluted EPS calculation, and no longer allowing the net share settlement method. The ASU also made revisions to Topic 815-40,
which provides guidance on how an entity must determine whether a contract qualifies for a scope exception from derivative accounting. The amendments to Topic 815-40 change the
scope of contracts that are recognized as assets or liabilities. The ASU is effective for public business entities for interim and annual periods beginning after December 15, 2021, with
early adoption permitted. Adoption of the ASU can either be on a modified retrospective or full retrospective basis. The Company is currently evaluating the impact the adoption of
this standard will have on its financial statements and related disclosures.


Table of Contents
Archer Aviation Inc.
Notes to Financial Statements
(in thousands, except share and per share data)
4.
Property and Equipment, Net
Property and equipment, net, consists of the following:
    
As of December 31, 
    
2020
    
2019
Furniture, fixtures, and equipment
$
1,046
$
—
Computer hardware
 
524  
4
Website design
 
128  
—
Leasehold improvements
 
54  
—
Total property and equipment
 
1,752  
4
Less: Accumulated depreciation
 
(139) 
—
Total property and equipment, net
$
1,613
$
4
Depreciation expense totaled $139 and $0 for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. Depreciation expense was classified as $72 and $67 within R&D and
general and administrative, respectively, for the year ended December 31, 2020 on the statements of operations and comprehensive loss.
5.
Other Current Liabilities
Other current liabilities consist of the following:
As of December 31, 
    
2020
    
2019
Accrued interest
$
6
$
—
Accrued bonus
155
43
Deposit liability related to cash received from the early exercise of stock options
117
—
Income tax payable
1
—
$
279
$
43
6.
Related Party Transactions
The Company has been primarily funded by notes payable and the sale of preferred and common stock to third parties and the Company’s Co-founders.
Convertible Promissory Notes Due to Related Parties
On October 11, 2019, the Company entered into a Convertible Note Purchase Agreement which permitted the Company to issue and sell two convertible promissory notes to the
founders’ Trusts, Capri Growth LLC (“Capri”) and Hight Drive Growth LLC (“Hight”), in the total amount of $601 (the “October Notes”). Interest accrues from the date of the notes
on the unpaid principal amount at a rate of 5% per annum. Capri and Hight will have the ability to convert the outstanding principal and (at the Company’s option) any accrued but
unpaid interest under the note (the “Conversion Amount”) into shares of the Company’s preferred stock issued and sold at the close of the Company’s next preferred equity financing


F-55
that yields gross proceeds of at least $1,000 in aggregate. If such financing occurs before maturity of the notes on October 11, 2021, the Company will issue a number of shares equal
to the Conversion Amount divided by (i) the capped price (price per share equal to $4,000 divided by the Company Capitalization) or (ii) the discount price (price per share multiplied
by the discount rate of 80%).
On November 21, 2019, the Company entered into a Convertible Note Purchase Agreement which permitted the Company to issue and sell an additional three convertible promissory
notes in the total amount of $5,000 to three related party investors (the “November Notes”), two of which are the Company’s founders and one of which is a third-party investor.
Interest accrues from the date of the notes on the unpaid principal amount at a rate of 10% per annum. The investors will have the ability to either (i) convert the


Table of Contents
Archer Aviation Inc.
Notes to Financial Statements
(in thousands, except share and per share data)
outstanding principal and any accrued but unpaid interest under the note into shares of the Company’s preferred stock at the price per share issued and sold at the close of the
Company’s next preferred equity financing that yields gross proceeds of least $25,000 in the aggregate if such financing occurs before maturity of the notes on December 31, 2022 or
(ii) be repaid in cash at the initial closing of such $25,000 equity financing event.
The Company has not elected the fair value option for either the October or November Notes and does not otherwise account for any convertible promissory notes at fair value under
GAAP.
On November 21, 2019, the Company closed their Series Seed Preferred Stock round in which the October Notes were cancelled and converted into such shares. On July 22, 2020, the
Company issued their Series A Preferred Stock in which the holders of the November Notes elected to cancel their notes and convert into such shares as opposed to being repaid in
cash. The outstanding principal balance on the convertible promissory notes was $0 and $4,995 as of December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively, recorded in convertible promissory
notes due to related parties on the accompanying balance sheets. Accrued interest was $0 and $47 as of December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively, recorded in other long-term
liabilities on the accompanying balance sheets.
Partial Recourse Promissory Notes
On November 21, 2020, the Company entered into partial recourse promissory note arrangements with each of the Company’s founders which provided each of them with a partial
recourse loan as consideration for the issuance of stock, which proceeds were used for the exercise of 2,645,517 shares, per founder, of the Company’s common stock pursuant to the
outstanding option agreements issued by the Company to the founders on November 3, 2020. Due to the partial recourse nature of the notes, the promissory note arrangements are
considered nonrecourse loans in their entirety for accounting purposes and thus are accounted for as in-substance share options. The purchase price for the shares was $0.15 per share
for a total amount of $397 paid by each founder. The notes bear interest at a fixed rate of 0.38% per annum, compounded annually. The promissory notes may be repaid at any time
and from time to time and are due upon the earlier of five years from issuance or upon a deemed liquidation event, initial draft registration statement filing, or within ninety days of
the respective founder’s termination. Concurrent with the execution of the notes, the founders early exercised their common stock options at the exercise price of $0.15 per share in
accordance with the terms of the early exercise agreements. These options are subject to vesting conditions and are subject to forfeiture in the form of a Company repurchase option at
the original $0.15 per share price if the founders terminate employment prior to the vesting dates of the original option agreements.
The Company determined that the stock options exercised by a nonrecourse note are considered unexercised until the nonrecourse note is repaid. Because the loan is deemed
nonrecourse, for accounting purposes the principal and interest represent the strike price of the in-substance awards for the purposes of fair valuing the in-substance awards, and the
principal and interest on the note and shares underlying the in- substance share options will not be recorded on the Company’s balance sheets or statements of operations and
comprehensive loss.
The Company estimated the fair value of the in-substance share options using the Black-Scholes option- pricing model and compared this fair value to the value of the original awards
immediately prior to the issuance of the promissory note. The Company determined that the promissory note terms did not result in incremental fair value of these awards and no
incremental compensation cost would be recognized under the promissory note arrangement. The grant date fair value of the original award is recognized as expense over the requisite
service period on a straight-line basis.
7.
Paycheck Protection Program Loan
On March 27, 2020, President Trump signed into law the CARES Act (defined above). The CARES Act, among other things, includes provisions relating to refundable payroll tax
credits, deferment of employer side social security payments, net operating loss carryback periods, alternative minimum tax credit refunds, modifications to the net interest deduction
limitations, increased limitations on qualified charitable contributions and technical corrections to tax depreciation methods for qualified improvement property. The CARES Act also


F-56
appropriated funds for the U.S. Small Business Administration (“SBA”) Paycheck Protection Program loans that are forgivable in certain situations to promote continued employment,
as well as Economic Injury Disaster Loans to provide liquidity to small businesses harmed by COVID-19.


Table of Contents
Archer Aviation Inc.
Notes to Financial Statements
(in thousands, except share and per share data)
On April 9, 2020, the Company entered into a PPP Loan with JPMorgan Chase Bank, N.A., under the Paycheck Protection Program of the CARES Act. The application for these
funds required the Company to, in good faith, certify that the current economic uncertainty made the loan request necessary to support the ongoing operations of the Company and
that the Company will use the loan funds to retain workers, maintain payroll, or make mortgage, lease, and utility payments. Based in part on the Company’s assessment of the
uncertainty associated with its future operating performance created by the COVID-19 pandemic and related governmental responses, and the going concern uncertainty reflected in
the Company’s financial statements, the Company believed in good faith that it met the eligibility requirements for the PPP Loan. If, despite the good-faith belief that given the
Company’s circumstances all eligibility requirements for the PPP Loan were satisfied, it is later determined that the Company had violated any applicable laws or regulations or it is
otherwise determined the Company was ineligible to receive the PPP Loan, it may be required to repay the PPP Loan in its entirety and/or be subject to additional penalties and
potential liabilities.
The Company received total proceeds of $905 from the PPP Loan, which is due on April 9, 2022. In accordance with the requirements of the CARES Act, the Company will use the
proceeds for payroll costs. Interest accrues on the PPP Loan at the rate of 0.98% per annum. Neither principal nor interest shall be due or payable during the six-month deferral period
beginning on April 9, 2020. On June 11, 2020, the SBA extended the deferral period to ten months. Commencing one month after the expiration of the deferral period and continuing
on the same day of each month thereafter until the maturity date, the Company will pay to JPMorgan Chase Bank, N.A. monthly payments of principal and interest, each in such equal
amount required to fully amortize the principal amount outstanding on the loan. The Company accounts for the PPP Loan as debt and will accrue interest over the term of the loan. As
of December 31, 2020, the PPP Loan had an outstanding balance of $645 and $260 in notes payable and notes payable, net of current portion, respectively, in the accompanying
balance sheets.
The future principal payments under the PPP loan agreement as of December 31, 2020 were as follows:
Years ending December 31,
2021
     $
645
2022
260
$
905
The Company may apply to JPMorgan Chase Bank, N.A., for loan forgiveness in an amount equal to the sum of payroll costs, covered mortgage interest payments, covered rent
payments, and covered utilities during the eight weeks following disbursement on the PPP Loan. Not more than 25% of the forgiven amount may be for non-payroll costs. Forgiveness
of the loan is only available for principal. Interest payable under the loan will not be forgiven but the SBA may pay the loan interest on forgiven amounts. On June 5, 2020, the
Paycheck Protection Program Flexibility Act (the “PPP Flexibility Act”) was signed into law, extending the PPP Note forgiveness period from 8 weeks to 24 weeks after loan
origination, reducing the required amount of payroll expenditures from 75% to 60%, removing the prior ban on borrowers taking advantage of payroll tax deferral after loan
forgiveness and allowing for the amendment of the maturity date on existing loans from two years to five years. The Company did not amend the maturity date but intends to apply for
loan forgiveness under the terms of the PPP Loan and expects the loan to be recorded as income when legal forgiveness is obtained. While the Company believes that its use of the
loan proceeds satisfied the conditions for forgiveness of the loan, the Company cannot guarantee that it has not or will not take actions that could cause the Company to be ineligible
for forgiveness of the loan, in whole or in part.
8.
Commitments and Contingencies
Operating Leases
The Company’s lease arrangements consist of one corporate facility lease and one short-term storage facility lease. The corporate facility lease expires in 2023 and does not contain an
option to extend the lease. The Company’s short-term storage facility lease has a term of six months and expires in January of 2021. As the Company does not intend to extend its


F-57
short-term lease over one year from the commencement date, the Company has elected the Short-Term Lease exemption and therefore, will not recognize right-of-use assets and lease
liabilities that arise from short-term leases for any class of underlying asset.


Table of Contents
Archer Aviation Inc.
Notes to Financial Statements
(in thousands, except share and per share data)
The Company’s lease costs, weighted-average remaining lease term and weighted-average discount rate for each period ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, is as follows:
    
Year Ended December 31, 
    
2020
    
2019
Operating lease cost
$
52
$
—
Short-term lease cost
 
44  
—
Total lease cost
$
96
$
—
Weighted-average remaining lease term (in months)
 
30
 
—
Weighted-average discount rate
 
12.17 %    
—
The minimum aggregate future obligations under noncancelable operating leases as of December 31, 2020 were as follows:
Years ending December 31, 
2021
     $
1,043
2022
1,074
2023
507
Future minimum lease payments
2,624
Less: Amount representing interest
(323)
Present value of future lease payments
$
2,301
Supplemental cash information and non-cash activities related to right-of-use assets and lease liabilities are as follows:
    
2020
    
2019
Operating cash outflows from operating leases
$
86
$
—
Operating lease assets obtained in exchange for new lease liabilities
 
2,300
 
—
Letter of Credit
In conjunction with the Company’s operating lease, the Company entered into a standby letter of credit in favor of the Company’s lessor, in lieu of paying cash to the lessor to satisfy
the security deposit requirements of the leased property. The standby letter of credit was issued on September 15, 2020 for an amount of $257 and expires on September 30, 2021. The
letter of credit automatically renews for additional 12- month periods at each forfeiture date until September 1, 2023 unless cancelled by the Company.
Litigation
During the ordinary course of the Company’s business, it may be subject to legal proceedings, various claims, and litigation in the ordinary course of business. As of December 31,
2020 and 2019, the Company did not have any matters which would require it to accrue any liability regarding ongoing legal proceedings.
9.
Preferred and Common Stock


F-58
Stock Split
On October 11, 2019, the Board of Directors effected a five-for-one stock split of the Company’s common stock. Accordingly, all share and share amounts for the periods presented in
the accompanying financial statements and the notes thereto have been adjusted retroactively, where applicable, to reflect this stock split.
Preferred Stock
There were 18,193,515 shares of Series Seed redeemable convertible preferred stock (“Series Seed Preferred Stock”) authorized, issued and outstanding as of December 31, 2020 and
2019. There were 46,732,728 shares of Series A redeemable convertible preferred stock


Table of Contents
Archer Aviation Inc.
Notes to Financial Statements
(in thousands, except share and per share data)
(“Series A Preferred Stock”) authorized and 46,267,422 shares issued and outstanding as of December 31, 2020. There were no shares of Series A Preferred Stock authorized, issued
and outstanding as of December 31, 2019.
Common Stock
There were 143,677,090 shares of common stock authorized and 51,321,752 shares issued and outstanding as of December 31, 2020. There were 77,285,983 shares of common stock
authorized and 50,000,000 shares issued and outstanding as of December 31, 2019.
Preferred and Common Stock Rights
The rights, privileges, and preferences of the Company’s preferred and common stock as set forth in the Company’s Amended and Restated Certificate of Incorporation, dated July 16,
2020, are as follows:
Voting
The holders of preferred and common stock vote together and not as separate classes. Each holder of common stock is entitled to one vote for each share held by such holder. Each
holder of preferred stock is entitled to the number of votes equal to the number of shares of common stock into which the shares of preferred stock are convertible. Except as
otherwise required by law, holders of common stock are not entitled to vote on any amendment to the Amended and Restated Certificate of Incorporation that relates solely to the
terms of one or more outstanding series of preferred stock. Holders of common stock, exclusively and as a separate class, are entitled to elect three directors of the Company. Holders
of Series A Preferred Stock, exclusively and as a separate class, are entitled to elect one director of the Company. Holders of Series Seed Preferred Stock are not entitled to vote for a
director. There is no cumulative voting.
Dividends
The Company may not declare, pay or set aside any dividends unless the holders of preferred stock have first or simultaneously received a dividend. If declared, the dividend rate for
the convertible preferred stock is defined as equal amount per share on an as-converted basis. Any dividends declared are noncumulative, and no dividends on preferred or common
stock have been declared by the Board of Directors through December 31, 2020.
Preemptive Rights
If the Company proposes to offer any equity securities, securities convertible to equity securities, or options or warrants, subject to customary exceptions, any investor who holds at
least 4,150,755 shares of registrable securities has the right to purchase their pro rata portion of such securities.
Redemption
The preferred stock is not redeemable at the option of the holder except in certain circumstances. Mandatory redemption occurs upon a redemption event, which is upon wind-up,
dissolution, liquidation, insolvency, declaration of bankruptcy, or change in control. The contingent redemption upon a deemed liquidation event results in mezzanine equity
classification (outside of permanent equity) on the Company’s balance sheets. In the event of a deemed liquidation event, if available proceeds are not sufficient to redeem all
outstanding shares of preferred stock, the Company may redeem a pro rata portion of each holder’s shares of preferred stock to the extent of such available proceeds.


F-59
Conversion
Each share of Series Seed Preferred Stock and Series A Preferred Stock is convertible into one share of common stock as determined by dividing the applicable original issue price by
the applicable conversion price in effect at the time of conversion (subject to appropriate adjustment in the event of a stock dividend, stock split, combination, or other similar
recapitalization). The applicable original issue


Table of Contents
Archer Aviation Inc.
Notes to Financial Statements
(in thousands, except share and per share data)
F-60
price and the applicable conversion price of each share of Series Seed Preferred Stock is $0.3300. The applicable original issue price and the applicable conversion price of each share
of Series A Preferred Stock is $1.2046.
The Company will reserve the number of authorized shares of common stock sufficient to effect the conversion of all outstanding preferred stock, and if necessary, will increase its
authorized but unissued shares of common stock to such number of shares sufficient to effect the conversion. All outstanding shares of preferred stock will be automatically converted
into shares of common stock upon either a qualified initial public offering or in event of a mandatory conversion. The Series Seed Preferred Stock and Series A Preferred Stock will
convert into common stock upon consummation of the Merger Agreement with Atlas and Merger Sub. Refer to Note 13 for more detail.
Liquidation
In the event of any voluntary or involuntary liquidation or deemed liquidation event such as dissolution or winding up, the holders of shares of preferred stock are entitled to receive
distribution in an amount per share equal to the greater of (i) the applicable original issue price, plus any declared but unpaid dividend, or (ii) the amount per share had all shares of
preferred stock been converted prior to such liquidation event, on a pari passu basis prior and in preference to any distribution to the holders of common stock. If upon any such
liquidation event, the assets of the Company available for distribution is insufficient to pay the holders of shares of preferred stock, the amounts will be distributed among the holders
of preferred stock pro rata, in proportion to the full amounts they would otherwise be entitled to receive. If the holders of preferred stock are paid in full, the remaining assets of the
Company will be distributed pro rata to the holders of common stock based on the number of shares held by each holder.
10.
Stock-Based Compensation
2019 Stock Plan
On October 11, 2019, the Company adopted the 2019 Stock Plan (the “Plan”) under which the Board of Directors may grant up to 5,555,555 incentive and nonstatutory stock options
and restricted stock to employees, directors, and non-employees. On November 20, 2019, the Board of Directors amended the Plan to increase the number of shares to 7,577,057
shares. On October 4, 2020, the Board of Directors further amended the Plan to increase the number of shares to 15,689,294 shares.
As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, the Company had 1,812,867 and 7,577,057 shares, respectively, of common stock available for future issuance under the Plan. The Company did
not grant any awards under the Plan during the year ended December 31, 2019.


Table of Contents
Archer Aviation Inc.
Notes to Financial Statements
(in thousands, except share and per share data)
A summary of our employee stock option activity is as follows:
    
    
         
    
Weighted
         
Weighted
Average
Average
Remaining
Aggregate
Number of
Exercise
Contractual
Intrinsic
Shares
Price
Life (Years)
Value
Outstanding as of December 31, 2019
 
—
$
—  
—
$
—
Granted
 
11,318,689
$
0.11  
 
Exercised
 
(151,600)
$
0.04
$
1,324
Outstanding as of December 31, 2020
 
11,167,089
$
0.11
 
9.61
$
136,988
Exercisable as of December 31, 2020
 
1,432,988
$
0.15
 
9.84
$
17,528
Vested and expected to vest as of December 31, 2020
 
11,167,089
$
0.11
 
9.61
$
136,988
A summary of our non-employee stock option activity is as follows:
    
    
    
Weighted 
    
Weighted 
Average 
Average 
Remaining 
Aggregate 
Number of 
Exercise 
Contractual 
Intrinsic 
Shares
Price
Life (Years)
Value
Outstanding as of December 31, 2019
 
—
$
—  
—
$
—
Granted
 
1,423,738
$
0.15  
 
Exercised
 
(36,152)
$
0.15
$
282
Outstanding as of December 31, 2020
 
1,387,586
$
0.15  
9.84
$
16,973
Exercisable as of December 31, 2020
 
6,172
$
0.15  
9.84
$
75
Vested and expected to vest as of December 31, 2020
 
1,387,586
$
0.15  
9.84
$
16,973
A summary of our restricted stock activity is as follows:
    
    
Weighted
Average
Number of 
Grant
Shares
 Price
Outstanding as of December 31, 2019
 
—
$
—
Granted
 
1,134,000
$
0.04
Vested
 
(567,000)
$
0.04
Outstanding as of December 31, 2020
 
567,000
$
0.04


F-61


Table of Contents
Archer Aviation Inc.
Notes to Financial Statements
(in thousands, except share and per share data)
F-62
Determination of Fair Value
The assumptions used in the Black-Scholes option pricing model for the year ended December 31, 2020 are provided in the following table.
    
2020
Risk-free interest rate:
Employee stock options
 
0.52 – 1.52%
Non-employee stock options
 
0.79%
Expected term (in years):
 
  
Employee stock options
 
6.02 – 6.32
Non-employee stock options
 
10.00
Expected volatility:
 
  
Employee stock options
 
60.00 – 70.00%
Non-employee stock options
 
60.00%
Dividend yield:
 
  
Employee stock options
 
0.00%
Non-employee stock options
 
0.00%
Grant date fair value per share:
 
  
Employee stock options
$0.02 – $0.08
Non-employee stock options
$0.10
The Company records stock-based compensation expense for stock-based compensation awards based on the fair value on the date of grant. The stock-based compensation expense is
recognized ratably over the course of the requisite service period. The Company recognized stock-based compensation expense of $142 and $8 for employee and non-employees,
respectively, for stock options and $25 for non-employees for restricted stock awards for the year ended December 31, 2020. The Company did not recognize any stock- based
compensation expense for the year ended December 31, 2019. As of December 31, 2020, the total remaining stock-based compensation expense for unvested stock options was $565
and $135 for employees and non-employees, respectively, which are expected to be recognized over a weighted-average period of 1.8 and 1.4 years, for employee and non-employees,
respectively. As of December 31, 2020, the total remaining stock-based compensation expense for restricted stock awards was $20 for non-employees, which is expected to be
recognized over a weighted-average period of 0.2 years.
The Company has elected to account for forfeitures as they occur and will record stock-based compensation expense assuming all stockholders will complete the requisite service
period. If an employee forfeits an award because they fail to complete the requisite service period, the Company will reverse stock- based compensation expense previously
recognized in the period the award is forfeited.


Table of Contents
Archer Aviation Inc.
Notes to Financial Statements
(in thousands, except share and per share data)
The following table presents stock-based compensation expense included in each respective expense category in the statements of operations and other comprehensive loss:
Years Ended December 31, 
2020
2019
Research and development
     $
25      $
—
General and administrative
 
150
 
—
Total
$
175
$
—
Collaboration Agreement and Warrant
On November 6, 2020, the Company entered into a collaboration agreement with FCA US LLC (“FCA”), in which both parties agreed to work together to complete a series of
fixed duration collaboration projects to develop a prototype aircraft for Archer (the “Collaboration Agreement”). In exchange for services to be provided by FCA under the
Collaboration Agreement, the Company issued a warrant to FCA on November 6, 2020 (the “Warrant”), in which FCA will have the right to purchase up to 1,660,302 shares of
Archer’s common stock at an exercise price of $0.01 per share (subject to appropriate adjustment in the event of a stock dividend, stock split, combination, or other similar
recapitalization). As of September 2020, the Company’s most recent valuation date, a valuation of the Company’s common and preferred stock was performed. The Company’s
common stock and Series A Preferred Stock was valued at $0.15 per share and $1.20 per share, respectively. The warrant expires on November 6, 2025. Shares under the Warrant are
vested and earned based on the completion of specific aircraft development milestones identified under the Collaboration Agreement which are expected to be achieved through
December 2022.
As the Company is currently in pre-revenue stage and is not generating any revenue from the Collaboration Agreement, all costs incurred with third parties are recorded based on
the nature of the cost incurred. The Company accounts for the Warrant in accordance with the provisions of ASC 718, Compensation — Stock Compensation. The Company will
assess whether it is probable that the award will vest for each of the seven milestones at the end of every reporting period. If and when the award is deemed probable of vesting, the
Company will recognize compensation expense for the portion of the grant determined probable of vesting on a straight-line basis over the duration of each milestone. If services had
been provided by FCA prior to management determining the milestone is probable of being achieved, a cumulative catch-up adjustment will be recorded for services performed in
prior periods. Costs incurred under the Collaboration Agreement and Warrant are associated with the research, design, and production and testing for the aircraft prototype and are
recorded in R&D expense in the statements of operations and comprehensive loss. As services are planned to begin in January  2021, none of the projects identified in the
Collaboration Agreement have commenced as of December 31, 2020. Therefore, no expense was recognized during the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019.
11.
Income Taxes
The Company did not record any deferred income tax provision for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019. The components of the provision for incomes taxes are as follows:
    
Years ended December 31, 
    
2020
    
2019
Current:
 
   
  
Federal
$
—
$
—
State
 
1
 
—
Total current
 
1
 
—
Total income tax provision
$
1
$
—


F-63


Table of Contents
Archer Aviation Inc.
Notes to Financial Statements
(in thousands, except share and per share data)
The following table presents the principal reasons for the difference between the effective tax rate and the federal statutory income tax rate of 21%:
    
Years Ended December 31, 
 
    
2020
    
2019
 
Federal income tax (benefit)
 
21.0 %  
21.0 %
State and local income taxes (net of federal benefit)
 
8.8 %  
15.2 %
Nondeductible expenses
 
(0.1)%  
(0.2)%
Valuation allowance
 
(29.7)%  
(36.0)%
Effective Tax Rate
 
0.0 %  
0.0 %
The tax effects of temporary differences that give rise to significant portions of the deferred tax assets and deferred tax liabilities are provided below:
Years ended December 31, 
    
2020
    
2019
Deferred Tax Assets:
Net operating loss carryforwards
     $
7,500      $
299
Accrued expenses
 
43
 
14
Operating lease liability
 
645
 
—
Other
 
34
 
—
Gross deferred tax assets
 
8,222
 
313
Less: Valuation allowance
 
(7,216)
 
(312)
Deferred tax assets, net of valuation allowance
 
1,006
 
1
Deferred Tax Liabilities:
 
  
 
  
Stock-based compensation
 
(5)
 
—
Depreciation and amortization
 
(356)
 
(1)
Right-of-use asset
 
(645)
 
—
Total deferred tax liabilities
 
(1,006)
 
(1)
Total net deferred tax assets
$
—
$
—
In assessing the realizability of deferred tax assets, management considers whether it is more likely than not that some portion or all of the deferred tax assets will not be realized. The
ultimate realization of deferred tax assets is dependent upon the generation of future taxable income during the period in which those temporary differences become deductible. Based
upon the analysis of federal and state deferred tax balances and future tax projections and the Company’s lack of taxable income in the carryback period, the Company recorded a
valuation allowance against the federal and state deferred tax assets of $7,216.
As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, the Company has U.S. federal net operating loss carryforwards of $26,959 and $905, respectively, which will both begin to expire in 2038. As of
December 31, 2020 and 2019, the Company has state net operating loss carryforwards of $26,692 and $1,796, respectively, which will both begin to expire in 2038.
The following table summarizes the activity related to the Company’s unrecognized tax benefits during the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019:


F-64
Balance as of December 31, 2019
     $
31
Increases related to current year tax positions
 
2,018
Balance as of December 31, 2020
$
2,049
The total amount of unrecognized tax benefits that, if recognized, would affect the effective tax rate as of December 31, 2019 and December 31, 2020 is zero due to the valuation
allowance that would otherwise be recorded on the deferred tax asset associated with


Table of Contents
Archer Aviation Inc.
Notes to Financial Statements
(in thousands, except share and per share data)
the recognized position. During the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, the Company recognized no interest and penalties related to uncertain tax positions.
In accordance with Section 382 and Section 383 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended (the “Code”), a corporation that undergoes an “ownership change” (generally
defined as a cumulative change [by value] of more than 50% in the equity ownership of certain stockholders over a rolling three- year period) is subject to limitations on its ability to
utilize its pre-change NOLs and R&D tax credits to offset post-change taxable income and post-change tax liabilities, respectively. The Company’s existing NOLs and R&D credits
may be subject to limitations arising from previous ownership changes, and the ability to utilize NOLs could be further limited by Section 382 and Section 383 of the Code. In
addition, future changes in the Company’s stock ownership, some of which may be outside of the Company’s control, could result in an ownership change under Section 382 and
Section 383 of the Code. The amount of such limitations, if any, has not been determined.
The Company is subject to taxation and files income tax returns with the U.S. federal government and the state of California. The tax years ended December 31, 2018 through
December 31, 2020 remain open to examination by the Internal Revenue Service and New York State Department of Revenue, and from December 31, 2020, by the California
Franchise Tax Board. In addition, the utilization of net loss carryforwards is subject to federal and state review for the periods in which those net losses were incurred. The Company
is not under audit by any taxing jurisdictions at this time.
12.
401(k) Savings Plan
The Company maintains a 401(k) savings plan for the benefit of its employees. The Company makes matching contributions equal to 50% of each employee contribution, not to
exceed $9 a year. All current employees are eligible to participate in the 401(k) savings plan. The Company’s matching contributions were approximately $276 for the year ended
December 31, 2020. As the 401(k) savings plan became effective in February 2020, the Company did not match any employee contributions for the year ended December 31, 2019.
13.
Subsequent Events
The Company evaluated subsequent events and transactions that occurred after the balance sheet date through March 8, 2021, which is the date the financial statements were available
to be issued. Other than as described below, the Company did not identify any subsequent events that would have required adjustment or disclosure in the financial statements.
Whisman Lease Agreement
On December 11, 2020, the Company entered into an agreement to lease approximately 14,660 square feet of R&D space for 30 months with an option to extend for one subsequent
12-month period. The Company obtained control of the leased property on January 11, 2021 and recognized the right-of-use asset and lease liability in January 2021.
Merger Agreement with Atlas Crest
On February 10, 2021, Archer entered into a Business Combination Agreement (the “Merger Agreement”) with Atlas Crest Investment Corp. (“Atlas”) and Artemis Acquisition
Sub Inc., a wholly- owned subsidiary of Atlas (“Merger Sub”), with an equity value of the Company of $2,525 million (the “Equity Value”). Pursuant to the Merger Agreement,
Archer shall cause Merger Sub to be merged with and into Archer with Archer continuing as the surviving company under the Companies Act following the merger, being a wholly-
owned subsidiary of Atlas, and the separate corporate existence of Merger Sub shall cease. Immediately after the completion of the merger, the shareholders of Archer will exchange
their interests in Archer for shares of common stock of the combined entity. Additionally, certain investors have agreed to subscribe for and purchase an aggregate of up to $600
million of common stock of the combined company (“PIPE Financing”).
United Collaboration and Warrant Agreement


F-65
On January 29, 2021, the Company entered into a purchase agreement and warrant agreement with United Airlines (“United”). Under the terms of the agreements, Archer expects
United to provide design and development support and United agreed to a conditional order


Table of Contents
Archer Aviation Inc.
Notes to Financial Statements
(in thousands, except share and per share data)
F-66
for $1 billion worth of Archer aircraft, with an option to order an additional quantity of Archer aircraft at the same unit price for an additional aggregate base purchase price of up to
$500 million, upon commencement of commercial production of the aircraft. Archer issued up to 14,645,614 warrants (subject to adjustment based on the Exchange Ratio) to United
to purchase shares of the Company’s common stock, twenty percent of which have been conditionally assigned to Mesa Airlines pursuant to the terms of the agreements. Each warrant
provides United with the right to purchase one share of Archer common stock at an exercise price of $0.01 per share. The warrants will vest in accordance with certain milestones,
including among others the agreement of all material terms pursuant to the collaboration agreement, completion of a SPAC transaction by Archer, the certification of the aircraft by the
FAA, and the sale of aircraft.


Table of Contents
ARCHER AVIATION INC.
CONDENSED BALANCE SHEETS
(In thousands, except share and per share data)
June 30, 2021
December 31, 2020
    
(Unaudited)
    
Assets
 
   
  
Current assets
 
   
  
Cash and cash equivalents
$
5,937
$
36,564
Prepaid expenses
 
542
 
762
Other current assets
 
199
 
43
Total current assets
 
6,678
 
37,369
Property and equipment, net
 
3,572
 
1,613
Intangible assets, net
 
481
 
497
Right-of-use asset
 
2,687
 
2,300
Other long-term assets
 
235
 
—
Total assets
$
13,653
$
41,779
Liabilities, Redeemable Convertible Preferred Stock, and Stockholders’ Deficit
 
  
 
  
Current liabilities
 
  
 
  
Accounts payable
$
21,710
$
2,103
Lease liability
 
1,329
 
816
Notes payable
 
—
 
645
Other current liabilities
 
667
 
279
Total current liabilities
 
23,706
 
3,843
Notes payable, net of current portion
 
—
 
260
Lease liability, net of current portion
 
1,385
 
1,485
Other long-term liabilities
 
215
 
268
Total liabilities
 
25,306
 
5,856
Commitments and contingencies (Note 7)
 
  
 
  
Series Seed redeemable convertible preferred stock, $0.0001 par value; liquidation value of $6,004; 18,193,515 shares authorized,
issued and outstanding as of June 30, 2021 and December 31, 2020, stated at
 
5,943
 
5,943
Series A redeemable convertible preferred stock, $0.0001 par value; liquidation value of $55,734; 46,732,728 shares authorized;
46,267,422 shares issued and outstanding as of June 30, 2021 and December 31, 2020, stated at
 
55,589
 
55,589
Stockholders’ deficit
 
  
 
  
Common stock, $0.0001 par value; 155,000,000 shares authorized; 52,229,481 shares issued and outstanding as of June 30, 2021
and 143,677,090 shares authorized; 51,321,752 shares issued and outstanding as of December 31, 2020
 
5
 
5
Additional paid-in capital
 
80,408
 
186
Accumulated deficit
 
(153,598)
 
(25,800)
Total stockholders’ deficit
 
(73,185)
 
(25,609)
Total liabilities, redeemable convertible preferred stock, and stockholders’ deficit
$
13,653
$
41,779


F-67
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these condensed financial statements.


Table of Contents
F-68
ARCHER AVIATION INC.
CONDENSED STATEMENTS OF OPERATIONS AND COMPREHENSIVE LOSS (UNAUDITED)
(In thousands, except share and per share data)
Three Months Ended June 30,
Six Months Ended June 30,
    
2021
    
2020
    
2021
    
2020
Operating expenses
 
   
   
   
  
Research and development
$
11,448
$
4,105
$
21,514
$
6,974
General and administrative
 
22,409
 
669
 
28,987
 
1,686
Other warrant expense
 
—
 
—
 
78,208
 
—
Total operating expenses
 
33,857
 
4,774
 
128,709
 
8,660
Loss from operations
 
(33,857)
 
(4,774)
 
(128,709)
 
(8,660)
Gain on forgiveness of PPP loan
 
912
 
—
 
912
 
—
Other expense, net
 
(3)
 
—
 
—
 
—
Interest income (expense)
 
3
 
(128)
 
1
 
(229)
Loss before income taxes
 
(32,945)
 
(4,902)
 
(127,796)
 
(8,889)
Income tax expense
 
—
 
—
 
(2)
 
—
Net loss and comprehensive loss
$
(32,945)
$
(4,902)
$
(127,798)
$
(8,889)
Net loss per share, basic and diluted
$
(0.57)
$
(0.10)
$
(2.25)
$
(0.18)
Weighted-average common shares, basic and diluted
 
58,100,977
 
50,000,000
 
56,774,344
 
50,000,000
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these condensed financial statements.


Table of Contents
F-69
ARCHER AVIATION INC.
CONDENSED STATEMENTS OF REDEEMABLE CONVERTIBLE PREFERRED STOCK AND
STOCKHOLDERS’ DEFICIT (UNAUDITED)
(In thousands, except share data)
Redeemable Convertible Preferred Stock
Series Seed
Series A
Common Stock
Additional
Paid-in
Accumulated
    
Shares
    
Amount
    
Shares
    
Amount
Shares
    
Amount     
Capital
    
 Deficit
    
Total
Balance as of
December 31, 2020
18,193,515
$
5,943
46,267,422
$
55,589      
51,321,752
$
5
$
186
$
(25,800)
$
(25,609)
Exercise of stock options
 
—
 
—  
—
 
—    
667,979
 
—
 
40
 
—
 
40
Issuance of warrants
 
—
 
—  
—
 
—    
—
 
—
 
78,242
 
—
 
78,242
Stock-based compensation
expense
 
—
 
—  
—
 
—    
—
 
—
 
925
 
—
 
925
Net loss
 
—
 
—  
—
 
—    
—
 
—
 
—
 
(94,853)
 
(94,853)
Balance as of March 31,
2021
 
18,193,515
 
5,943  
46,267,422
 
55,589    
51,989,731
 
5
 
79,393
 
(120,653)
 
(41,255)
Exercise of stock options
 
—
 
—  
—
 
—    
239,750
 
—
 
22
 
—
 
22
Stock-based compensation
expense
 
—
 
—  
—
 
—    
—
 
—
 
993
 
—
 
993
Net loss
 
—
 
—  
—
 
—    
—
 
—
 
—
 
(32,945)
 
(32,945)
Balance as of June 30, 2021  
18,193,515
$
5,943  
46,267,422
$
55,589    
52,229,481
$
5
$
80,408
$
(153,598)
$
(73,185)
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these condensed financial statements.


Table of Contents
F-70
ARCHER AVIATION INC.
CONDENSED STATEMENTS OF REDEEMABLE CONVERTIBLE PREFERRED STOCK AND
STOCKHOLDERS’ DEFICIT (UNAUDITED)
(In thousands, except share data)
Redeemable Convertible Preferred Stock
         
    
    
Series Seed
Series A
Common Stock
Additional
Paid-in 
Accumulated 
    
Shares
    
Amount
     Shares     
Amount
      
Shares
    
Amount
    
Capital
    
Deficit
    
Total
Balance as of December 31, 2019
 
18,193,515
$
5,943  
—
$
—    
50,000,000
$
5
$
—
$
(977)
$
(972)
Stock-based compensation expense
 
—
 
—  
—
 
—    
—
 
—
 
3
 
—
 
3
Net loss
 
—
 
—  
—
 
—    
—
 
—
 
—
 
(3,987)
 
(3,987)
Balance as of March 31, 2020
 
18,193,515
 
5,943  
—
 
—    
50,000,000
 
5
 
3
 
(4,964)
 
(4,956)
Issuance of restricted stock
 
—
 
—  
—
 
—    
1,134,000
 
—
 
—
 
—
 
—
Stock-based compensation expense
 
—
 
—  
—
 
—    
—
 
—
 
8
 
—
 
8
Net loss
 
—
 
—  
—
 
—    
—
 
—
 
—
 
(4,902)
 
(4,902)
Balance as of June 30, 2020
 
18,193,515
$
5,943  
—
$
—    
51,134,000
$
5
$
11
$
(9,866)
$
(9,850)
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these condensed financial statements.


Table of Contents
ARCHER AVIATION INC.
CONDENSED STATEMENTS OF CASH FLOWS (UNAUDITED)
(In thousands)
Six Months Ended June 30,
    
2021
    
2020
Cash flows from operating activities
  
  
Net loss
$
(127,798)
$
(8,889)
Adjustments to reconcile net loss to net cash used in operating activities:
 
  
 
  
Depreciation and amortization
 
422
 
39
Stock-based compensation expense
 
1,918
 
11
Noncash interest
 
—
 
248
Noncash lease expense
 
597
 
—
Research and development warrant expense
 
34
 
—
Other warrant expense
 
78,208
 
—
Gain on forgiveness of PPP loan
 
(912)
 
—
Changes in operating assets and liabilities:
 
  
 
  
Prepaid expenses
 
220
 
(315)
Other current assets
 
(156)
 
(6)
Other long-term assets
 
(235)
 
—
Accounts payable
 
19,161
 
790
Other current liabilities
 
343
 
642
Operating lease liability
 
(572)
 
—
Net cash used in operating activities
 
(28,770)
 
(7,480)
Cash flows from investing activities
 
  
 
  
Purchases of property and equipment
 
(1,919)
 
(315)
Net cash used in investing activities
 
(1,919)
 
(315)
Cash flows from financing activities
 
  
 
  
Payments of offering costs
 
—
 
(80)
Proceeds from exercise of stock options
 
62
 
—
Proceeds from issuance of debt
 
—
 
905
Net cash provided by financing activities
 
62
 
825
Net decrease in cash and cash equivalents
 
(30,627)
 
(6,970)
Cash and cash equivalents, beginning of period
 
36,564
 
10,149
Cash and cash equivalents, end of period
$
5,937
$
3,179
Noncash investing activities
 
  
 
  
Purchases of property and equipment included in accounts payable
$
446
$
—
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these condensed financial statements.


F-71


Table of Contents
ARCHER AVIATION INC.
NOTES TO CONDENSED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (UNAUDITED)
(in thousands, except share and per share data)
1.     Formation and Nature of Business
Formation and Nature of Business
Archer Aviation Inc. (the “Company” or “Archer”), headquartered in Palo Alto, California, is an aerospace company focused on the engineering, design, and development of all-
electric vertical takeoff and landing (“eVTOL”) aircraft with the objective of improving mobility in cities. The Company’s mission is to advance the benefits of sustainable air
mobility that saves people significant time compared to ground transportation. Archer’s vehicle performance is enabled by bringing together advances in key technologies such as high
specific energy batteries, high performance electric motors, an advanced fly-by-wire flight control system, and a lightweight and efficient structure.
In connection with the initial formation of the Company, Archer Aviation Inc. was incorporated in the State of Delaware and commenced operations on October 16, 2018.
Merger with Atlas Crest
On September  16, 2021, Archer consummated the previously announced business combination pursuant to the Business Combination Agreement dated February  10, 2021 (as
amended and restated on July 29, 2021) between Atlas Crest Investment Corp. (“Atlas”), Artemis Acquisition Sub Inc., a wholly-owned subsidiary of Atlas (“Merger Sub”), and
Archer, under the terms of which Merger Sub merged with and into Archer, with Archer surviving the merger as a wholly-owned subsidiary of Atlas. After giving effect to the business
combination, the combined company directly owns all of the issued and outstanding equity interests of Archer. As a result of the Business Combination Agreement, Archer’s
stockholders received an aggregate number of shares of New Archer common stock equal to $2,465,779 divided by $10.00.
Additionally, certain investors had agreed to subscribe for and purchase an aggregate of up to $600 million of common stock of the combined company (“PIPE Financing”). The PIPE
Investment was consummated immediately prior to the closing of the merger.
COVID-19 Pandemic
In March 2020, the World Health Organization declared the outbreak of a novel coronavirus ("COVID-19") as a pandemic, which continues to spread. COVID-19 has spread rapidly
throughout the world, causing volatility and disruption in financial markets, curtailing global economic activity, raising the prospect of an extended global recession, and prompting
governments and businesses to take unprecedented measures such as travel restrictions, quarantines, shelter-in-place orders, and business shutdowns. The COVID-19 pandemic may
slow down the Company’s ability to ramp up its production and delay the Company’s ability to launch products on anticipated timelines and begin generating revenue. The COVID-19
pandemic could limit the ability of suppliers and business partners to perform, including third party suppliers’ ability to provide components and materials. The Company may also
experience an increase in the cost of raw materials.
The full impact of the COVID-19 pandemic continues to evolve as of the date of this report. As such, it is uncertain as to the full magnitude that the pandemic will have on the
Company’s financial condition, liquidity, and future results of operations. Management is actively monitoring the situation on its financial condition, liquidity, operations, suppliers,
industry, and workforce.
2.     Liquidity and Going Concern
Since its formation, the Company has devoted substantial effort and capital resources to the design and development of its planned eVTOL aircraft and Urban Air Mobility network.
Funding of these activities has primarily been through the net proceeds received from the issuance of related and third-party debt (Notes 5 and 6), and the sale of preferred and


F-72
common stock to related and third parties (Note 8). Since inception of the Company through June 30, 2021, the Company has incurred cumulative losses from operations, negative
cash flows from operating activities, and has an accumulated deficit of $153,598. Additionally, Archer had cash and cash equivalents of $5,937 at June 30, 2021.


Table of Contents
ARCHER AVIATION INC.
NOTES TO CONDENSED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (UNAUDITED)
(in thousands, except share and per share data)
The Company’s audit report for the year ended December 31, 2020 from the Company’s independent registered public accounting firm includes an explanatory paragraph stating that
the Company’s recurring losses from operations and cash outflows from operating activities raise substantial doubt about Archer’s ability to continue as a going concern. However,
after the closing of the business combination on September 16, 2021, the Company received net cash proceeds of $801,826. Management expects that the net cash proceeds from the
business combination along with cash balances held by the Company prior to the closing date will be sufficient for its working capital and capital requirements for at least the next
12 months from the date these condensed financial statements were available to be issued.
There can be no assurance that the Company will be successful in achieving its strategic plans, that the Company’s future capital raises will be sufficient to support its ongoing
operations, or that any additional financing will be available in a timely manner or on acceptable terms, if at all. If events or circumstances occur such that the Company does not meet
its strategic plans, the Company will be required to reduce discretionary spending, alter or scale back aircraft development programs, be unable to develop new or enhanced
production methods, or be unable to fund capital expenditures. Any such events would have a material adverse effect on the Company’s financial position, results of operations, cash
flows, and ability to achieve its intended business objectives.
3.      Summary of Significant Accounting Policies
Basis of Presentation
The accompanying unaudited condensed financial statements have been prepared pursuant to the rules and regulations of the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission for interim
financial information. Accordingly, they do not include all of the information and footnotes required by accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America
(“GAAP”) for complete financial statements. In the opinion of management, all adjustments, consisting of normal recurring adjustments, necessary for a fair presentation of financial
position, results of operations, and cash flows for the interim periods presented have been reflected herein. The results of operations for interim periods are not necessarily indicative
of the results to be expected for the full year. The unaudited condensed financial statements should be read in conjunction with the Company’s audited financial statements as of and
for the year ended December 31, 2020 set forth elsewhere in this proxy statement/prospectus.
The Company has provided a discussion of significant accounting policies, estimates, and judgments in its audited financial statements. There have been no changes to the Company’s
significant accounting policies since December 31, 2020 which are expected to have a material impact on the Company’s financial position, results of operations, or cash flows.
Cash and Cash Equivalents
Cash consists of cash on deposit with financial institutions. Cash equivalents consist of short-term, highly liquid financial instruments that are readily convertible to cash and have
maturities of three months or less from the date of purchase. Cash and cash equivalent balances were $5,937 and $36,564 as of June 30, 2021 and December 31, 2020, respectively, of
which, money market funds were $344 and $34,377 as of June 30, 2021 and December 31, 2020, respectively. Money market funds, which are considered as cash equivalents, are
recorded at fair value and classified as Level 1 within the fair value hierarchy.
Fair Value Measurements
The Company applies the provisions of Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) 820, Fair Value Measurement, which defines a single authoritative definition of fair value, sets
out a framework for measuring fair value and expands on required disclosures about fair value measurements. The provisions of ASC 820 relate to financial assets and liabilities as
well as other assets and liabilities carried at fair value on a recurring and nonrecurring basis. The standard clarifies that fair value is an exit price, representing the amount that would


F-73
be received to sell an asset or paid to transfer a liability in an orderly transaction between market participants. As such, fair value is a market-based measurement that should be
determined based on assumptions that market participants would use in pricing an asset or


Table of Contents
ARCHER AVIATION INC.
NOTES TO CONDENSED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (UNAUDITED)
(in thousands, except share and per share data)
liability. As a basis for considering such assumptions, the standard establishes a three-tier value hierarchy, which prioritizes the inputs used in measuring fair value as follows:
Level 1 Unadjusted quoted prices in active markets for identical assets or liabilities accessible to the reporting entity at the measurement date.
Level 2 Other than quoted prices included in Level 1 inputs that are observable for the asset or liability, either directly or indirectly, for substantially the full term of the asset or
liability.
Level 3 Unobservable inputs for the asset or liability used to measure fair value to the extent that observable inputs are not available, thereby allowing for situations in which
there is little, if any, market activity for the asset or liability at the measurement date.
The carrying amounts of the Company’s cash, accounts payable, accrued compensation and accrued liabilities approximate fair value due to the short-term nature of these instruments.
Level 1 instruments include investments in money market funds, which are valued based on inputs such as actual trade data, quoted market prices from brokers or other similar
sources.
Financial Instruments Not Recorded at Fair Value on a Recurring Basis
Certain financial instruments, including debt, are not measured at fair value on a recurring basis in the balance sheets. The fair value of debt as of December 31, 2020 approximates its
carrying value. There was no outstanding debt as of June 30, 2021.
Assets and Liabilities Recorded at Fair Value on a Non-Recurring Basis
Certain assets and liabilities are subject to measurement at fair value on a nonrecurring basis if there are indicators of impairment or if they are deemed to be impaired as a result of an
impairment review.
There were no assets or liabilities measured at fair value using Level 3 inputs for the periods presented.
Intangible Assets, Net
Intangible assets consist solely of domain names and are recorded at cost, net of accumulated amortization, and if applicable, impairment charges. Amortization of domain names is
provided over a 15-year estimated useful life on a straight-line basis or based on the pattern in which economic benefits are consumed, if reliably determinable. The Company reviews
intangible assets for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of an asset may not be recoverable. The Company has analyzed a
variety of factors in light of the known impact to date of the COVID-19 pandemic on its business to determine if a circumstance could trigger an impairment loss, and, at this time and
based on the information presently known, does not believe that it is more likely than not that an impairment loss has been incurred.
As of June 30, 2021 and December 31, 2020, the gross carrying amount for domain names was $500 with $19 and $3 recorded in accumulated amortization, respectively. During the
three and six months ended June 30, 2021, the Company recognized amortization expense of $9 and $17, respectively, included within general and administrative expenses on the
statements of operations and comprehensive loss. The Company did not recognize any amortization expense during the three and six months ended June 30, 2020.
Property and Equipment, Net


F-74
Property and equipment are stated at historical cost less accumulated depreciation. Expenditures for major renewals and betterments are capitalized, while minor replacements,
maintenance, and repairs, which do not extend the asset lives, are charged to operations as incurred. Upon sale or disposition, the cost and related accumulated depreciation is
removed from the accounts, and any difference between the selling price and net carrying amount is recorded as a gain or loss in the statements of operations and comprehensive loss.


Table of Contents
ARCHER AVIATION INC.
NOTES TO CONDENSED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (UNAUDITED)
(in thousands, except share and per share data)
Depreciation on property and equipment is calculated using the straight-line method over the estimated useful lives of the assets as follows:
    
Useful Life
    
 (in years)
Furniture, fixtures, and equipment
 
5
Computer hardware
 
3
Computer software
 
3
Website design
 
2
Leasehold improvements
 
Shorter of lease term or the asset standard life
Impairment of Long-Lived Assets
The Company reviews its long-lived assets, consisting primarily of property and equipment, for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying
amount of such assets may not be recoverable. Such triggering events or changes in circumstances may include: a significant decrease in the market price of a long-lived asset, a
significant adverse change in the extent or manner in which a long-lived asset is being or intended to be used, a significant adverse change in legal factors or in the business climate,
the impact of competition or other factors that could affect the value of a long-lived asset, a significant adverse deterioration in the amount of revenue or cash flows expected to be
generated from an asset group, an accumulation of costs significantly in excess of the amount originally expected for the acquisition or development of a long-lived asset, current or
future operating or cash flow losses that demonstrate continuing losses associated with the use of a long-lived asset, or a current expectation that, more likely than not, a long-lived
asset will be sold or otherwise disposed of significantly before the end of its previously estimated useful life. The Company performs impairment testing at the asset group level that
represents the lowest level for which identifiable cash flows are largely independent of the cash flows of other assets and liabilities. Recoverability of these assets is determined by
comparing the forecasted undiscounted cash flows attributable to such assets including any cash flows upon their eventual disposition to their carrying value. If the carrying value of
the assets exceeds the forecasted undiscounted cash flows, then the assets are written down to their fair value. The Company determined there was no impairment of long-lived assets
during all periods presented.
Operating Expenses
Research and Development
Research and development (“R&D”) costs are expensed as incurred and are primarily comprised of personnel-related costs (including salaries, bonuses, benefits, and stock-based
compensation) for employees focused on R&D activities, other related costs, and an allocation of general overhead. In addition, R&D expense includes professional fees paid to
outside contractors and depreciation expense. R&D efforts are focused on design and development of our electric aircraft and continuing to prepare our prototype electric aircraft to
achieve industry standards.
General and Administrative
General and administrative expenses are primarily comprised of personnel-related costs (including salaries, bonuses, benefits, and stock-based compensation) and overhead related
costs for employees in our executive, finance, information technology, or human resources departments. In addition, general and administrative expense includes fees for third-party
professional services (including consulting, legal, and audit services), other corporate expenses, allocated shared costs, and depreciation expense.


F-75
Other Warrant Expense
Other warrant expense of $78,208 is related to the vesting of warrants issued in conjunction with the execution of purchase, collaboration, and warrant arrangements with United
Airlines. Refer to Note 9 for additional information.


Table of Contents
ARCHER AVIATION INC.
NOTES TO CONDENSED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (UNAUDITED)
(in thousands, except share and per share data)
Stock-Based Compensation
The Company’s stock-based compensation awards consist of options granted to employees, directors, and non-employees for the purchase of ordinary shares and restricted shares. The
Company recognizes stock-based compensation expense in accordance with the provisions of ASC 718, Compensation - Stock Compensation. ASC 718 requires the measurement and
recognition of compensation expense for all stock-based compensation awards made to employees, directors, and non-employees to be based on the grant date fair values of the
awards.
The Company estimates the fair value of share options using the Black-Scholes option-pricing model. The value of the award is recognized as expense over the requisite service
period on a straight-line basis.
Determining the grant date fair value of the awards using the Black-Scholes option-pricing model requires management to make assumptions and judgments, including but not limited
to the following:
Expected term - The estimate of the expected term of employee awards is determined in accordance with the simplified method, which estimates the term based on an averaging of the
vesting period and contractual term of the option grant. The Company uses the contractual term for non-employee awards.
Expected volatility - Since the Company is a private entity without sufficient historical data on the volatility of its common stock, the expected volatility used is based on the volatility
of similar entities (referred to as “guideline companies”) for a period consistent with the expected term of the award.
Risk-free interest rate - The risk-free interest rate used to value awards is based on the United States Treasury yield in effect at the time of grant for a period consistent with the
expected term of the award.
Dividend yield - The Company has never declared or paid any cash dividends and does not presently plan to pay cash dividends in the foreseeable future.
Forfeiture rate – The Company has elected to account for forfeitures as they occur and will record stock-based compensation expense assuming all option holders will complete the
requisite service period. If an employee forfeits an award because they fail to complete the requisite service period, the Company will reverse stock-based compensation expense
previously recognized in the period the award is forfeited.
Fair value of common stock
The Company’s Board of Directors grants stock options with exercise prices equal to the fair value of the Company’s common stock on the date of grant.
Because there is no public market for the Company’s common stock, the Company has determined the fair value of its common stock at the time of the grant of stock options in
accordance with the American Institute of Certified Public Accountants (“AICPA”) Accounting and Valuation Guide: Valuation of Privately-Held-Company Equity Securities Issued
as Compensation (the “AICPA Practice Aid”). The Company determined the fair value of its common stock based on a variety of factors including, but not limited to (i) the results of
contemporaneous independent third-party valuations of the Company’s common stock and the prices, rights, preferences and privileges of the Company’s redeemable convertible
preferred stock relative to those of its common stock; (ii) the lack of marketability of the Company’s common stock; (iii) actual operating and financial results; (iv) current business
conditions and projections; (v) the likelihood of achieving a liquidity event, such as an IPO or sale of the Company, given prevailing market conditions, and (vi) precedent transactions
involving the Company’s shares.


F-76
As provided in the AICPA Practice Aid, there are several approaches for setting the value of an enterprise and various methodologies for allocating the value of an enterprise to its
outstanding equity. The Company determined the fair value of equity awards using a combination of the market and income approach. Within the market approach, the guideline
public company method was used, which


Table of Contents
ARCHER AVIATION INC.
NOTES TO CONDENSED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (UNAUDITED)
(in thousands, except share and per share data)
employs the use of ratios developed from the market price of traded shares from publicly traded companies considered reasonably similar to the Company. Under the income
approach, the enterprise value was estimated using the discounted cash flow method, which involves estimating the future cash flows of a business for a discrete period and
discounting them to their present value. In allocating enterprise value to its outstanding equity, the Company applied a hybrid approach, which consisted of the option pricing method
(“OPM”) and probability-weighted expected return method (“PWERM”). The OPM treats securities, including debt, common and preferred stock, as call options on the enterprise’s
value, with exercise prices based on the securities’ respective liquidation preferences and conversion values. The PWERM estimates the fair market value of the common stock based
on an analysis of future values for the enterprise assuming various exit scenarios, such as IPO, merger or sale, staying private, and liquidation.
In conducting the valuations, the Company considered all objective and subjective factors that it believed to be relevant in the valuation conducted, including management’s best
estimate of the Company’s business condition, and prospects and operating performance at the valuation dates. There are significant judgments and estimates inherent in these
valuations.
Net Loss Per Share Attributable to Ordinary Stockholders
The Company has one class of participating security (preferred shares) issued and outstanding as of June 30, 2021. Losses are not attributed to the participating security as the
preferred stockholders are not contractually obligated to share in the Company’s losses. For all periods presented, the calculation of basic net loss per share excludes shares issued
upon the early exercise of stock options where the vesting conditions have not been satisfied.
Basic net loss attributable to common stockholders per share is calculated by dividing net loss attributable to ordinary stockholders by the weighted-average number of common
shares outstanding.
Diluted net loss per share attributable to ordinary stockholders reflects adjustments to the basic net loss per share attributable to ordinary stockholders and the weighted-average
number of shares of ordinary shares outstanding for the potentially dilutive impact of outstanding securities or other contracts to issue common stock if they were to be exercised or
converted into common shares, using the treasury stock method.
Contingently issuable shares, including equity awards with performance conditions, are considered outstanding common shares and included in basic net loss per share as of the date
that all necessary conditions to earn the awards have been satisfied. Prior to the end of the contingency period, the number of contingently issuable shares included in diluted net loss
per share is based on the number of shares, if any, that would be issuable under the terms of the arrangement at the end of the reporting period.
Because the Company reported net losses for all periods presented, all potentially dilutive common stock equivalents are antidilutive and have been excluded from the calculation of
net loss per share.
The following table presents the number of antidilutive shares excluded from the calculation of diluted net loss per share:
Three Months Ended June 30,
Six Months Ended June 30,
    
2021
    
2020
    
2021
    
2020
Stock-based compensation awards - employees
  
11,690,674
  
3,714,205
  
11,690,674
  
3,714,205
Stock-based compensation awards - non-employees
  
11,440,789
  
1,134,000
  
11,440,789
  
1,134,000
Series Seed redeemable convertible preferred stock
  
18,193,515
  
18,193,515
  
18,193,515
  
18,193,515
Series A redeemable convertible preferred stock
  
46,267,422
  
—
  
46,267,422
  
—


F-77
Total
  
87,592,400
  
23,041,720
  
87,592,400
  
23,041,720
Comprehensive Loss
There were no differences between net loss and comprehensive loss presented in the statements of operations and comprehensive loss for the three and six months ended June 30,
2021 and 2020.


Table of Contents
ARCHER AVIATION INC.
NOTES TO CONDENSED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (UNAUDITED)
(in thousands, except share and per share data)
Recently adopted accounting pronouncements
In February 2016, the FASB issued ASU 2016-02, Leases (Topic 842) (“ASU 2016-02”), which outlines a comprehensive lease accounting model that supersedes the current lease
guidance. The new guidance requires lessees to recognize lease liabilities and corresponding right-of-use assets for all leases with lease terms greater than 12 months. It also changes
the definition of a lease and expands the disclosure requirements of lease arrangements. In July 2018, the FASB issued ASU 2018-11, which provides the option of an additional
transition method that allows entities to initially apply the new lease guidance at the adoption date and recognize a cumulative-effect adjustment to the opening balance of retained
earnings in the period of adoption. The Company entered into its first lease in July of 2020 and applied ASU 2016-02 to this lease and subsequent leases.
In June 2018, the FASB issued ASU 2018-07, Compensation - Stock Compensation (Topic 718): Improvements to Nonemployee Share-Based Payment Accounting ("ASU 2018-07").
This amendment expands the scope of Topic 718, Compensation—Stock Compensation (which only included share-based payments to employees) to include share-based payments
issued to nonemployees for goods or services. Consequently, the accounting for share-based payments to nonemployees and employees is substantially aligned. ASU 2018-07
supersedes Subtopic 505-50, Equity—Equity-Based Payments to Non-Employees. Early adoption of ASU 2018-07 is permitted and should be applied on a prospective basis. The
Company began applying ASU 2018-07 during 2020 upon the Company’s first grant of share-based payment awards. No share-based payments were granted prior to 2020.
In August 2018, the FASB issued ASU 2018-13, Fair Value Measurement (Topic 820) (“ASU 2018-13”), which modifies, removes, and adds certain disclosure requirements on fair
value measurements based on the FASB Concepts Statement, Conceptual Framework for Financial Reporting—Chapter 8: Notes to Financial Statements. The ASU is effective for all
entities for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2019. The amendments on changes in unrealized gains and losses, the range and weighted average of significant unobservable
inputs used to develop Level 3 fair value measurements and the narrative description of measurement uncertainty should be applied prospectively for only the most recent annual
period presented in the initial fiscal year of adoption. All other amendments should be applied retrospectively to all periods presented upon their effective date. The Company has
applied ASU 2018-13 to all periods presented.
In November 2019, the FASB issued ASU 2019-08, Compensation — Stock Compensation (Topic 718) and Revenue from Contracts with Customers (Topic 606) (“ASU 2019-08”),
which requires entities to measure and classify share-based payments to a customer in accordance with the guidance in ASC 718, Compensation — Stock Compensation. ASU 2019-08
expanded the scope of Topic 718 to include awards issued to customers for purposes of measurement and classification and amended portions of ASC 606, Revenue from Contracts
with Customers, to refer to this guidance. The amount that would be recorded as a reduction in revenue would be measured based on the grant date fair value of the share-based
payment in accordance with Topic 718. The Company adopted ASU 2019-08 on January 1, 2021 and has applied its provisions to the measurement of the warrants issued to United
Airlines. Refer to Note 9 for details.
In December 2019, the FASB issued ASU 2019-12, Income Taxes (Topic 740): Simplifying the Accounting for Income Taxes ("ASU 2019-12"). This amendment was issued to
simplify the accounting for income taxes by removing certain exceptions for recognizing deferred taxes, performing intraperiod allocation, and calculating income taxes in interim
periods. Further, ASU 2019-12 adds guidance to reduce complexity in certain areas, including recognizing deferred taxes for tax basis goodwill and allocating taxes to members of a
consolidated group. The Company has applied ASU 2019-12 to all periods presented, and there was no adoption date impact to its financial statements.
Recently issued accounting pronouncements not yet adopted
In August 2020, the FASB issued ASU 2020-06, Accounting for Convertible Instruments and Contracts in an Entity’s Own Equity. The ASU simplifies the accounting for convertible
instruments by removing certain separation models in ASC 470- 20, Debt — Debt with Conversion and Other Options, for convertible instruments. The ASU updates the guidance on
certain embedded conversion features that are not required to be accounted for as derivatives under Topic 815, Derivatives and Hedging, or that do not result in substantial premiums
accounted for as paid-in capital, such that those features are no longer required to be separated from the host contract. The convertible debt instruments will be accounted for as a


F-78
single liability measured at amortized cost. Further, the ASU made amendments to the EPS guidance in Topic 260 for convertible instruments, the most significant impact of which is
requiring the use of the if-converted


Table of Contents
ARCHER AVIATION INC.
NOTES TO CONDENSED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (UNAUDITED)
(in thousands, except share and per share data)
method for diluted EPS calculation, and no longer allowing the net share settlement method. The ASU also made revisions to Topic 815-40, which provides guidance on how an entity
must determine whether a contract qualifies for a scope exception from derivative accounting. The amendments to Topic 815-40 change the scope of contracts that are recognized as
assets or liabilities. The ASU is effective for public business entities for interim and annual periods beginning after December 15, 2021, with early adoption permitted. Adoption of the
ASU can either be on a modified retrospective or full retrospective basis. The Company is currently evaluating the impact the adoption of this standard will have on its financial
statements and related disclosures.
4.      Property and Equipment, Net
Property and equipment, net, consists of the following:
    
June 30, 2021
    
December 31, 2020
Furniture, fixtures, and equipment
$
1,379
$
1,046
Computer hardware
 
1,281
 
524
Website design
 
504
 
128
Leasehold improvements
 
764
 
54
Construction in progress
 
189
 
—
Property and equipment, gross
 
4,117
 
1,752
Less: Accumulated depreciation
 
(545)
 
(139)
Property and equipment, net
$
3,572
$
1,613
The following table presents depreciation expense included in each respective expense category in the statements of operations and comprehensive loss:
Three Months Ended June 30,
Six Months Ended June 30,
    
2021
    
2020
    
2021
    
2020
Research and development
$
91
$
10
$
166
$
16
General and administrative
 
167
 
19
 
239
 
19
Total depreciation expense
$
258
$
29
$
405
$
35
5.      Related Party Transactions
The Company has been primarily funded by notes payable and the sale of preferred and common stock to third parties and the Company’s co-founders.
Convertible Promissory Notes Due to Related Parties
On October 11, 2019, the Company entered into a Convertible Note Purchase Agreement which permitted the Company to issue and sell two convertible promissory notes to the
founders’ Trusts, Capri Growth LLC (“Capri”) and Hight Drive Growth LLC (“Hight”), in the total amount of $601 (the “October Notes”). Interest accrues from the date of the notes
on the unpaid principal amount at a rate of 5% per annum. Capri and Hight will have the ability to convert the outstanding principal and (at the Company’s option) any accrued but


F-79
unpaid interest under the note (the “Conversion Amount”) into shares of the Company’s preferred stock issued and sold at the close of the Company’s next preferred equity financing
that yields gross proceeds of at least $1,000 in aggregate. If such financing occurs before maturity of the notes on October 11, 2021, the Company will issue a number of shares equal
to the Conversion Amount divided by (i) the capped price (price per share equal to $4,000 divided by the Company Capitalization) or (ii) the discount price (price per share multiplied
by the discount rate of 80%).
On November 21, 2019, the Company entered into a Convertible Note Purchase Agreement which permitted the Company to issue and sell an additional three convertible promissory
notes in the total amount of $5,000 to three related party investors (the “November Notes”), two of which are the Company’s founders and one of which is a third-party investor.
Interest accrues from the date


Table of Contents
ARCHER AVIATION INC.
NOTES TO CONDENSED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (UNAUDITED)
(in thousands, except share and per share data)
of the notes on the unpaid principal amount at a rate of 10% per annum. The investors will have the ability to either (i) convert the outstanding principal and any accrued but unpaid
interest under the note into shares of the Company’s preferred stock at the price per share issued and sold at the close of the Company’s next preferred equity financing that yields
gross proceeds of least $25,000 in the aggregate if such financing occurs before maturity of the notes on December 31, 2022 or (ii) be repaid in cash at the initial closing of such
$25,000 equity financing event.
The Company has not elected the fair value option for either the October or November Notes and does not otherwise account for any convertible promissory notes at fair value under
GAAP.
On November 21, 2019, the Company closed its Series Seed Preferred Stock round in which the October Notes were cancelled and converted into such shares. On July 22, 2020, the
Company issued its Series A Preferred Stock in which the holders of the November Notes elected to cancel their notes and convert into such shares as opposed to being repaid in cash.
As the October and November Notes were cancelled and converted into preferred stock in the respective preferred equity financing rounds, there was no outstanding balance on the
convertible promissory notes as of June 30, 2021.
Partial Recourse Promissory Notes
On November 21, 2020, the Company entered into partial recourse promissory note arrangements with each of the Company’s founders which provided each of them with a partial
recourse loan as consideration for the issuance of stock, which proceeds were used for the exercise of 2,645,517 shares, per founder, of the Company’s common stock pursuant to the
outstanding option agreements issued by the Company to the founders on November 3, 2020. Due to the partial recourse nature of the notes, the promissory note arrangements are
considered nonrecourse loans in their entirety for accounting purposes and thus are accounted for as in-substance share options. The purchase price for the shares was $0.15 per share
for a total amount of $397 paid by each founder. The notes bear interest at a rate of 0.38% per annum, compounded annually. The promissory notes may be repaid at any time and
from time to time and are due upon the earlier of five years from issuance or upon a deemed liquidation event, initial draft registration statement filing, or within 90 days of the
respective founder’s termination. Concurrent with the execution of the notes, the founders early exercised their common stock options at the exercise price of $0.15 per share in
accordance with the terms of the early exercise agreements. These options are subject to vesting conditions and are subject to forfeiture in the form of a Company repurchase option at
the original $0.15 per share price if the founders terminate employment prior to the vesting dates of the original option agreements.
The Company determined that the stock options exercised by a nonrecourse note are considered unexercised until the nonrecourse note is repaid. Because the loan is deemed
nonrecourse for accounting purposes, the principal and interest represent the strike price of the in-substance awards for the purposes of fair valuing the in-substance awards, and the
principal and interest on the note and shares underlying the in-substance share options will not be recorded on the Company’s balance sheets or statements of operations and
comprehensive loss.
The Company estimated the fair value of the in-substance share options using the Black-Scholes option-pricing model and compared this fair value to the value of the original awards
immediately prior to the issuance of the promissory note. The Company determined that the promissory note terms did not result in incremental fair value of these awards and no
incremental compensation cost would be recognized under the promissory note arrangement. The grant date fair value of the original award is recognized as expense over the requisite
service period on a straight-line basis.
6.      Paycheck Protection Program Loan
On March 27, 2020, President Trump signed into law the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act (the “CARES Act”). The CARES Act, among other things, includes
provisions relating to refundable payroll tax credits, deferment of employer side social security payments, net operating loss carryback periods, alternative minimum tax credit


F-80
refunds, modifications to the net interest deduction limitations, increased limitations on qualified charitable contributions, and technical corrections to tax depreciation methods for
qualified improvement property. The CARES Act also appropriated funds for the U.S. Small Business Administration (“SBA”) Paycheck Protection Program (“PPP”) loans that are
forgivable in certain situations to promote continued employment, as well as Economic Injury Disaster Loans to provide liquidity to small businesses harmed by COVID-19.


Table of Contents
ARCHER AVIATION INC.
NOTES TO CONDENSED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (UNAUDITED)
(in thousands, except share and per share data)
On April 9, 2020, the Company entered into a PPP Loan with JPMorgan Chase Bank, N.A. under the Paycheck Protection Program of the CARES Act and received total proceeds of
$905, with interest accruing at a rate of 0.98% per annum. The application for these funds required the Company to, in good faith, certify that the current economic uncertainty made
the loan request necessary to support the ongoing operations of the Company and that the Company will use the loan funds to retain workers, maintain payroll, or make mortgage,
lease, and utility payments. In accordance with the requirements of the CARES Act, the Company used the proceeds for payroll costs. In June  2021, the Company received
notification from the SBA that the loan and accrued interest, totaling $912, was forgiven in full. Accordingly, the Company recorded a gain on forgiveness of PPP loan and interest in
the condensed statement of operations and comprehensive loss.
7.      Commitments and Contingencies
Operating Leases
The Company leases office and storage facilities under various operating lease agreements with lease periods expiring between 2022 and 2023 and generally contain periodic rent
increases and various renewal and termination options.
The Company’s lease costs were as follows:
Three Months Ended June 30,
Six Months Ended June 30,
    
2021
    
2020
    
2021
    
2020
Operating lease cost
$
388
$
—
$
731
$
—
Short-term lease cost
 
—
 
—
 
25
 
—
Total lease cost
$
388
$
—
$
756
$
—
The Company’s weighted-average remaining lease term and discount rate were as follows:
Six Months Ended June 30,
    
2021
    
2020
Weighted-average remaining lease term (in months)
23.42
—
Weighted-average discount rate
 
11.29 %  
—
The minimum aggregate future obligations under noncancelable operating leases as of June 30, 2021 were as follows:
Remaining 2021
     $
774
2022
 
1,546
2023
 
688
Total future lease payments
 
3,008
Less: imputed interest
 
(294)
Present value of future lease payments
$
2,714


F-81
Supplemental cash information and non-cash activities related to right-of-use assets and lease liabilities were as follows:
Three Months Ended June 30,
Six Months Ended June 30,
    
2021
    
2020
    
2021
    
2020
Operating cash outflows from operating leases
$
379
$
—
$
706
$
—
Operating lease assets obtained in exchange for new lease liabilities
 
165
 
—
 
984
 
—
Letter of Credit
In conjunction with the Company’s operating lease for its headquarters, the Company entered into a standby letter of credit in favor of the Company’s lessor, in lieu of paying cash to
the lessor to satisfy the security deposit requirements of the leased property. The standby


Table of Contents
ARCHER AVIATION INC.
NOTES TO CONDENSED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (UNAUDITED)
(in thousands, except share and per share data)
letter of credit was issued on September 15, 2020 for an amount of $257 and expires on September 30, 2021. The letter of credit automatically renews for additional 12-month periods
at each forfeiture date until September 1, 2023, unless cancelled by the Company.
Legal Proceedings
During the ordinary course of the Company’s business, it may be subject to legal proceedings, various claims, and litigation. Such proceedings can be costly, time consuming, and
unpredictable, and therefore, no assurance can be given that the final outcome of such proceedings will not materially impact the Company’s financial condition or results of
operations.
On April 6, 2021, Wisk Aero LLC (“Wisk”) brought a lawsuit against Archer in the United States District Court in the Northern District of California alleging misappropriation of
trade secrets and patent infringement. Archer has placed an employee on paid administrative leave in connection with a government investigation and a search warrant issued to the
employee, which Archer believes are focused on conduct prior to the employee joining Archer. Archer and three other Archer employees with whom the individual worked have
received subpoenas relating to this investigation. Archer is cooperating with the investigation of the employee. On May 19, 2021, Wisk filed a motion for preliminary injunction and
expedited discovery. On June 1, 2021, Archer filed a motion to dismiss the trade secret claims and filed counterclaims. On June 15, 2021, Wisk amended its complaint, and the
following day Archer filed a motion to dismiss the amended complaint. On June 23, 2021, Archer filed an opposition to the motion for preliminary injunction. On July 13, 2021,
Archer filed amended counterclaims. On July 22, 2021, the Court denied Wisk’s motion for preliminary injunction. On July 27, 2021, Wisk filed a motion to strike and dismiss certain
of Archer’s amended counterclaims. On August 10, 2021, Archer filed a motion to dismiss the motion to strike and dismiss and issued a press release. On August 20, 2021, Wisk filed
a notice of appeal of the Court’s denial of the motion for preliminary injunction. On August 24, 2021, the Court denied Archer’s motion to dismiss the trade secret claims. On
September 14, 2021, the Court denied Wisk’s motion to strike and dismiss certain of Archer’s amended counterclaims. Archer cannot predict the timing or outcome of the litigation or
federal government investigation. On September 30, 2021, Wisk dismissed its appeal of the District Court’s denial of the motion for preliminary injunction. As of October 6, 2021, the
investigation is ongoing. Archer cannot predict the timing or probability of the outcome or range of reasonably possible loss, if any, but a negative result could have a material adverse
effect on Archer’s financial position, liquidity, operations, and cash flows.
8.      Preferred and Common Stock
Preferred Stock
There were 18,193,515 shares of Series Seed redeemable convertible preferred stock (“Series Seed Preferred Stock”) authorized, issued and outstanding as of June 30, 2021 and
December 31, 2020. There were 46,732,728 shares of Series A redeemable convertible preferred stock (“Series A Preferred Stock”) authorized and 46,267,422 shares issued and
outstanding as of June 30, 2021 and December 31, 2020.
Common Stock
There were 155,000,000 shares of common stock authorized and 52,229,481 shares issued and outstanding as of June 30, 2021 and 143,677,090 shares of common stock authorized
and 51,321,752 shares issued and outstanding as of December 31, 2020.
Preferred and Common Stock Rights


F-82
The rights, privileges, and preferences of the Company’s preferred and common stock as set forth in the Company’s Amended and Restated Certificate of Incorporation, dated July 16,
2020, are as follows:
Voting
The holders of preferred and common stock vote together and not as separate classes. Each holder of common stock is entitled to one vote for each share held by such holder. Each
holder of preferred stock is entitled to the number of votes equal to the number of shares of common stock into which the shares of preferred stock are convertible. Except as
otherwise required by law, holders of common


Table of Contents
ARCHER AVIATION INC.
NOTES TO CONDENSED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (UNAUDITED)
(in thousands, except share and per share data)
stock are not entitled to vote on any amendment to the Amended and Restated Certificate of Incorporation that relates solely to the terms of one or more outstanding series of preferred
stock. Holders of common stock, exclusively and as a separate class, are entitled to elect three directors of the Company. Holders of Series A Preferred Stock, exclusively and as a
separate class, are entitled to elect one director of the Company. Holders of Series Seed Preferred Stock are not entitled to vote for a director. There is no cumulative voting.
Dividends
The Company may not declare, pay, or set aside any dividends unless the holders of preferred stock have first or simultaneously received a dividend. If declared, the dividend rate for
the convertible preferred stock is defined as equal amount per share on an as-converted basis. Any dividends declared are noncumulative, and no dividends on preferred or common
stock have been declared by the Board of Directors through June 30, 2021.
Preemptive Rights
If the Company proposes to offer any equity securities, securities convertible to equity securities, or options or warrants, subject to customary exceptions, any investor who holds at
least 4,150,755 shares of registrable securities has the right to purchase their pro rata portion of such securities.
Redemption
The preferred stock is not redeemable at the option of the holder except in certain circumstances. Mandatory redemption occurs upon a redemption event, which is upon wind-up,
dissolution, liquidation, insolvency, declaration of bankruptcy, or change in control. The contingent redemption upon a deemed liquidation event results in mezzanine equity
classification (outside of permanent equity) on the Company’s balance sheets. In the event of a deemed liquidation event, if available proceeds are not sufficient to redeem all
outstanding shares of preferred stock, the Company may redeem a pro rata portion of each holder’s shares of preferred stock to the extent of such available proceeds.
Conversion
Each share of Series Seed Preferred Stock and Series A Preferred Stock is convertible into one share of common stock as determined by dividing the applicable original issue price by
the applicable conversion price in effect at the time of conversion (subject to appropriate adjustment in the event of a stock dividend, stock split, combination, or other similar
recapitalization). The applicable original issue price and the applicable conversion price of each share of Series Seed Preferred Stock is $0.3300. The applicable original issue price
and the applicable conversion price of each share of Series A Preferred Stock is $1.2046.
The Company will reserve the number of authorized shares of common stock sufficient to effect the conversion of all outstanding preferred stock, and if necessary, will increase its
authorized but unissued shares of common stock to such number of shares sufficient to effect the conversion. All outstanding shares of preferred stock will be automatically converted
into shares of common stock upon either a qualified initial public offering or in event of a mandatory conversion. The Series Seed Preferred Stock and Series A Preferred Stock will
convert into common stock upon consummation of the Business Combination Agreement with Atlas and Merger Sub. Refer to Note 1 for more detail.
Liquidation
In the event of any voluntary or involuntary liquidation or deemed liquidation event such as dissolution or winding up, the holders of shares of preferred stock are entitled to receive
distribution in an amount per share equal to the greater of (i) the applicable original issue price, plus any declared but unpaid dividend, or (ii) the amount per share had all shares of
preferred stock been converted prior to such liquidation event, on a pari passu basis prior and in preference to any distribution to the holders of common stock. If upon any such


F-83
liquidation event, the assets of the Company available for distribution is insufficient to pay the holders of shares of preferred stock, the amounts will be distributed among the holders
of preferred stock pro rata, in proportion to the full amounts they would otherwise be


Table of Contents
ARCHER AVIATION INC.
NOTES TO CONDENSED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (UNAUDITED)
(in thousands, except share and per share data)
entitled to receive. If the holders of preferred stock are paid in full, the remaining assets of the Company will be distributed pro rata to the holders of common stock based on the
number of shares held by each holder.
9.      Stock-Based Compensation
2019 Stock Plan
In January 2021, the Company granted 1,269,289 incentive and nonstatutory stock options. As of June 30, 2021, the Company had 543,578 shares of common stock available for
issuance under the 2019 Stock Plan.
A summary of our employee stock option activity is as follows:
    
    
    
Weighted
    
Weighted
Average
Average
Remaining
Aggregate
Number of
Exercise
Contractual
Intrinsic
    
Shares
    
Price
    
Life (Years)
    
Value
Outstanding as of January 1, 2021
 
11,167,089
$
0.11  
9.61
$
136,988
Granted
 
1,203,981
$
0.15  
 
  
Exercised
 
(680,396)
$
0.04
$
9,339
Outstanding as of June 30, 2021
 
11,690,674
$
0.12
9.18
$
177,315
Exercisable as of June 30, 2021
 
2,335,560
$
0.14
9.28
$
35,385
Vested and expected to vest as of June 30, 2021
 
11,690,674
$
0.12
9.18
$
177,315
A summary of our non-employee stock option activity is as follows:
    
    
    
Weighted
    
Weighted
Average
Average
Remaining
Aggregate
Number of
Exercise
Contractual
Intrinsic
    
Shares
    
Price
    
Life (Years)
    
Value
Outstanding as of January 1, 2021
 
1,387,586
$
0.15  
9.84
$
16,973
Granted
 
65,308
$
0.15  
  
 
  
Exercised
 
(227,333)
$
0.15
$
3,129
Outstanding as of June 30, 2021
 
1,225,561
$
0.15  
9.35
$
18,885
Exercisable as of June 30, 2021
 
33,900
$
0.15  
9.41
$
513
Vested and expected to vest as of June 30, 2021
 
1,225,561
$
0.15  
9.35
$
18,885
A summary of our restricted stock activity is as follows:


F-84
    
Weighted
Average
Number of
Grant
    
Shares
    
Price
Outstanding as of January 1, 2021
 
567,000
$
0.04
Vested
 
(567,000)
$
0.04
Outstanding as of June 30, 2021
 
—
$
—


Table of Contents
ARCHER AVIATION INC.
NOTES TO CONDENSED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (UNAUDITED)
(in thousands, except share and per share data)
Determination of Fair Value
The assumptions used in the Black-Scholes option pricing model are provided in the following table.
    
June 30, 2021
    
December 31, 2020
 
Risk-free interest rate:
 
   
  
Employee stock options
 
0.62 % 
0.52 – 1.52 %
Non-employee stock options
 
1.08 % 
0.79 %
Expected term (in years):
 
   
  
Employee stock options
 
6.32  
6.02 – 6.32
Non-employee stock options
 
10.00  
10.00
Expected volatility:
 
   
  
Employee stock options
 
87.94 % 
60.00 – 70.00 %
Non-employee stock options
 
88.03 % 
60.00 %
Dividend yield:
 
   
  
Employee stock options
 
0.00 % 
0.00 %
Non-employee stock options
 
0.00 % 
0.00 %
Grant date fair value per share:
 
   
  
Employee stock options
$
13.65
$
0.02 - $0.08
Non-employee stock options
$
13.68
$
0.10
The Company records stock-based compensation expense for stock-based compensation awards based on the fair value on the date of grant. The stock-based compensation expense is
recognized ratably over the course of the requisite service period.
The Company recognized stock-based compensation expense of $861 and $123 for employee and non-employees, respectively, for stock options and $9 for non-employees for
restricted stock awards for the three  months ended June  30, 2021. The Company recognized stock-based compensation expense of $1,658 and $240 for employees and non-
employees, respectively, for stock options and $20 for non-employees for restricted stock awards for the six months ended June 30, 2021. For the three and six months ended June 30,
2020, the Company recognized stock-based compensation expense of $5 and $8, respectively, related to stock options for employees. For the three months ended June 30, 2020, the
Company recognized stock-based compensation expense of $3 related to restricted stock awards for non-employees.
As of June 30, 2021, the total remaining stock-based compensation expense for unvested stock options was $15,342 and $788 for employees and non-employees, respectively, which
are expected to be recognized over a weighted-average period of 1.7 and 1.1 years, for employee and non-employees, respectively.
The Company has elected to account for forfeitures as they occur and will record stock-based compensation expense assuming all stockholders will complete the requisite service
period. If an employee forfeits an award because they fail to complete the requisite service period, the Company will reverse stock-based compensation expense previously recognized
in the period the award is forfeited.
The following table presents stock-based compensation expense included in each respective expense category in the statements of operations and comprehensive loss:


F-85
Three Months Ended June 30,
Six Months Ended June 30,
    
2021
    
2020
    
2021
    
2020
Research and development
$
735
$
5
$
1,416
$
8
General and administrative
 
258
 
3
 
502
 
3
Total stock-based compensation expense
$
993
$
8
$
1,918
$
11


Table of Contents
ARCHER AVIATION INC.
NOTES TO CONDENSED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (UNAUDITED)
(in thousands, except share and per share data)
Collaboration and Warrant Agreements
United Airlines
On January 29, 2021, the Company entered into a purchase agreement and warrant agreement with United Airlines (“United”). Under the terms of the purchase agreement, United has
a conditional purchase order for up to 200 Archer aircraft, with an option to purchase an additional 100 aircraft. The purchase agreement between Archer and United is subject to
conditions that include, but are not limited to, the certification of Archer’s aircraft by the Federal Aviation Administration (“FAA”) and further negotiation and reaching mutual
agreement on certain material terms. Archer issued 14,645,614 warrants to United to purchase shares of the Company’s common stock. Each warrant provides United with the right to
purchase one share of Archer common stock at an exercise price of $0.01 per share. The warrants will vest in accordance with four milestones including the issuance of the warrant in
conjunction with the execution of the purchase and collaboration arrangements, completion of a SPAC transaction by Archer, the certification of the aircraft by the FAA, and the sale
of aircraft to United.
On January 29, 2021, a valuation of the Company’s common stock was performed, valuing the Company’s common stock at $13.35 per share. The value of the common stock was
determined using a hybrid approach of the OPM and PWERM, with the PWERM weighted at 80% primarily based on management’s expectation of the planned merger as described
in Note 1 and the OPM weighted at 20% due to uncertainties in the timing of other possible scenarios. The Company used the OPM to allocate value in a stay private scenario. Given
the $0.01 exercise price, each warrant also had a fair value of $13.35 at the grant date.
The Company determined that as a result of signing the purchase agreement, United is a customer with the intention of obtaining the output of the Company’s ordinary activities
(design and production of aircraft). United has not contracted to share in the risks and benefits of development of the aircraft, and United is not involved in the development of the
aircraft. As a result, the Company accounts for the collaboration and purchase agreement under ASC 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers. The Company identified the sale of
each aircraft ordered by United as a separate performance obligation in the contract. As the performance obligations have not been satisfied, the Company has not recognized any
revenue as of June 30, 2021.
With respect to the four milestones outlined above, the Company accounts for them as consideration payable to a customer under ASC 606 related to the future purchase of aircraft by
United. Pursuant to ASC 718, the Company measured the grant date fair value of the warrants to be recognized upon the achievement of each of the four milestones and the vesting of
the related warrants. The Company determined that the warrants will be classified as equity awards based on the criteria of ASC 480 and ASC 718.
Pursuant to ASC 606, consideration payable to the customer is generally accounted for as a reduction to revenue and recorded at the later of when (i) the entity recognizes revenue for
the transfer of related goods, or (ii) the entity pays the consideration. Due to the nature of the four milestones, and the Company’s unique circumstances upon the actual or anticipated
vesting dates as described below, the recognition pattern and cost presentation of each will differ. For the first milestone, issuance of the warrant in conjunction with the execution of
the purchase and collaboration arrangements, the Company has recorded the grant date fair value of the respective warrant tranche at the vesting date upon satisfaction of the
milestone. The Company does not believe that the consideration payable for the first milestone was provided in exchange for a distinct good or service. Rather, the consideration was
to induce United to commit to a contingent purchase agreement for an aircraft from the Company. The related costs for this milestone were recorded in other warrant expense in the
statements of operations and comprehensive loss due to the absence of historical or probable future revenue. For the second milestone, the completion of the SPAC transaction by
Archer, as it is not considered probable that certain events will occur, the Company will record the grant date fair value of the respective warrant tranche at the vesting date upon
satisfaction of the milestone. The related costs for this milestone will be recorded in other warrant expense in the statements of operations and comprehensive loss due to the absence
of historical or probable future revenue. For the third milestone, the certification of the aircraft by the FAA, the Company will assess whether it is probable that the award will vest at
the end of every reporting period. If and when the award is deemed probable of vesting, the Company will begin capitalizing the grant date fair value of the associated warrant as an
asset through the vesting date and subsequently amortize the asset as a reduction to revenue as it sells the new aircraft to United. For the fourth milestone, the sale of aircraft to


F-86
United, the Company will record the cost associated with the vesting of each portion of warrants within this milestone as a reduction of the transaction price as revenue is recognized
for each sale of the aircraft. As of June 30, 2021, the first


Table of Contents
ARCHER AVIATION INC.
NOTES TO CONDENSED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (UNAUDITED)
(in thousands, except share and per share data)
milestone of execution of the collaboration agreement had been achieved, and the Company recorded the associated expense of $78,208 related to 5,858,246 warrants that vested.
FCA US LLC
On November 6, 2020, the Company entered into a collaboration agreement with FCA US LLC (“FCA”), in which both parties agreed to work together to complete a series of fixed
duration collaboration projects to develop a prototype aircraft for Archer. In exchange for services to be provided by FCA under the collaboration agreement, the Company issued a
warrant to FCA on November 6, 2020, in which FCA will have the right to purchase up to 1,660,302 shares of Archer’s common stock at an exercise price of $0.01 per share (subject
to appropriate adjustment in the event of a stock dividend, stock split, combination, or other similar recapitalization). In September 2020, a valuation of the Company’s common and
preferred stock was performed, valuing the Company’s common stock and Series A Preferred Stock at $0.15 and $1.20 per share, respectively. The warrant expires on November 6,
2025. Shares under the warrant are vested and earned based on the completion of specific aircraft development milestones identified under the collaboration agreement which are
expected to be achieved through December 2022.
As the Company is currently in pre-revenue stage and is not generating any revenue from the collaboration agreement, all costs incurred with third parties are recorded based on the
nature of the cost incurred. The Company accounts for the warrant in accordance with the provisions of ASC 718. The Company will assess whether it is probable that the award will
vest for each of the seven milestones at the end of every reporting period. If and when the award is deemed probable of vesting, the Company will recognize compensation expense
for the portion of the grant determined probable of vesting on a straight-line basis over the duration of each milestone. If services had been provided by FCA prior to management
determining the milestone is probable of being achieved, a cumulative catch-up adjustment will be recorded for services performed in prior periods. Costs incurred under the
collaboration agreement and warrant are associated with the research, design, and production and testing for the aircraft prototype and are recorded in R&D expense in the statements
of operations and comprehensive loss. As services began in January 2021, no expense was recognized during the year ended December 31, 2020. During the six months ended
June 30, 2021, the Company recorded $34 of expense related to the completion of two milestones, amounting to 232,442 shares that have vested.
10.      Income Taxes
The Company recognized zero and an immaterial amount of income tax expense for the three and six months ended June 30, 2021, respectively, resulting in an effective tax rate of
0%. The Company did not recognize an income tax benefit/(expense) during the three and six months ended June 30, 2020. The effective tax rate is different from the federal statutory
tax rate primarily due to a full valuation allowance against deferred tax assets.
In assessing the realizability of deferred tax assets, management considers whether it is more-likely-than-not that some portion or all of the deferred tax assets will not be realized. The
ultimate realization of deferred tax assets is dependent upon the generation of future taxable income during the period in which those temporary differences become deductible. Based
upon the analysis of federal and state deferred tax balances, future tax projections, and the Company’s lack of taxable income in the carryback period, the Company recorded a
valuation allowance against the federal and state deferred tax assets as of June 30, 2021 and 2020.
11.      401(k) Savings Plan
The Company maintains a 401(k) savings plan for the benefit of its employees. The Company makes matching contributions equal to 50% of each employee contribution, subject to
the maximum amount established by the Internal Revenue Service. All current employees are eligible to participate in the 401(k) savings plan. The Company’s matching contributions
were approximately $123 and $252 for the three and six months ended June 30, 2021, respectively, and $67 and $126 for the three and six months ended June 30, 2020, respectively.


F-87


Table of Contents
ARCHER AVIATION INC.
NOTES TO CONDENSED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (UNAUDITED)
(in thousands, except share and per share data)
F-88
12.      Subsequent Events
The Company evaluated subsequent events and transactions that occurred after the balance sheet date through the date of the issuance of these financial statements. Other than as
described below, the Company did not identify any subsequent events that would have required adjustment or disclosure in the condensed financial statements.
Silicon Valley Bank Loan and Security Agreement
On July  9, 2021, Archer, as the borrower, entered into a Loan and Security Agreement with Silicon Valley Bank (“SVB”) and SVB Innovation Credit Fund VIII,  L.P. (“SVB
Innovation”) as the lenders, and SVB as the collateral agent. The total principal amount of the loans is $20,000 (the “Term Loans”), and all obligations due under the Term Loans are
collateralized by all of Archer’s right, title, and interest in and to its specified personal property in favor of the collateral agent. The interest rate on the loans is a floating rate per
annum equal to the greater of (1) 8.5% and (2) the Prime Rate plus the Prime Rate Margin, which increases by 2% per annum upon the occurrence of an event of default. The Term
Loans are subject to a final payment fee ranging between zero and 5.5% of the original aggregate principal amount depending on the timing of repayment and whether the SPAC
transaction occurs.
Additionally, in conjunction with the issuance of the Term Loans, the Company agreed to issue 211,641 warrants to SVB and 211,641 warrants to SVB Innovation, totaling 423,282
warrants. Each warrant provides SVB and SVB Innovation with the right to purchase one share of Archer common stock. The warrants have an exercise price of $17.30 per share and
expire on the 10th anniversary of the issuance date. The number and exercise price of the warrants are subject to adjustment if the Atlas merger closing occurs on or before
October 10, 2021. As of the date of the merger with Atlas, the warrants were exchanged into public warrants and became 732,280 shares at the exercise price of $11.50. The Company
accounts for the warrants in accordance with the guidance contained in ASC 815-40, Derivatives and Hedging – Contracts in Entity’s Own Equity, under which the warrants do not
meet the criteria for equity treatment and must be recorded as liabilities. Accordingly, the Company classifies the warrants as liabilities at their fair value and adjusts the warrants to
fair value at each reporting period. This liability is subject to re-measurement at each balance sheet date until exercised, and any change in fair value is recognized as a gain or loss in
the Company’s statement of operations.
FCA Italy S.p.A. Manufacturing Consulting and Warrant Agreements
On July 19, 2021, Archer entered into a manufacturing consulting agreement with an affiliate of FCA, FCA Italy S.p.A. (“FCA Italy”), in which both parties agreed to work together
to complete a series of fixed duration projects to develop manufacturing and production processes for the sale of the Company’s aircraft. In conjunction with the manufacturing
consulting agreement, the Company issued a warrant to FCA Italy, in which FCA Italy will have the right to purchase up to 1,070,000 shares of Archer’s common stock at an exercise
price of $0.01 per share. Shares under the warrant will vest in accordance with two events, including the execution of the manufacturing consulting agreement and 12 months from the
effective date of the agreement.


Table of Contents


Table of Contents
PART II
INFORMATION NOT REQUIRED IN PROSPECTUS
Item 13. Other Expenses of Issuance and Distribution
The following table sets forth all costs and expenses, other than underwriting discounts and commissions, payable by us in connection with the sale of the securities being registered.
All amounts shown are estimates except for the SEC registration fee.
    
Amount
 
SEC registration fee
$
140,101
Accountants’ fees and expenses
75,000
Legal fees and expenses
125,000
Printing fees
75,000
Miscellaneous
17,740
Total expenses
$
432,841
Discounts, concessions, commissions and similar selling expenses attributable to the sale of shares of Common Stock covered by this prospectus will be borne by the selling
securityholders. We will pay all expenses (other than discounts, concessions, commissions and similar selling expenses) relating to the registration of the shares with the Securities and
Exchange Commission, as estimated in the table above.
Item 14. Indemnification of Directors and Officers
Section 145 of the Delaware General Corporation Law authorizes a court to award, or a corporation’s board of directors to grant, indemnity to directors and officers in terms
sufficiently broad to permit such indemnification under certain circumstances for liabilities, including reimbursement for expenses incurred, arising under the Securities Act of 1933,
as amended, or the Securities Act.
Our Charter provides for indemnification of our directors, officers, employees and other agents to the maximum extent permitted by the Delaware General Corporation Law, and our
Bylaws provide for indemnification of our directors, officers, employees and other agents to the maximum extent permitted by the Delaware General Corporation Law.
In addition, we have entered into indemnification agreements with our directors, officers, and some employees containing provisions which are in some respects broader than the
specific indemnification provisions contained in the Delaware General Corporation Law. The indemnification agreements will require us, among other things, to indemnify our
directors against certain liabilities that may arise by reason of their status or service as directors and to advance their expenses incurred as a result of any proceeding against them as to
which they could be indemnified.
Item 15. Recent Sales of Unregistered Securities
The following list sets forth information regarding all unregistered securities sold by Atlas Crest Investment Corp. (“Atlas”) and Archer Aviation Inc. (prior to the Closing of the
Business Combination) since January 1, 2018:
(1) In October 2020, the Sponsor purchased 12,500,00 shares of Class A Common Stock for an aggregate purchase price of $25,000, or approximately $0.002 per share, in
connection with Atlas’ organization. Upon Closing, each share of Atlas Class B Shares automatically converted into a share of Atlas Class A Common Stock in accordance
with Atlas’ certificate of incorporation.


II-1
(2) In October 2020, the Sponsor purchased an aggregate of 8,000,000 Private Placement Warrants at a price of $1.50 per private warrant, generating gross proceeds of $12.0
million. Each Private Placement Warrants is exercisable for one share of Class A Common Stock of the combined company.
(3) In July 2021, Legacy Archer issued 423,282 warrants to Silicon Valley Bank. Upon Closing, the warrants were automatically exchanged for warrants to purchase an
aggregate of 732,280 shares of Class A Common Stock at an exercise price of $11.50 per share.


Table of Contents
II-2
(4) In September 2021, upon Closing, we issued an aggregate of 60,000,000 shares of Class A Common Stock of the combined company for an aggregate purchase price of
$600.0 million to qualified institutional buyers and accredited investors, at a purchase price of $10.00.
None of the foregoing transactions involved any underwriters, underwriting discounts or commissions, or any public offering. We believe each of these transactions was exempt from
registration under the Securities Act in reliance on Section 4(a)(2) of the Securities Act (and Regulation D promulgated thereunder) as transactions by an issuer not involving any
public offering or Rule 701 promulgated under Section 3(b) of the Securities Act as transactions by an issuer under benefit plans and contracts relating to compensation as provided
under Rule 701. The recipients of the securities in each of these transactions represented their intentions to acquire the securities for investment only and not with a view to or for sale
in connection with any distribution thereof, and appropriate legends were placed on the share certificates issued in these transactions. All recipients had adequate access, through their
relationships with us, to information about us. The sales of these securities were made without any general solicitation or advertising.


Table of Contents
Item 16. Exhibits and Financial Statement Schedules.
(a) Exhibits.
The exhibits listed below are filed as part of this registration statement
Exhibit
Number
    
Description
    
Schedule/
Form
    
File No.
    
Exhibit
    
Filing Date
2.1†
Amended and Restated Business Combination Agreement, dated as of
July 29, 2021, by and among Atlas Crest Investment Corp., Artemis
Acquisition Sub Inc. and Archer Aviation Inc.
8-K
001-39668
2.1
July 29, 2021
3.1
Amended and Restated Certificate of Incorporation of Archer Aviation
Inc.
8-K 
001-39668
3.1
September 22, 2021
3.2
Amended and Restated Bylaws of Archer Aviation Inc.
8-K
001-39668
3.2
September 22, 2021
4.1
Warrant Agreement, dated October 27, 2020, by and between the
Company and Continental Stock Transfer & Trust Company, as warrant
agent.
8-K
001-39668
4.1
November 2, 2020
5.1**
Opinion of Cooley LLP
10.1
Form of Subscription Agreement.
8-K
001-39668
10.2
February 10, 2021
10.2
Amended and Restated Registration Rights Agreement, by and between
the Company and certain stockholders, dated September 16, 2021.
 8-K
001-39668
10.2
September 22, 2021
10.3
Amended and Restated Sponsor Letter Agreement, dated July 29, 2021,
by and among Atlas Crest Investment LLC, Atlas Crest Investment
Corp., Archer Aviation Inc. and the individuals named therein.
S-4
333-254007
10.1B
August 3, 2021
10.4
Form of Transaction Support Agreement
S-4
333-254007
10.2
March 8,2021
10.5+
Archer 2019 Equity Incentive Plan.
8-K
001-39668
3.2
September 22, 2021
10.6+
Form of Stock Option Grant Package under Archer 2019 Equity
Incentive Plan.
8-K
001-39668
3.2
September 22, 2021
10.7+
Form of RSU Grant Package under 2019 Equity Incentive Plan.
8-K
001-39668
3.2
September 22, 2021
10.8+
Archer 2021 Equity Incentive Plan.
8-K
001-39668
3.2
September 22, 2021
10.9+
Form of Stock Option Grant Package under Archer 2021 Equity
Incentive Plan.
8-K
001-39668
3.2
September 22, 2021
10.10+
Form of RSU Grant Package under Archer 2021 Equity Incentive Plan.
8-K
001-39668
3.2
September 22, 2021
10.11+
Archer 2021 Employee Stock Purchase Plan.
8-K
001-39668
3.2
September 22, 2021
10.12+
Offer Letter, dated September 16, 2021, by and between the Company
and Brett Adcock.
8-K
001-39668
3.2
September 22, 2021
10.13+
Offer Letter, dated September 16, 2021, by and between the Company
and Adam Goldstein.
8-K
001-39668
3.2
September 22, 2021
10.14+
Offer Letter, dated November 19, 2019, by and between the Company
and Tom Muniz.
S-4
333-254007
10.19
August 10, 2021
10.15+
Offer Letter, dated June 24, 2021, by and between the Company and Ben
Lu.
S-4
333-254007
10.18
August 10, 2021
10.16+
Offer Letter, dated May 5, 2021, by and between the Company and Andy
Missan.
S-4
333-254007
10.17
August 10, 2021


II-3
10.17
Sublease Agreement, dated July 1, 2020, by and between Aurora
Innovation, Inc. and Archer Aviation Inc.
S-4
333-254007
10.12
August 10, 2021


Table of Contents
II-4
Exhibit
Number
    
Description
    
Schedule/
Form
    
File No.
    
Exhibit
    
Filing Date
10.18
Lease Agreement, dated December 11, 2020, by and between Jack
Dymond Lathing Co. and Archer Aviation Inc.
S-4
333-254007
10.13
August 10, 2021
10.19
Sublease Agreement, dated March 1, 2020, by and between Delta Mike
Enterprises, LLC and Archer Aviation Inc.
S-4
333-254007
10.14
August 10, 2021
10.20
Lease Agreement, dated April 14, 2021, by and between NC
Investments, LLC and Archer Aviation Inc.
S-4
333-254007
10.15
August 10, 2021
10.21
Storage/R&D Space License Agreement, dated March 15, 2021, by and
between J.V. Lewis Enterprises, Inc. and Archer Aviation.
S-4
333-254007
10.16
August 10, 2021
10.22
Warrant to Purchase Shares, dated as of November 6, 2020, by and
among FCA US LLC and Archer Aviation Inc.
S-4
333-254007
10.8
August 3, 2021
10.23
Warrant to Purchase Shares, dated as of January 29, 2021, by and among
United Airlines, Inc. and Archer Aviation Inc.
S-4
333-254007
10.9
August 3, 2021
10.24
Loan and Security Agreement, dated July 9, 2021, by and among Silicon
Valley Bank, in its capacity as administrative agent and collateral agent,
Silicon Valley Bank and SVB Innovation Credit Fund VIII, L.P., as
lenders, and Archer Aviation Inc.
S-4
333-254007
10.10
August 3, 2021
10.25
Warrant to Purchase Shares, dated as of February 26, 2021, by and
among Mesa Air Group, Inc. and Archer Aviation Inc.
S-4
333-254007
10.11
August 3, 2021
10.26+
Form of Indemnity Agreement.
8-K
001-39668
3.2
September 22, 2021
16.1
Letter from Marcum LLP.
8-K
001-39668
3.2
September 22, 2021
21.1
List of Subsidiaries.
8-K
001-39668
3.2
September 22, 2021
23.1*
Consent of PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP.
23.2*
Consent of Marcum LLP.
24.1*
Power of Attorney (included on signature page)
101.CAL
XBRL Taxonomy Extension Calculation Linkbase Document.
101.SCH
XBRL Taxonomy Extension Schema Document.
101.DEF
XBRL Taxonomy Extension Definition Linkbase Document.
101.LAB
XBRL Taxonomy Extension Labels Linkbase Document.
101.PRE
XBRL Taxonomy Extension Presentation Linkbase Document.
*
Filed herewith.
**
To be filed by amendment
†
Certain of the exhibits and schedules to this Exhibit have been omitted in accordance with Regulation S-K Item 601. The Registrant agrees to furnish a copy of all omitted
exhibits and schedules to the SEC upon its request
+
Indicates a management contract or compensatory plan, contract or arrangement.


Table of Contents
Item 17.  Undertakings.
(a) The undersigned registrant hereby undertakes as follows:
(1) To file, during any period in which offers or sales are being made, a post-effective amendment to this registration statement:
(i)
To include any prospectus required by Section 10(a)(3) of the Securities Act of 1933;
(ii) To reflect in the prospectus any facts or events arising after the effective date of the registration statement (or the most recent post-effective amendment thereof) which,
individually or in the aggregate, represent a fundamental change in the information set forth in the registration statement. Notwithstanding the foregoing, any increase or
decrease in volume of securities offered (if the total dollar value of securities offered would not exceed that which was registered) and any deviation from the low or high
end of the estimated maximum offering range may be reflected in the form of prospectus filed with the Commission pursuant to Rule 424(b) if, in the aggregate, the
changes in volume and price represent no more than 20 percent change in the maximum aggregate offering price set forth in the “Calculation of Registration Fee” table
in the effective registration statement;
(iii) To include any material information with respect to the plan of distribution not previously disclosed in the registration statement or any material change to such
information in the registration statement.
(2) That, for the purpose of determining any liability under the Securities Act of 1933, each such post-effective amendment shall be deemed to be a new registration statement
relating to the securities offered therein, and the offering of such securities at that time shall be deemed to be the initial bona fide offering thereof.
(3) To remove from registration by means of a post-effective amendment any of the securities being registered which remain unsold at the termination of the offering.
(4) That, for the purpose of determining liability under the Securities Act of 1933 to any purchaser, each prospectus filed pursuant to Rule 424(b) as part of a registration
statement relating to an offering, other than registration statements relying on Rule 430B or other than prospectuses filed in reliance on Rule 430A, shall be deemed to be part
of and included in the registration statement as of the date it is first used after effectiveness. Provided, however, that no statement made in a registration statement or
prospectus that is part of the registration statement or made in a document incorporated or deemed incorporated by reference into the registration statement or prospectus that
is part of the registration statement will, as to a purchaser with a time of contract of sale prior to such first use, supersede or modify any statement that was made in the
registration statement or prospectus that was part of the registration statement or made in any such document immediately prior to such date of first use.
(5) That, for the purpose of determining any liability under the Securities Act of 1933 to any purchaser in the initial distribution of the securities, the undersigned registrant
undertakes that in a primary offering of securities of the undersigned registrant pursuant to this registration statement, regardless of the underwriting method used to sell the
securities to the purchaser, if the securities are offered or sold to such purchaser by means of any of the following communications, the undersigned registrant will be a seller
to the purchaser and will be considered to offer or sell such securities to such purchaser:
(i)
Any preliminary prospectus or prospectus of the undersigned registrant relating to the offering required to be filed pursuant to Rule 424;
(ii) Any free writing prospectus relating to the offering prepared by or on behalf of the undersigned registrant or used or referred to by the undersigned registrant;
(iii) The portion of any other free writing prospectus relating to the offering containing material information about the undersigned registrant or our securities provided by or
on behalf of the undersigned registrant; and
(iv) Any other communication that is an offer in the offering made by the undersigned registrant to the purchaser.
(b) Insofar as indemnification for liabilities arising under the Securities Act of 1933 may be permitted to directors, officers and controlling persons of the undersigned pursuant to the
foregoing provisions, or otherwise, the undersigned has been advised that in the opinion of the SEC such indemnification is against public policy as expressed in the Securities


II-5
Act and is, therefore,


Table of Contents
II-6
unenforceable.  In the event that a claim for indemnification against such liabilities (other than the payment by the undersigned of expenses incurred or paid by a director, officer
or controlling person of the undersigned in the successful defense of any action, suit or proceeding) is asserted by such director, officer or controlling person in connection with
the securities being registered, the undersigned will, unless in the opinion of our counsel the matter has been settled by controlling precedent, submit to a court of appropriate
jurisdiction the question whether such indemnification by it is against public policy as expressed in the Act and will be governed by the final adjudication of such issue.


Table of Contents
SIGNATURES
Pursuant to the requirements of the Securities Act of 1933, the registrant has duly caused this registration statement to be signed on its behalf by the undersigned, thereunto
duly authorized in Palo Alto, California, on this 7th day of October 2021.
ARCHER AVIATION INC.
By:
/s/ Brett Adcock
Brett Adcock
Co-Chief Executive Officer
KNOW ALL BY THESE PRESENTS, that each person whose signature appears below hereby constitutes and appoints Brett Adcock, Adam Goldstein and Ben Lu, and
each of them, as his or her true and lawful agents, proxies and attorneys-in-fact, with full power of substitution and resubstitution, for him or her and in his or her name, place and
stead, in any and all capacities, to (i) act on, sign and file with the Securities and Exchange Commission any and all amendments (including post-effective amendments) to this
registration statement together with all schedules and exhibits thereto and any subsequent registration statement filed pursuant to Rule 462(b) under the Securities Act of 1933, as
amended, together with all schedules and exhibits thereto, (ii) act on, sign and file such certificates, instruments, agreements and other documents as may be necessary or appropriate
in connection therewith, (iii) act on and file any supplement to any prospectus included in this registration statement or any such amendment or any subsequent registration statement
filed pursuant to Rule 462(b) under the Securities Act of 1933, as amended, and (iv) take any and all actions which may be necessary or appropriate to be done, as fully for all intents
and purposes as he might or could do in person, hereby approving, ratifying and confirming all that such agent, proxy and attorney-in-fact or any of his substitutes may lawfully do or
cause to be done by virtue thereof.
Pursuant to the requirements of the Securities Act of 1933, this registration statement has been signed by the following persons in the capacities and on the dates indicated.
Signature
    
Title
Date
/s/ Brett Adcock
Co-Chief Executive Officer and Co-Chairman of the Board
(Principal Co-Executive Officer)
     October 7, 2021
Brett Adcock
/s/ Adam Goldstein
Co-Chief Executive Officer and Co-Chairman of the Board
(Principal Co-Executive Officer)
October 7, 2021
Adam Goldstein
/s/ Ben Lu
Chief Financial Officer (Principal Financial and Accounting
Officer)
October 7, 2021
Ben Lu
/s/ Deborah Diaz
Director
October 7, 2021
Deborah Diaz
/s/ Fred Diaz
Director
October 7, 2021
Fred Diaz
/s/ Oscar Munoz
Director
October 7, 2021
Oscar Munoz
/s/ Maria Pinelli
Director
October 7, 2021


II-7
Maria Pinelli
/s/ Michael Spellacy
Director
October 7, 2021
Michael Spellacy