Universality of Tip Singularity Formation in Freezing Water Drops
A drop of water deposited on a cold plate freezes into an ice drop with a pointy tip. While this
phenomenon clearly finds its origin in the expansion of water upon freezing, a quantitative description of
the tip singularity has remained elusive. Here we demonstrate how the geometry of the freezing front,
determined by heat transfer considerations, is crucial for the tip formation. We perform systematic
measurements of the angles of the conical tip, and reveal the dynamics of the solidification front in a Hele-
Shaw geometry. It is found that the cone angle is independent of substrate temperature and wetting angle,
suggesting a universal, self-similar mechanism that does not depend on the rate of solidification. We
propose a model for the freezing front and derive resulting tip angles analytically, in good agreement with
the experiments.
DOI: 10.1103/PhysRevLett.113.054301
PACS numbers: 47.20.Ft
Liquid solidification can lead to intricate morphological
structures, from dendritic growth [1] to the fascinating
complexity of snowflakes [2]. In an apparently much
simpler situation of a water drop freezing on a cold
substrate, it has been observed that the final shape of the
ice drop is pointy [3–6], with a sharp tip that is reminiscent
of the domes of orthodox churches (Fig. 1). Intriguingly,
the sharp tip appears despite the presence of liquid surface
tension, which usually tends to smooth out sharp features.
These singular ice drops can be observed in frozen water
accretion on aircraft cabins during flights [7], during
solidification for freeze drying purposes [8], and in recent
studies on supercooling [9] and icing of substrates [10]. A
similar mechanism is thought to be at the origin of the
formation of spiky microstructures following the irradiation
by high-power ultrashort lasers in germanium and silicon
substrates [11], which like water are materials that expand
upon freezing.
Though the formation of pointy ice drops has been
attributed to the expansion of water upon freezing, there
is still no satisfactory explanation for this phenomenon.
Previous studies revealed that the freezing can indeed yield
a tip singularity, by modeling a planar solidification front
reaching the top of the drop [3,5]. However, these theories
predict a singularity only when the ratio of solid and liquid
densities is below 0.75: this clearly does not explain the
appearance of conical ice drops, since for water ν≡ρs=ρl ¼
0.92. The paradox can be resolved by assuming that the
freezing dynamics induces a contact angle, with a slope
discontinuity at the solid-liquid-air trijunction point that
depends on the freezing rate [3].
Alternatively, the singularity was also recovered for
realistic ν when numerically treating the solidification
dynamics in full detail, but without the assumption of a
dynamic co
FIG. 1 (color online).
Experimental setup. (a) Water drops are
deposited on a copper plate immersed in a cooling bath of
ethylene-glycol, ethanol, and dry ice. (b) The shape of the
advancing freezing front can be observed using a 2D-like
Hele-Shaw setup. (c) A freezing water droplet with red dye.
The position of the trijunction point is clearly visible, while the
images give also give a qualitative impression of the geometry of
the freezing front.
PRL 113, 054301 (2014)
P H Y S I C A L
R E V I E W
L E T T E R S
week ending
1 AUGUST 2014
0031-9007=14=113(5)=054301(5)
054301-1
© 2014 American Physical Society


ntact angle [4,12]. The true mechanism behind the tip
singularity has therefore remained elusive, in particular
since there is a lack of systematic experiments to which any
of the theories can be compared.
In this Letter we reveal that the geometry of the freezing
front, essentially determined by the final stages of a
quasisteady heat transfer problem, is responsible for the
formation of pointy ice drops. First, we experimentally
show that the cone angles at the tip are universal, and do
not depend on the substrate temperature, excluding the
influence of the solidification rate. Next, we reveal the
boundary conditions of the solidification front by tracking
the freezing process in a Hele-Shaw geometry. It is found
experimentally, and explained theoretically from heat con-
duction, that the front develops a spherical shape that ends
perpendicularly to the solid-air interface. Taking this into
account into the mass balance during solidification, we then
show how the singularity emerges for any density ratio
ν < 1. The theory predicts a cone angle α ¼ 131° for water
drops [α defined in Fig. 1(c)], which falls within the range
of experimental observations.
Experiments.—Droplets
of
pure
water
(milli-Q,
degassed) were frozen on a copper structure that is partially
immersed in a cooling bath composed of ethylene-glycol,
ethanol, and dry ice [Fig. 1(a)]. With this mixture, the
temperature can be controlled in the range −78 to −17 °C
by modifying the volume fraction of the two liquids [13].
Droplets of volume 4–8 μl were deposited using a syringe
pump (Harvard Apparatus PHD ULTRA) and a 200 μm
capillary. The temperature on the plate was measured near
the droplet using a thermocouple. We focus here on
temperatures above −44 °C, for which reproducible experi-
ments could be performed. At lower temperatures nondi-
rectional freezing and multiple freezing fronts appear.
The freezing process was recorded, using a PCO camera
(Sensicam QE), a long distance microscope (Edmund
Optics VZM1000), and diffused back lighting, until the
tip was formed.
We extracted the final shape of the drops through image
analysis and fitted third-order polynomials to the left-hand
and right-hand regions close to the tip. The angle of the tip
is then computed as the intersecting angle of the poly-
nomials, with an experimental error bar of 5° on average.
The total time for the solidification is on the order of
1 sec for the coldest cases and 10 sec for the warmest.
Importantly, the liquid near the contact line freezes long
before reaching the equilibrium contact angle, so that
different contact angles can be achieved by varying the
height of deposition. This results in drops of different
aspect ratio H=R, where H is defined as the final height of
the ice drop and R the radius of the wetted area [see Fig 2(a)
for geometric definitions and Fig. 2(b) for typical droplet
shapes]. Various movies of the freezing process can be
found as Supplemental Material [14].
Figure 2(b) shows typical shapes of ice drops, as
obtained for different temperatures and contact angles.
Despite the large disparity of drop shapes, the formation of
the tip singularity appears to be independent of contact
angle and substrate temperature. This can be inferred from
Fig. 2(c), where we report the cone angle α for more than
200 experiments, carried out at different temperatures
(horizontal axis) and for different aspect ratios (upward
or downward symbols). All measurements fall within a
well-defined range of tip angles, characterized by an
average and standard deviation α ¼ 139°  8°. The data
give no evidence for any correlation of α with temperature
and aspect ratio. The experiments thus show that the tip
formation is not influenced by global geometry of the drop,
FIG. 2 (color online).
Tip formation on freezing drops. (a) Sketch of the geometry during the final stages of the freezing process. θ is
the angle formed by the liquid interface with the horizontal, ϕ is that formed by the solid-frozen interface with the horizontal, and α is the
final tip angle. The drop radius R, and the “downward volume” Vd are also defined. (b) Drops with different contact angles (i.e., aspect
ratios) are achieved by changing the deposition height, at different temperatures. (c) Measurement of the tip angle α for the full range of
temperatures explored. Base-down triangles represent data from droplets at high contact angles and therefore a height-to-radius aspect
ratio H=R > 1. Base-up triangles represent drops with low contact angle characterized by aspect ratios H=R < 1. We find no systematic
dependence of α with global drop shape and substrate temperature. The gray line indicates the theoretical prediction (4).
PRL 113, 054301 (2014)
P H Y S I C A L
R E V I E W
L E T T E R S
week ending
1 AUGUST 2014
054301-2


or by the rate at which the solidification occurs—the latter
suggesting that the singularity is the outcome of a quasi-
static process. The observed variability in α is beyond the
accuracy of the measurement, and appears to be due to the
conditions in which the experiments were performed, i.e.,
with the droplet exposed to air currents and vapor from the
cooling bath.
Freezing front.—To obtain further insight in the tip
formation, we next investigate the shape of the solidifica-
tion front. The still images in Fig. 1(c) suggest that the
front does not remain planar, as was also discussed in
Refs. [15,16]. However, in order to achieve quantitative
access to the advancing front, we constructed a Hele-Shaw
cell with two microscope slides separated by a 1 mm spacer
[Fig. 1(b)]. The cell was placed on the copper plate and the
capillary carefully maneuvered between the walls. The
gap is wide enough for the drop to form a conical tip, but
this is not always visible due to the presence of a wetting
meniscus. To minimize image distortion due to this
meniscus, the glass is treated such that the wetting contact
angle ≈90°. This gives a clear view on the quasi-two-
dimensional freezing process—typical videos can be found
in the Supplemental Material [14].
Figure 3(a) shows that the solidification front in the
Hele-Shaw cell grows towards the top of the drop in a
similar fashion to the unconfined experiment, although the
time scale of the process is a bit faster. In the first instants of
the process, vapor condensates on the glass slides resulting
in a “frost halo” [9] around the drop. Such an event occurs
simultaneously as the partial and kinetically controlled
recalescent freezing [17], also visible in Fig. 3(a) as a
brighter area above the freezing front.
Our prime interest here is to extract quantitative infor-
mation on the geometry of the freezing front. The front
shown in Fig. 3(a) has a convex shape at the early stage of
the freezing, while at the last stages the curvature it is
inverted towards a concave geometry. Interestingly, these
profiles closely resemble two-dimensional numerical sim-
ulations [4]. At all times, the experimentally observed
freezing front appears to be perpendicular to the ice-air
interface. This is confirmed in Fig. 3(c), where we present
the angle γ ¼ θ þ ϕ defined in Fig. 3(b), as a function of
the height z of the trijunction point. The red line corre-
sponds to the average over 20 experiments, performed at
temperatures ranging from −30 to −15 °C. We find that the
front is nearly perpendicular during the entire experiment.
During the final stages we find an average and standard
deviation γ ¼ 87°  8°.
Heat-transfer-limited self-similar freezing dynamics.—
Coming back to the axisymmetric case we now derive the
shape of the solid-liquid front from the heat transfer in the
late stages of the freezing process [cf. Fig. 2(a)]. We neglect
any small-scale kinetic undercooling or Gibbs-Thomson
effect (as considered, e.g., in Ref. [12]), such that the front
here always remains at the equilibrium melting temperature
Tm. As the air surrounding the drop has a much smaller
thermal conductivity than the solid (and the liquid), the
latent heat released by the advancing front must be
FIG. 3 (color online).
Freezing experiments with droplets sandwiched in a Hele-Shaw cell. (a) Evolution of the freezing front (green
line) in different stages of the process. (b) Sketch and definitions of angles and distances. (c) Front-to-interface angle γ plotted against
the relative height of the freezing front z=H. Within experimental variations, we find γ ≈90°.
PRL 113, 054301 (2014)
P H Y S I C A L
R E V I E W
L E T T E R S
week ending
1 AUGUST 2014
054301-3


evacuated via the solid, while the liquid remains at uniform
temperature Tm. The fact that heat cannot cross the solid-air
boundary has an important consequence: it implies that the
isotherms, in particular the freezing front at Tm, are locally
perpendicular to the solid-air boundary, i.e., γ ¼ 90°. This
simple argument is in good agreement with the Hele-Shaw
cell experiments, even though heat transfer via the glass
slides might not be entirely negligible there.
The final stages of the heat transfer are expected to be
self-similar. Namely, the angle γ made by the front with the
external surface remains approximately constant, and the
freezing is characterized by a single length scale r, the radius
at the triple junction [Fig. 2(b)]. Based on this length, one
can derive a scaling law for the normal velocity vn of the
front, which is proportional to the rate at which latent heat
released by the front is evacuated. This gives vn ∼−dr=dt∼
λsδT=ρsLmr, where λs is the solid thermal conductivity,
Lm is the latent heat of melting, and the undercooling
δT ¼ Tm −T. Here we assumed that the heat transfer
process in the solid is quasisteady, i.e., that the time scale
of front motion r=vn is much larger than the thermal
diffusion time scale r2=κs, where κs is the thermal diffusivity
of the solid. Taking into account that κs ¼ λs=ρscp;s, where
cp;s is the thermal capacity of the solid, this is equivalent to
assuming that the Stefan number S ¼ cp;sδT=Lm is small
[4]. Actually, we find S ¼ 0.27 for the maximal value of
δT ¼ 44 K in our experiments, such that this quasisteadi-
ness assumption is sufficiently accurate here [as also con-
firmed in Fig. 2(c)]. Note that solving the above energy
balance for r leads to a classical r2 law; i.e., r2 decreases
linearly with time during tip formation.
The above theory also provides the self-similar shape of
the freezing front, which is crucial for understanding the tip
formation. The heat transfer problem amounts to solving
∇2T ¼ 0 in the solid, with the boundary condition that
the isotherms make an angle γ ¼ 90°. When the solid
approaches a conical shape, the resulting isotherms are
portions of concentric spheres centered at the final cone
tip [Fig. 2(a)]. The two-dimensional equivalent is that the
freezing front is a portion of a circle—in good agreement
with the concave shape in the final stage [Fig. 3(a)]. This
solution is stable with respect to dendrite formation given
that cooling is from the solid side [1]. Hence, the front will
remain spherical during the self-similar final stages of tip
formation.
Geometric theory for tip formation.—The results above
point towards a scenario where the tip is formed by a
quasistatic mechanism. Based on this, we propose a model
in the spirit of Ref. [3], but taking into account the self-
similar spherical geometry of the freezing front. The
starting point is mass conservation
d
dz ðVl þ νVsÞ ¼ 0;
ð1Þ
here expressed in terms of liquid and solid volumes
Vl;s and density ratio ν. Since temporal dynamics is
unimportant, the conservation law has been written in
terms of a derivative with respect to z, the height of the
trijunction. The total liquid volume can be decomposed into
a spherical cap of angle θ and a downward volume Vd
[cf. Fig. 2(a)]. The liquid and solid volumes then are
Vl ¼ r3fðθÞ þ Vd;
Vs ¼ −Vd þ
Z z
0
dz0πrðz0Þ2;
ð2Þ
where rðzÞ and θðzÞ are the local radius and angle of the
frozen drop, and the geometry of a spherical cap gives
fðθÞ ¼ π
3
2–3 cos θ þ cos3θ
sin3θ

:
ð3Þ
Closing the problem requires an expression for Vd, which
in general implies a full solution of the solidification
front. For the final stages, however, we can take advantage
of our previous observation that the front develops a
spherical shape with downward angle ϕ ¼ γ −θ, such that
Vd ¼ r3fðγ −θÞ. With this, and taking into account
that dr=dz ¼ −1= tan θ, Eqs. (1)–(3) give a closed set of
equations for rðzÞ, indeed predicting a sharp tip as r→0
[18]. At the singularity, θ obeys
fðγ −θÞ þ fðθÞ ¼ ν

fðγ −θÞ þ π
3 tan θ

;
ð4Þ
from which we can infer α ¼ π −2θ, for any density ratio.
The central result of this analysis is that, combined with
our result that γ ¼ 90°, Eq. (4) gives a parameter-free
prediction for the tip angle of ice drops: α ¼ 131°. This is
consistent with our experimental observation α ¼ 139°8°,
though most experiments are slightly above the theoretical
prediction. We tentatively attribute the experimentally
observed variability in the cone angle to variations of γ.
Inserting the γ variations measured in the Hele-Shaw cell in
Eq. (4) indeed gives α ¼ 133°  5°, in close agreement
with experiments.
Equation (4) has an elegant interpretation in terms of
the volumes before and after freezing. After multiplication
by r3, the left-hand side represents the unfrozen liquid
volume, consisting of two spherical caps. This mass is to
be transformed into ice, where due to the expansion factor
ν the upward liquid sphere is transformed into a cone of
volume ðπ=3Þr3 tan θ. The tip angle is thus determined
from purely geometrical considerations. Interestingly,
the model does not display a critical density ratio: a tip
is formed even for 0 < 1 −ν ≪1. This can be seen by
expansion of Eq. (4), yielding a nonzero angle θ ¼
ð12=πÞfðγÞð1 −νÞ, in radians. This is in marked contrast
with the model where the solidification front was assumed
PRL 113, 054301 (2014)
P H Y S I C A L
R E V I E W
L E T T E R S
week ending
1 AUGUST 2014
054301-4


planar [3,5], which predicted tip formation only for ν below
a critical value 3=4.
Outlook.—This offers a fundamentally new view of
freezing phenomena near free surfaces, valid beyond the
ice-cone formation studied here: our findings provide the
first direct measurement of the boundary condition for
the freezing front, and highlight that geometric aspects are
more critical than dynamical effects. The confinement of
heat transfer within the solid-liquid system is a generic
feature of solidification near free surfaces. The results are
therefore expected to have impact on a broad variety of
applications, such as icing, drop impact on cold surfaces,
and solidification during 3D printing.
A. G. M. and O. R. E. contributed equally to the Letter
and their names in the author list are interchangeable.
We thank Koen Winkels for many discussions. J. H. S.
acknowledges financial support from NWO through
VIDI Grant No. 11304. P. C. acknowledges financial sup-
port from FRS-FNRS and BELSPO (IAP 7/38 μ-MAST).
[1] M. E. Glicksman, Principles of Solidification (Springer,
New York, 2002).
[2] K. G. Libbrecht, Rep. Prog. Phys. 68, 855 (2005).
[3] D. M. Anderson, M. G. Worster, and S. H. Davis, J. Cryst.
Growth 163, 329 (1996).
[4] V. S. Ajaev and S. H. Davis, J. Comput. Phys. 187, 492
(2003).
[5] J. H. Snoeijer and P. Brunet, Am. J. Phys. 80, 764 (2012).
[6] O. R. Enriquez, A. G. Marin, K. G. Winkels, and J. H.
Snoeijer, Phys. Fluids 24, 091102 (2012).
[7] See, for example, SKYbrary, “In-Flight Icing,” http://www
.skybrary.aero/index.php/In‑Flight_Icing.
[8] J. D.
Mellor
et
al.,
Fundamentals
of
Freeze-Drying
(Academic Press, London, 1978).
[9] S. Jung, M. K. Tiwari, and D. Poulikakos, Proc. Natl. Acad.
Sci. U.S.A. 109, 16073 (2012).
[10] S. Jung, M. Dorrestijn, D. Raps, A. Das, C. M. Megaridis,
and D. Poulikakos, Langmuir 27, 3059 (2011).
[11] K. W. Kolasinski, Curr. Opin. Solid State Mater. Sci. 11. 76
(2007).
[12] V. S. Ajaev and S. H. Davis, J. Cryst. Growth 264, 452
(2004).
[13] C. M. Jensen and D. W. Lee, J. Chem. Educ. 77, 629
(2000).
[14] See
Supplemental
Material
at
http://link.aps.org/
supplemental/10.1103/PhysRevLett.113.054301 for several
experimental videos of the freezing drops.
[15] M. Nauenberg, Am. J. Phys. 81, 150 (2013).
[16] J. H. Snoeijer and P. Brunet, Am. J. Phys. 81, 151 (2013).
[17] F.
Tavakoli,
A.
Sarkissians,
and
P.
Kavehpour,
arXiv:1210.3759.
[18] The tip formation is obtained by taking r →0. In this limit,
the asymptotic solution is of the form θðrÞ −θcone ¼ Arb,
where the sought for cone angle θcone is given by condition (4).
PRL 113, 054301 (2014)
P H Y S I C A L
R E V I E W
L E T T E R S
week ending
1 AUGUST 2014
054301-5


Received: 9 May 2023 |
Revised: 26 June 2023 |
Accepted: 18 July 2023
DOI: 10.1002/dro2.90
R E S E A R C H A R T I C L E
Liquid encapsulation in a freezing sessile drop
Sijia Lyu1
|
Xun Zhu1
|
Dominique Legendre2
|
Chao Sun1,3
1Center for Combustion Energy, Key Laboratory for Thermal Science and Power Engineering of Ministry of Education, Department of Energy and Power Engineering,
Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
2Institut de Mécanique des Fluides de Toulouse (IMFT), Université de Toulouse, CNRS‐Toulouse, France
3Department of Engineering Mechanics, School of Aerospace Engineering, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
Correspondence
Chao Sun, Center for Combustion Energy, Key
Laboratory for Thermal Science and Power
Engineering of Ministry of Education,
Department of Energy and Power Engineering,
Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China.
Email: chaosun@tsinghua.edu.cn
Funding information
Natural Science Foundation of China,
Grant/Award Numbers: 11988102, 91852202,
11861131005; New Cornerstone Science
Foundation; China Postdoctoral Science
Foundation, Grant/Award Numbers:
2022T150068, 2021M700507
Abstract
During the solidification of a sessile drop, the effect of heat exchange from the
gaseous environmental medium is generally ignored. However, by combining
experimental observations, direct numerical simulations, and a theoretical model,
we have demonstrated that the environmental medium, particularly one with high
thermal conductivity such as a liquid, has nonnegligible heat exchange with both the
drop and the substrate, leading to accelerated cooling of the outer surface of the
sessile drop. Consequently, it causes alterations in the geometry of the freezing
front and ultimately results in the formation of a solidified shell that encloses the
drop. Furthermore, the encapsulated liquid continues to solidify, which induces
volume change and consequently changes the final outcome of the freezing process.
This study highlights the importance of considering the properties of the
environmental medium and provides novel strategies to manipulate the freezing
rate and reshape the morphology of the solidified drop.
INTRODUCTION
Solidification of a sessile drop is very common and significant in nature
and industry. Especially in the cold winter season, accumulating frozen
drops on substrates may cause various adverse effects, such as fracture
electrical wires,1 aviation safety hazards,2 and added load on wind
turbines.3 On the other hand, solidification of molten material drops is
pivotal in advanced manufacturing industries, such as thermal spraying,4
three‐dimensional (3D) printing,5 and laser beam welding.6 Different
solidification rates and final frozen morphologies could cause variations
in the structure and strength of materials.
Many factors can influence the freezing dynamics of drops.
These influencing factors are mainly divided into three categories. The
first category is related to the characteristics of drops, such as size,7,8
physical properties of the material,9,10 initial configuration,11,12 and
impact velocity.13–15 The second category is related to the substrate,
such as substrate temperature16,17 and wettability.18–22 The third
category is related to the environmental medium, which is generally
ignored. The common stationary gaseous environmental medium is
usually regarded as adiabatic due to very low thermal conductivity.10
However, when the environmental medium is flowing, changes in the
heat transfer process and the geometry of the drop result in different
final frozen morphologies.23–26 Besides, if water vapor exists in the
gaseous environmental medium, it may condense on the freezing drop
surface and the released latent heat could affect the freezing front
kinetics, the tip angle of a frozen drop, and even induce the growth of
ice crystals at the drop tip.27–30 In addition, the presence of a
neighboring drop induces nonuniform cooling at the droplet–gas
interface of a sessile drop, which may cause its asymmetrical
solidification.31 From these investigations, it is clear that even a little
Droplet. 2023;2:e90.
1 of 7
|
wileyonlinelibrary.com/journal/dro2
https://doi.org/10.1002/dro2.90
This is an open access article under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits use, distribution and reproduction in any medium,
provided the original work is properly cited.
© 2023 The Authors. Droplet published by Jilin University and John Wiley & Sons Australia, Ltd.


heat transfer from the surrounding medium can obviously affect the
freezing dynamics of a sessile drop. When a sessile drop is deposited
within a liquid or gel environmental medium with higher conductivity or
when the temperature difference between a drop and the environ-
mental medium is very high, the heat transfer between the drop and the
environmental medium becomes nonnegligible. In this paper, we will
show an intriguing effect of the heat exchange with the environmental
medium on the freezing dynamics of a sessile drop by combining
experiments, simulations, and a theoretical model.
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
External freezing dynamics: In experiments, we deposit water drops
within gaseous and liquid environmental media with typical different
thermal conductivities. A simple sketch of the experiment setup and
some cross‐sectional characteristic parameters of the drop is shown in
Figure 1a. Using a microliter‐pipette, degassed and deionized water
drops with a constant volume V = 10 μL
l
are deposited on the
substrate. In Figure 1b, the gaseous environmental medium of low
thermal conductivity is nitrogen. The specific thermal conductivity ratio
of the environmental medium to the solidified phase, λ
λ
∕
e
s, is 0.01. In
addition, nitrogen can avoid the effect of water vapor condensation.
When the substrate temperature Tw approaches −9°C, a water drop
starts to freeze. From the side view, the front light illuminates the ice
part. Visible freezing fronts are shown as the orange solid lines. During
solidification, the drop outer surface and front geometry always remain
symmetric. Figure 1c shows that the external contour of the completely
solidified drop is smooth and symmetric, with a tip angle of 136°, which
is in agreement with previous observations.10,27 In Figure 1d, the liquid
environmental medium of high thermal conductivity is silicone oil. The
conductivity ratio λ
λ
/
e
s is changed to 0.06. The initial height of the oil
bath is 2 mm. A water drop starts to freeze on the substrate at
T = −10°C
w
. The backlight illuminates the water part and makes it easy
to identify the freezing front. For the environmental medium of high
thermal conductivity, the freezing dynamics of a sessile drop change
dramatically. First, on comparing the second column in Figure 1b,d, it is
clear that both visible freezing fronts are symmetric, but the curvature
of the freezing front near the triple line is larger in the environmental
medium with a high conductivity ratio λ
λ
/
e
s. Second, on comparing the
second and third images in Figure 1d, it is clear that a dark ice crystal
structure appears near the top of the drop, which is indicated by a blue
arrow. This ice structure is nearly immobile (a more complete process is
shown in Supporting Information: Movie S2), which means that it could
limit part of the drop's outer surface. In addition, as a green arrow
indicates, a clear ice shell appears on the drop's outer surface, and the
ice in the middle is cloudy. The divergence of the backlight
transmittance may result from the sequence of solidification. The first
frozen ice is the cleanest and purest, which pushes air bubbles and
impurities out32,33 and causes the remaining ice to become cloudy.
Thus, the experimental result indicates that the outer surface of the
drop may freeze before part of the internal water trapped inside the ice
shell. These special ice structures are not found for a freezing sessile
drop in nitrogen. Third, the drop's outer profile in the environmental
medium with a high conductivity ratio breaks the symmetry, as shown
in the third and fourth images in Figure 1d. A nonsmooth asymmetric
frozen drop finally forms (shown in Figure 1e), which is totally different
from the result in the case of nitrogen (shown in Figure 1c).
Encapsulated drop: To precisely explain the different phenomena
observed in different environmental media, a detailed investigation of
the freezing process in the drop is required. For this purpose, we
perform well‐controlled direct numerical simulations (DNS) of the
Navier–Stokes equations and the solidification process using the
in‐house developed code named JADIM.34–36 This numerical method
can accurately simulate the quasi‐equilibrium isotropic solidification
process without protrusions or dendritic crystal structures. For more
FIGURE 1
Experimental investigations of a freezing sessile water drop in different environmental media. (a) Simple sketch of the
experimental setup and some cross‐sectional parameters. (b) A water drop freezes in the gaseous environmental medium (nitrogen) with a
conductivity ratio λ
λ
/
= 0.01
e
s
. See Supporting Information: Movie S1. (d) A water drop freezes in the liquid environmental medium
(silicone oil) with λ
λ
/
= 0.06
e
s
. See Supporting Information: Movie S2. External contours of two completely solidified drops are compared
in (c, e). Visible freezing fronts are shown as orange solid lines. A fixed ice crystal structure and an ice shell are indicated by a blue arrow
and a green arrow, respectively.
LYU ET AL.
|
2 of 7
 27314375, 2023, 4, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/dro2.90 by Tsinghua University Library, Wiley Online Library on [08/01/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License


details on the numerical method and validation, please refer to our
previous paper.36
We systematically investigate an axisymmetric sessile water drop
that freezes in different environmental media with different thermal
conductivities. Figure 2 shows the evolution of freezing drops on the
cross‐section. The initial geometry of a drop is a spherical cap with a
radius R = 1mm. The effect of the contact angle on drop‐freezing
dynamics has been studied in our previous work.36 Here, we set
the contact angle at θ = 90°. At the initial moment t = 0 s, the
temperature of the drop T
li and that of the environmental medium T
ei
are equal at 20°C. The cold wall temperature Tw is always maintained
at −20°C. The Stefan number Ste
C
T
T
L
=
(
−
)/
ps
f
w
is 0.12, where Cps is
the specific heat capacity of ice, T
f is the freezing point of water, and
L is the latent heat of solidification. The color in Figure 2 shows the
temperature distribution, and the color map shows the temperature
range. Red and black lines, respectively, represent liquid–solid
interfaces and outer surfaces of drops.
In Figure 2a, the environmental medium, the liquid phase,
and the solidified phase are nitrogen, water, and ice, and their
thermal conductivities are λe = 0.026 W/(m K), λl = 0.555 W/(m K),
and λs = 2.187 W/(m K), respectively. Other physical properties are
shown in Supporting Information. As freezing starts, the drop and the
environmental medium are meanwhile cooled down by the cold
substrate. Once the liquid temperature is lower than its freezing point
T = 0°C
f
, the liquid phase is transformed into the solid phase. In our
simulations, for water drop solidification, the drop volume expansion
is induced by the density difference,37 and the deformation of the
liquid phase is controlled by the balance of surface tension and
gravity. These two conditions change the drop's outer profile.36 Thus,
on comparing the leftmost and the rightmost images in Figure 2a, it is
clear that the height of the frozen drop obviously increases and a tip
appears at the top of the drop. These observations have been
confirmed in experiments.10,38,39 Another characteristic is the curved
shape of the freezing front.40,41 Because the conductivity ratio λ
λ
/
e
s
is 0.01 and the temperature difference between the drop surface and
the environmental medium is not large, most of the released latent
heat is transferred through the solidified phase to the cold
substrate,42 with an isothermal freezing front nearly perpendicular
to the surface of the drop.10 Finally, the freezing front clearly
converges to the drop apex, resulting in tip formation. The freezing
time in this case is 3.6 s.
However, when the conductivity of the environmental medium
λe further increases, the freezing dynamics of a sessile drop are
significantly impacted. Figure 2b,c shows results when the conduc-
tivity ratio is increased to λ
λ
/
e
s = 0.06 and 0.59. The simulations
clearly reveal the formation of a liquid in the frozen drop. As the
conductivity ratio increases, the solidification rate of the triple line
increases, resulting in a change in the shape of the icing front and
encapsulation of the liquid phase when the drop's outer surface is
fully solidified. A small encapsulated liquid formation is shown in
FIGURE 2
Numerical investigations of a freezing sessile water drop in environmental media with different thermal conductivities.
(a–c) Images show the evolution of a freezing drop on the cross‐section. Red and black lines represent freezing fronts and outer surfaces of
drops, respectively. The thermal conductivity ratio of the environmental medium to the solidified phase λ
λ
/
e
s = 0.01, 0.06, and 0.59. The third
column shows the precise moment the drop's outer surface is completely solidified. The drop height at this moment is defined as ha. The color
of the background shows the temperature distribution, and the temperature range is shown in the color map. The numerical solidification
processes of (a) and (c) are shown in Supporting Information: Movies S3 and S4. Scale bars in white: 0.5 mm.
3 of 7
|
DROPLET
 27314375, 2023, 4, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/dro2.90 by Tsinghua University Library, Wiley Online Library on [08/01/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License


Figure 2b, while a much larger volume of liquid is encapsulated in
Figure 2c. We define the corresponding encapsulation time as tb and
h
h
h
=
−
i
b
c as the height of the encapsulated liquid, where hb and hc
are the freezing front heights at the triple line and the central axis,
respectively (see Figure 1a). Note that the geometry of the drop after
encapsulation is fixed in the simulation because the ice is considered
perfectly rigid, while it may deform and crack in the experiments as
shown in Figure 1d,e and described in the following.
Time evolution of the freezing front height in Figure 2a,c is
compared in Figure 3a. For the case of low conductivity ratio
λ
λ
/
= 0.01
e
s
, the central height hc increases at a slower rate than hb
in the beginning, but its growth rate rapidly increases toward the end.
Finally, hc and hb nearly meanwhile reach the drop apex. However, for
the case of high conductivity ratios such as λ
λ
/
= 0.59
e
s
, due to the
cooling effect of the environmental medium, the height of the triple line
increases much faster. Just after 1 s, the triple line reaches the drop
apex, while the evolution of hc is similar to that of low conductivity
ratios. Thus, a large height difference hi occurs at t = 1 s, which indicates
that a large amount of water remains in the encapsulated drop.
The characteristic parameters for ice shell formation on the drop
surface, that is, the encapsulation time tb for the surface ice shell to
reach the drop apex and the corresponding drop height ha (see
Figure 2c), are plotted as functions of λ
λ
∕
e
s in Figure 3b,c. The height
is normalized by the drop initial height h = 1mm
d
and the time is
normalized using the characteristic thermal diffusion time of the liquid
phase, t
h
α
=
∕
= 7.58 s
d
d2
l
, where αl is the thermal diffusivity of water.
As λ
λ
∕
e
s increases, t
t
∕
b
d decreases, and h
h
∕
a
d decreases slightly,
except for the lowest two ratios. This means that an environmental
medium with higher conductivity may promote a faster encapsulation
process and lower apex height of the encapsulated drop.
Freezing front: In addition, the morphology of the freezing front
dramatically changes as λ
λ
∕
e
s increases, especially the curvature near
the triple line. Thus, we define the front‐to‐interface angle in the solid
phase as γ (see Figure 4a). As shown in Figure 4b, for λ
λ
∕
= 0.59
e
s
, the
angle γ decreases to less than 90° and decreases with time, which is
clearly different from the common stable gaseous environmental
medium (λ
λ
∕
= 0.01
e
s
, almost adiabatic42) with γ ≈90°.10,36
The difference in the freezing front morphology may be due to
the use of an environmental medium with high thermal conductivity,
which has nonnegligible heat exchange with the drop. To further
study
the
heat
exchange
of
the
environmental
medium,
the
distribution of the heat transfer rate is calculated by numerical
simulations. For a sessile freezing drop, there are three kinds of
external interfaces (see Figure 4a), including the ice–substrate
interface,
the
ice–environmental
medium
interface,
and
the
water–environmental medium interface. The heat transfer rate
between the base of the droplet and the cold substrate is Q1.
The heat transferred to the environmental medium through the
ice–environmental medium interface and the liquid–environmental
medium interface is represented by Q2 and Q3, respectively. In
simulations, since the density of the environmental medium and the
surface tension between the liquid phase and the environmental
medium are both constant, there is no thermal or Marangoni
convection in the environmental medium.43 We mainly consider the
heat conduction between the environmental medium and the drop.
According to Fourier's law of heat conduction, the absolute value of
the heat transfer rate is calculated by
∫
Q
λ
dA
= −
T
n
∂
∂
, where dA is the
local area and
T
n
∂
∂
is the rate of temperature change in the direction
perpendicular to the local surface. The interface area of a 3D drop is
calculated according to the axisymmetric assumption.
The time evolution of quantitative heat transfer rates through
different interfaces is plotted in Figure 4c. For a low conductivity
ratio λ
λ
∕
= 0.01
e
s
, Q1 is always considerably higher than both Q2 and
Q3, suggesting that almost the entire heat exchange of the drop is
directly transferred to the cold substrate through the ice–substrate
interface, which is in agreement with the previous work.42 Since the
thermal resistance increases with the height of the freezing front,
Q1 reduces with time. However, for a high conductivity ratio
λ
λ
∕
= 0.59
e
s
, Q2 and Q3 increase considerably. Especially close to
the encapsulation time tb, Q1 and Q2 have the same magnitude; thus,
FIGURE 3
Quantitative effect of the environmental medium's
conductivity on drop solidification. (a) Time evolution of hb and
hc for cases with λ
λ
∕
e
s = 0.01 and 0.59. (b, c) The dimensionless
encapsulation time t
t
∕
b
d and the dimensionless final height h
h
∕
a
d as
functions of λ
λ
∕
e
s. The characteristic length of the drop is its initial
height h = 1mm
d
, and the characteristic time is the thermal diffusion
time of the liquid phase, t
h
α
=
∕
d
d2
l, where αl is the thermal diffusivity
of water.
LYU ET AL.
|
4 of 7
 27314375, 2023, 4, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/dro2.90 by Tsinghua University Library, Wiley Online Library on [08/01/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License


the heat transfer rate between the environmental medium and the
drop is important. This heat transfer from the environmental medium
contributes to an increase in the freezing rate on the drop surface,
which obviously changes the morphology of the freezing front.
Explanation of experimental phenomena: These numerical results
provide a full picture of the icing process on changing the external
conductivity and allow us to explain the experimental results. For the
liquid environmental medium with high thermal conductivity, it is first
cooled by the cold substrate and then becomes another important cold
source. Then, the environmental medium cools down the drop outer
surface, which increases the freezing rate of the triple line, changes the
geometry of the freezing front with the formation of an ice shell at the
drop surface, and induces liquid encapsulation inside the drop. Special
ice structures in Figure 1d conform that a solidified shell appears on the
drop outer surface and encapsulates the drop. For a sessile water drop
freezing on a cold substrate, the solidification starts from the bottom to
the top of the drop, and the unfrozen liquid can be pushed upward
before the encapsulation time tb. After the drop is encapsulated by the
ice shell, the internal water within the shell continues to solidify and
expand, which may induce a high pressure inside the drop.44 However,
unlike an inward freezing water drop, which has a relatively uniform
thick ice shell and finally explodes,44 the ice shell on the top of the
sessile drop is very thin (see the third image in Figure 2c), which can be
easily overcome by the high pressure of the internal liquid. Thus, the
internal liquid breaks through the ice shell near the top of the drop,
flows, and freezes outside of the ice shell. Finally, a nonsmooth and
asymmetric frozen drop may form (shown in Figure 1e). However, the
deformation and rupture of the solidified phase are not considered in
simulations, and simulations are stopped at the encapsulation time tb.
Liquid encapsulation model: From the above research, we find that
when a solidified shell limits the outer surface of a freezing sessile
drop, due to the volume change of the encapsulated liquid because of
solidification, the geometry of this drop may become totally different.
Thus, liquid encapsulation is a very important characteristic of these
freezing drops. To quantitatively analyze and predict the formation
and geometric features of liquid encapsulation, a phenomenological
model is developed as detailed in Supporting Information. Consider-
ing that the cooling process at the central axis of the drop is almost
not impacted by the external medium (see Figure 3a), most of the
released latent heat is transferred to the cold substrate through the
solidified phase:
ρ L dh
dt
λ
T
h
=
Δ ,
s
c
s
c
(1)
where ρs is the density of the solidified phase, L is the latent heat of
solidification, and
T
Δ
is the temperature difference between the
freezing front and the cold substrate. Thus, the time evolution of the
central freezing front height is given by












h
λ
Tt
ρ L
=
2
Δ
.
c
s
s
1
2
(2)
The evolution of the front position at the drop surface lb (see
Figure 1a) is compared with the front propagation at the drop center
as l
fh
=
b
c, where f is the acceleration function of the freezing process
at the drop surface due to the geometry of the drop outer surface
and the cooling effect induced by the environmental medium.
Ignoring the expansion of the drop, when the triple line reaches
the drop apex, l =
θπR
b
180, the encapsulation time is












t
ρ L
λ
T
θπR
f
= 2
Δ
180
.
b
s
s
2
(3)
At this moment, if the central freezing front has not reached the
drop apex, an ice shell forms on the drop's outer surface and the
encapsulated liquid is formed inside the drop. The liquid's height hi at
the central axis normalized by the drop's initial height hd is
h
h
h
h
h
θπ
f
θ
=
−
= 1 −180 (1 −cos
) ,
i
d
d
c
d
(4)
where h
R
θ
=
(1 −cos
)
d
. According to the discussion in Supporting
Information, f depends on the contact angle θ of the drop and the
conductivity ratio λ
λ
∕
e
s. The above‐reported numerical results yield a
FIGURE 4
Geometry of the freezing front. (a) On the cross‐sectional diagram of a drop, the front‐to‐interface angle in the solid phase is
defined as γ. The heat transferred to the substrate through the base of the droplet is Q1. The heat transferred to the environmental medium
through the ice–environmental medium interface and the liquid–environmental medium interface is represented by Q2 and Q3, respectively.
(b, c) Time evolution of γ and heat transfer rates for λ
λ
∕
= 0.01 and 0.59
e
s
.
5 of 7
|
DROPLET
 27314375, 2023, 4, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/dro2.90 by Tsinghua University Library, Wiley Online Library on [08/01/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License


formula of the acceleration function, f θ λ
λ
( ,
∕
) =
(1 + 2.4
)
θπ
θ
λ
λ
e
s
180(1 −cos
)
e
s
(see the corresponding plot in Supporting Information). Using this
acceleration function and Equation (4), a predictive relationship between
the dimensionless height of the liquid h h
∕
i
d and the conductivity ratio
λ
λ
∕
e
s is
h
h
= 1 −
1
1 + 2.4
,
λ
λ
i
d
e
s
(5)
which could be used to provisionally extrapolate data for numerical
simulations.
As shown in Figure 5, Equation (5) (green line) optimally
represents the characteristics of numerical (DNS) and experimental
(EXP) results. As λ
λ
∕
e
s increases, the dimensionless height of the
liquid h h
∕
i
d increases and a decreasing slope indicates a decreasing
growth rate. Thus, for a freezing drop, when the thermal conductivity
ratio of the environmental medium to the solidified phase is large
enough, a liquid may be encapsulated in the drop. Due to the density
difference between the liquid phase and the solidified phase, the
liquid could expand or shrink as solidification, resulting in the
appearance of a crack or a cavity in the drop.
CONCLUSION
In
summary,
we
have
shown
that
heat
transfer
from
the
environmental medium to a sessile drop can drastically influence
the drop‐freezing dynamics. Environmental medium with non-
negligible heat exchange with the drop and plate can be cooled by
a cold substrate and becomes a new cooling source. The coupling
effect of different cooling sources increases the solidification rate
of the triple line and modifies the morphology of the freezing front,
and consequently, a solid shell can form on the drop's outer surface
with the formation of an encapsulated liquid. As the freezing
process continues, the liquid will expand or shrink, which can
considerably influence the final geometry of a freezing drop. For a
freezing sessile water drop, the encapsulated liquid could expand
and induce high pressure within the drop. The internal liquid breaks
through the weakest point of the ice shell, flows, and solidifies on
the ice shell, which results in a nonsmooth asymmetric frozen drop.
This study builds our understanding of the importance of an
environmental medium, and presents new strategies to change the
freezing rate and reshape the morphology of the solidified drop,
which offers new possibilities to manipulate solidification in
anti‐icing and additive manufacturing.
METHODS
Experimental settings: The environmental medium is added to a
transparent cubic cell with a width of 84 mm. The cold substrate is
made of copper with a nickel coating. A circulating bath (PolyScience
PP15R‐40) is used to cool down the substrate temperature. Since the
surface tension of water and different environmental media is
different, the wettability of the substrate is modified to obtain
similar initial drop morphology with a contact angle higher than 90°.
In silicone oil, the contact angle θ of the water drop on the nickel
coating is around 128°. In nitrogen, a hydrophobic spray (SOFT99 SF‐
04172) is used to change the wettability of the substrate and the
contact angle θ of the water drop is set to 111°.
Numerical settings: Numerical parameters are set as follows. The
following boundary conditions are considered: a no‐slip condition and a
constant temperature on the bottom wall, an outlet and adiabatic
condition on the top wall, a symmetry condition on the left boundary (the
symmetry axis), and a no‐slip boundary and adiabatic condition on the
right wall. The domain extensions along the radial and vertical directions
are both 2 mm, corresponding to twice the drop radius. The spatial and
temporal resolutions are 2 μm and 1 μs, respectively, considering the grid
and time convergence reported in our previous paper.36
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank Mingjiu Ni, Lin Shi, Feng He, Yuanyuan Duan, Shuhong
Liu, and Mingbo Li for fruitful discussions. We acknowledge Lei Yi
for helping us with the experimental setup. This work was
supported by the Natural Science Foundation of China under
Grant Nos. 11988102, 91852202, and 11861131005, the New
Cornerstone Science Foundation through the XPLORER PRIZE,
and the China Postdoctoral Science Foundation (Grant Nos.
2022T150068 and 2021M700507).
CONFLICT OF INTEREST STATEMENT
The authors declare no conflict of interest.
ORCID
Sijia Lyu
http://orcid.org/0000-0002-4546-7419
REFERENCES
1.
Szilder K, Lozowski EP, Reuter G. A study of ice accretion shape on
cables under freezing rain conditions. J Offshore Mech Arct Eng.
2002;124:162‐168.
FIGURE 5
Dimensionless height of the liquid at the central axis
h h
∕
i
d versus the conductivity ratio λ
λ
∕
e
s. The open circles correspond
to experimental data, the closed triangles correspond to numerical
data, and the green line represents the theoretical data of the model.
DNS, direct numerical simulation; EXP, experimental.
LYU ET AL.
|
6 of 7
 27314375, 2023, 4, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/dro2.90 by Tsinghua University Library, Wiley Online Library on [08/01/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License


2.
Lynch FT, Khodadoust A. Effects of ice accretions on aircraft
aerodynamics. Prog Aeronaut Sci. 2001;37:669‐767.
3.
Makkonen L, Laakso T, Marjaniemi M, Finstad KJ. Modelling and
prevention of ice accretion on wind turbines. Wind Eng. 2001;25:3‐21.
4.
Dykhuizen R. Review of impact and solidification of molten thermal
spray droplets. J Therm Spray Technol. 1994;3:351‐361.
5.
Wang C‐H, Tsai H‐L, Wu Y‐C, Hwang W‐S. Investigation of molten
metal droplet deposition and solidification for 3D printing tech-
niques. J Micromech Microeng. 2016;26:095012.
6.
Geng S, Jiang P, Guo L, Gao X, Mi G. Multi‐scale simulation of grain/
sub‐grain structure evolution during solidification in laser welding of
aluminum alloys. Int J Heat Mass Transfer. 2020;149:119252.
7.
Zhang C, Liu H. Effect of drop size on the impact thermodynamics for
supercooled large droplet in aircraft icing. Phys Fluids. 2016;28:062107.
8.
Zhang X, Wu X, Min J, Liu X. Modelling of sessile water droplet
shape evolution during freezing with consideration of supercooling
effect. Appl Therm Eng. 2017;125:644‐651.
9.
de Ruiter J, Soto D, Varanasi KK. Self‐peeling of impacting droplets.
Nat Phys. 2018;14:35‐39.
10.
Marín
AG,
Enríquez
OR,
Brunet
P,
Colinet
P,
Snoeijer
JH.
Universality of tip singularity formation in freezing water drops.
Phys Rev Lett. 2014;113:054301.
11.
Ismail MF, Waghmare PR. Universality in freezing of an asymmetric
drop. Appl Phys Lett. 2016;109:234105.
12.
Ahmadi SF, Nath S, Kingett CM, Yue P, Boreyko JB. How soap
bubbles freeze. Nat Commun. 2019;10:2531.
13.
Thiévenaz V, Séon T, Josserand C. Freezing‐damped impact of a
water drop. EPL. 2020;132:24002.
14.
Wang Y, Ju L, Han D, Wang Q. Numerical investigation of the
impacting and freezing process of a single supercooled water
droplet. Phys Fluids. 2021;33:042114
15.
Thiévenaz V, Séon T, Josserand C. Solidification dynamics of an
impacted drop. J Fluid Mech. 2019;874:756‐773.
16.
Thiévenaz V, Josserand C, Séon T. Retraction and freezing of a water
film on ice. Phys Rev Fluid. 2020;5:041601.
17.
Ghabache E, Josserand C, Séon T. Frozen impacted drop: from
fragmentation to hierarchical crack patterns. Phys Rev Lett. 2016;
117:074501.
18.
Zhang H, Zhao Y, Lv R, Yang C. Freezing of sessile water droplet for
various contact angles. Int J Therm Sci. 2016;101:59‐67.
19.
Liu J, Zhu C, Liu K, et al. Distinct ice patterns on solid surfaces with
various wettabilities. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 2017;114:11285‐11290.
20.
Dong X, Liu J, Liu S, Li Z. Quasi‐static simulation of droplet
morphologies using a smoothed particle hydrodynamics multiphase
model. Acta Mech Sin. 2019;35:32‐44.
21.
Jin Z, Zhang H, Yang Z. The impact and freezing processes of a water
droplet on a cold surface with different inclined angles. Int J Heat
Mass Transfer. 2016;103:886‐893.
22.
Schremb M, Roisman IV, Tropea C. Transient effects in ice
nucleation of a water drop impacting onto a cold substrate. Phys
Rev E. 2017;95:022805.
23.
Jung S, Tiwari MK, Doan NV, Poulikakos D. Mechanism of
supercooled droplet freezing on surfaces. Nat Commun. 2012;3:615.
24.
Vu TV. Fully resolved simulations of drop solidification under forced
convection. Int J Heat Mass Transfer. 2018;122:252‐263.
25.
Roisman IV, Criscione A, Tropea C, Mandal DK, Amirfazli A.
Dislodging a sessile drop by a high‐Reynolds‐number shear flow at
subfreezing temperatures. Phys Rev E. 2015;92:023007.
26.
Lian Y, Liao D, Qiu H, Sussman M, Vahab M, Hussaini Y.
Experimental and numerical investigation of icing process of a
liquid droplet. 9th AIAA Atmospheric and Space Environments
Conference. 2017:4481.
27.
Sebilleau J, Ablonet E, Tordjeman P, Legendre D. Air humidity
effects on water‐drop icing. Phys Rev E. 2021;104:L032802.
28.
Bobinski T, Sobieraj G, Gumowski K, et al. Droplet impact in icing
conditions—the influence of ambient air humidity. Arch Appl Mech.
2014;66:127‐142.
29.
Enríquez OR, Marín ÁG, Winkels KG, Snoeijer JH. Freezing
singularities in water drops. Phys Fluids. 2012;24:091102.
30.
Huang L, Liu Z, Liu Y, Gou Y, Wang L. Effect of contact angle on
water droplet freezing process on a cold flat surface. Exp Therm Fluid
Sci. 2012;40:74‐80.
31.
Castillo JE, Huang Y, Pan Z, Weibel JA. Asymmetric solidification
during droplet freezing in the presence of a neighboring droplet. Int
J Heat Mass Transfer. 2021;171:121134.
32.
Chu F, Zhang X, Li S, et al. Bubble formation in freezing droplets.
Phys Rev Fluid. 2019;4:071601.
33.
Shafique U, Anwar J, Rehman R, et al. Forced migration of soluble
and suspended materials by freezing front in aqueous systems.
J Hydro‐Environ Res. 2012;6:221‐226.
34.
Dupont JB, Legendre D. Numerical simulation of static and sliding
drop with contact angle hysteresis. J Comput Phys. 2010;229:
2453‐2478.
35.
Legendre D, Maglio M. Comparison between numerical models for the
simulation of moving contact lines. Comput Fluids. 2015;113:2‐13.
36.
Lyu S, Wang K, Zhang Z, Pedrono A, Sun C, Legendre D. A hybrid
VOF‐IBM method for the simulation of freezing liquid films and
freezing drops. J Comput Phys. 2021;432:110160.
37.
Raessi M, Mostaghimi J. Three‐dimensional modelling of density
variation due to phase change in complex free surface flows. Numer
Heat Transfer Part B. 2005;47:507‐531.
38.
Anderson D, Worster MG, Davis S. The case for a dynamic contact
angle in containerless solidification. J Cryst Growth. 1996;163:329‐338.
39.
Snoeijer JH, Brunet P. Pointy ice‐drops: how water freezes into a
singular shape. Am J Phys. 2012;80:764‐771.
40.
Schetnikov A, Matiunin V, Chernov V. Conical shape of frozen water
droplets. Am J Phys. 2015;83:36‐38.
41.
Schremb M, Tropea C. Solidification of supercooled water in the
vicinity of a solid wall. Phys Rev E. 2016;94:052804.
42.
Castillo JE, Huang Y, Pan Z, Weibel JA. Quantifying the pathways of
latent heat dissipation during droplet freezing on cooled substrates.
Int J Heat Mass Transfer. 2021;164:120608.
43.
Lohse D, Zhang X. Physicochemical hydrodynamics of droplets out
of equilibrium. Nat Rev Phys. 2020;2:426‐443.
44.
Wildeman S, Sterl S, Sun C, Lohse D. Fast dynamics of water droplets
freezing from the outside in. Phys Rev Lett. 2017;118:084101.
SUPPORTING INFORMATION
Additional supporting information can be found online in the
Supporting Information section at the end of this article.
How to cite this article: Lyu S, Zhu X, Legendre D, Sun C.
Liquid encapsulation in a freezing sessile drop. Droplet.
2023;2:e90. doi:10.1002/dro2.90
7 of 7
|
DROPLET
 27314375, 2023, 4, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/dro2.90 by Tsinghua University Library, Wiley Online Library on [08/01/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License