WORLD TRADE 
ORGANIZATION 
 
 
WT/DS379/R 
22 October 2010 
 
 
(10-5262) 
 
 
 
Original:   English 
 
 
UNITED STATES – DEFINITIVE ANTI-DUMPING AND 
COUNTERVAILING DUTIES ON CERTAIN PRODUCTS 
FROM CHINA  
 
 
 
 
Report of the Panel 
 
 
 
 
 


WT/DS379/R 
Page 206 
 
 
 
acting purely as intermediaries, on a transaction-by-transaction basis, rather than as 
distributor/stockists or as bulk purchasers.  This is further suggested by the "ex-works" delivery terms 
of a number of purchases865, a phrase generally synonymous with "ex-factory".  That said, there is no 
reference in the USDOC's determination in the OTR investigation to any evidence regarding the 
precise role played by the trading companies from which GTC and TUTRIC purchased rubber inputs, 
nor any indication that the USDOC made inquiries in that regard.  Before us, the United States makes 
no arguments in this respect.  We consider that, for the reasons explained above, given the 
methodology that the USDOC chose to use to the establish the existence and amount of the benefit to 
the tire producers from their purchases of inputs from trading companies, it was incumbent on the 
USDOC to have investigated the precise role played by the trading companies, so as to ensure that its 
methodology did not calculate a benefit in excess of that conferred by the government provision of 
SOE-produced inputs. 
12.58 The record evidence presented to us does not indicate that the USDOC undertook any such 
inquiries.  Therefore, there is nothing before us that demonstrates that, under the particular facts of the 
investigation, the USDOC's methodology could not and did not give rise to a calculation of benefit in 
excess of that conferred by the provision of the inputs.  We therefore find on this basis that the 
USDOC acted inconsistently with the United States' obligations under Article 1.1 and Article 14 of 
the SCM Agreement. 
XIII. 
CHINA'S CONSEQUENTIAL CLAIMS 
13.1 
We now turn to various consequential claims raised by China.  In particular, at 
paragraph B.1(e) of its request for establishment of the Panel, China alleges consequential violations 
of Articles 10 and 32.1 of the SCM Agreement, and of Article VI:3 of the GATT 1994, "in connection 
with all countervailing duty investigations, determinations and orders specified above" (i.e., specified 
at paragraphs B.1(a)-(d) of the request for establishment of the Panel).  China requests findings in 
respect of these consequential claims at paragraphs 468 (a), (b), (d), (e), (f), and (g) of its first written 
submission, and at paragraphs 315 (a), (b), (c), (e), (f), (g), and (h) of its second written submission.  
We note that China has presented no argumentation in support of these consequential claims, but 
simply requests findings on them in the paragraphs just identified.  Particularly under these 
circumstances, in the light of the findings we have made supra, we see no need to rule on these 
consequential claims.  We therefore apply judicial economy in respect of all of them. 
13.2 
We recall, however, that in respect of its other allegations pursuant to Article 10 and 32.1 of 
the SCM Agreement and Article VI:3 of the GATT 1994 (specifically, those raised in connection with 
its claims addressed at Sections XI and XII.D.2 supra, and Section XIV, infra) China did present 
argumentation.  As set forth in the respective sections and as summarized below at Section XVII, we 
have examined and made findings in respect of these allegations.   
XIV. 
CHINA'S CLAIMS PERTAINING TO "DOUBLE REMEDIES" 
A. 
INTRODUCTION 
14.1 
We now consider China's claims with respect to "double remedies".  China's claims in this 
respect arise from the concurrent imposition, by the United States, of countervailing duties and of 
                                                   
865 See Exhibit US-156.  Ex Works is defined as:  "An <Incoterm> whereby the seller is responsible 
only for having the ordered <goods> available for pickup at the agreed place, which is usually the seller's own 
premises.  The seller is also usually responsible for export packing to the extent that the transportation 
particulars are made available [...]".  (A to Z of international trade, F. Reynolds (ICC Publishing S.A., 2002), 
p. 79). 


 
WT/DS379/R  
 
Page 207 
 
 
 
anti-dumping duties calculated pursuant to the USDOC's NME methodology on products from China 
in the four sets of parallel anti-dumping and countervailing duty investigations at issue. 
1. 
Background 
14.2 
In anti-dumping investigations involving products from countries it considers to be non-
market economies ("NMEs"), the USDOC calculates the normal value on the basis of surrogate values 
taken from countries which it considers to be "market economies" rather than on the basis of the 
prices or costs of production actually incurred by the investigated producer.866  Specifically, under its 
NME methodology, the USDOC:  (i) determines the quantities of the factors of production (e.g. inputs, 
labour, energy) actually used by the respondent producer in producing the investigated good; (ii) 
multiplies those quantities by the prices of each of those factors based on a "surrogate value" from a 
market economy country (or, where available, the actual price paid for an input imported from a 
market economy country); and (iii) adds an amount for factory overhead, selling, general and 
administrative (SG&A) expenses, and profit, calculated on the basis of ratios of these costs to the 
costs of the other inputs in the surrogate country.867 
14.3 
The USDOC generally treats China as an NME in anti-dumping investigations, and did so in 
the anti-dumping investigations at issue in this dispute.  As a result, the USDOC applied its NME 
methodology in calculating the normal value for the investigated Chinese producers.  The normal 
value so constructed was then used to determine these producers' dumping margins. 
14.4 
As China points out, the four countervailing duty investigations at issue in this dispute mark a 
policy change on the part of the USDOC.  The USDOC had taken the position, in 1984, that its 
countervailing duty legislation did not apply to imports from non-market economies:  In its 
investigations on Wire Rod from Poland and from Czechoslovakia, the USDOC determined that it was 
impossible to identify a "bounty" or "grant" within the meaning of U.S. countervailing duty law in 
NMEs, because of the pervasive role played by the governments of such centrally-planned economies.  
This interpretation of the U.S. countervailing duty statute was affirmed by the U.S. Court of Appeals 
for the Federal Circuit in Georgetown Steel.868  In March 2007, the United States reversed this 
longstanding policy of not applying U.S. countervailing duty legislation to NMEs:  In the CFS Paper 
investigation, the USDOC considered that while still not a market economy, China's economy had 
evolved sufficiently that it was possible to identify and countervail subsidies granted by China.869  At 
the same time, the USDOC maintained China's NME status for purposes of applying the U.S. anti-
dumping regime.870  Ultimately, no duties were imposed in the CFS Paper case.  Thus, the four 
                                                   
866 Section 773(c) of the U.S. Tariff Act of 1930 (codified at 19 U.S.C. 1677b(c)), Exhibit CHI-119.  
The USDOC may, in anti-dumping investigations involving an NME country, determine that the industry being 
investigated operates on market principles (market-oriented industry, or "MOI").  China indicates that the 
USDOC has never found any industry in any country that it designates as an NME to be an MOI. 
867 United States first written submission, para. 450. 
868 Georgetown Steel Corporation v. United States, U.S. Court of Appeals for Federal Circuit, 
18 September 1986, Exhibit CHI-90.  This USDOC policy was reaffirmed in the Preamble to the USDOC's 
countervailing duty Regulations, Countervailing Duties:  Final Rule, 63 Fed. Reg. 65348, Exhibit CHI-91, 
p. 65360. 
869 Countervailing Duty Investigation of Coated Free Sheet Paper from the People's Republic of China 
– Whether the Analytical Elements of the Georgetown Steel Opinion are Applicable to China's Present-Day 
Economy ("Georgetown Steel Memo"), Exhibit CHI-89, p. 5; and Issues and Decision Memorandum for the 
Antidumping Investigation of Certain Pneumatic Off-the-Road Tires from the People's Republic of China ("OTR 
Anti-Dumping Duty I&D Memo"), Exhibit CHI-53, pp. 5-10. 
870 In maintaining its qualification of China as an NME, the USDOC in August 2006 considered that 
"market forces in China are not yet sufficiently developed" to allow it to rely on Chinese costs and prices in 
establishing normal value.  (Final Affirmative Countervailing Duty Determination: Certain New Pneumatic Off-


WT/DS379/R 
Page 208 
 
 
 
countervailing duty investigations at issue in the present dispute constitute the first instances of 
imposition by the USDOC of countervailing duties on imports from an NME. 
14.5 
China claims that this imposition by the USDOC of countervailing duties concurrently with 
anti-dumping duties calculated under the U.S. NME methodology results in the imposition of a 
"double remedy".  China explains that by "double remedy" it means that the subsidies at issue are 
"offset" twice, once through the imposition of the countervailing duties, and once through the 
imposition of the anti-dumping duties, because of the manner in which the latter are calculated. 
14.6 
The Government of China and Chinese interested parties raised the issue of double remedies 
in each of the four countervailing duty investigations before us.  In its determinations in three of the 
investigations (LWS, LWR, and OTR), the USDOC indicated that it had no authority to address the 
issue of double remedies in the context of countervailing duty investigations, and that if any 
adjustment to avoid a double remedy were possible, it would only be in the context of anti-dumping 
investigations.871  Interested parties also raised the issue in the CWP and OTR anti-dumping 
investigations.  In the CWP anti-dumping investigation, the USDOC declined to make adjustments for 
double remedies given that the interested party that had raised the issue had not received an individual 
company-specific margin.  The USDOC also indicated that "Congress provided no anti-dumping 
adjustment for CVDs imposed to offset subsidies that are not export subsidies".872  In the OTR anti-
dumping investigation, the USDOC considered that interested parties had not established the 
existence of a double remedy, and in particular had not provided sufficient evidence in support of 
their arguments that domestic subsidies automatically lower prices or that they "pass through", pro 
rata, to domestic prices.873  The USDOC also considered that the Chinese interested parties had not 
demonstrated that they were "entitled to an adjustment under US AD law to prevent a presumed 
double remedy from arising".874 
                                                                                                                                                              
the-Road Tires from the People's Republic of China – Final Loan Benchmark and Discount Rate, Exhibit CHI-
88, Attachment 2). 
871 For instance, in the LWR countervailing duty investigation, the USDOC addressed the double 
counting arguments presented by respondents as follows: 
 
"[...] The [Government of China and a respondent] have not cited to any statutory authority 
that would allow us to terminate this countervailing duty investigation to avoid double 
counting and the CVD law provides no authority to make an adjustment to the CVD 
calculations to prevent double counting.  If any adjustment to avoid a double remedy is 
possible, it would only be in the context of an antidumping investigation and no party raised 
this claim in the companion antidumping investigation of LWR".  (Exhibit CHI-2, p. 19). 
 
The USDOC made virtually identical statements in its determinations in the LWS and OTR 
countervailing duty investigations.  (Exhibits CHI-3, p. 40 and CHI-4, p. 53).  In the CWP countervailing duty 
investigation, the USDOC incorporated by reference its treatment of the issue in the concurrent anti-dumping 
investigation.  (Exhibit CHI-1, p. 101). 
 
872 Exhibit CHI-9, pp. 21-22. 
873 Exhibit CHI-53, pp. 13-14.  The USDOC rejected the arguments that it must assume that domestic 
subsidies necessarily result in lower export prices and that it had recognized that domestic subsidies lower prices 
pro rata in both domestic or export markets, indicating that "when it has considered the issue, the Department 
has sometimes presumed that, whatever the effect, if any, of domestic subsidies upon the prices subsequently 
charged by their recipients, that effect would be the same for domestic prices and export prices".  (Id., p. 14). 
874 In this respect, the USDOC stated that: 
 
"As we noted in [CFS Paper], 'despite addressing the issue of parallel AD duties and CVDs 
directly, and explicitly requiring that the amount of any CVDs to offset export subsidies be 
added to U.S. price, Congress provided no adjustment for CVDs imposed by reason of 


WT/DS379/R 
Page 220 
 
 
 
14.45 Also as a preliminary remark, we consider it appropriate to emphasize that the dispute before 
us is limited to the consistency with the covered agreements of the USDOC's determinations in the 
four sets of investigations at issue; the consistency of double remedies with U.S. law is not before us. 
2. 
General considerations with respect to the potential for "double remedies" to arise from 
the simultaneous imposition of countervailing duties and of anti-dumping duties 
calculated pursuant to the U.S. NME methodology 
14.46 We first examine the parties' arguments with respect to whether the concurrent imposition of 
anti-dumping duties calculated under the U.S. NME methodology and of countervailing duties results 
in the imposition of double remedies. 
(a) 
Main arguments of the Parties 
(i) 
China 
14.47 China argues that where anti-dumping duties calculated pursuant to a methodology that relies 
on surrogate, market-determined, values (NME methodology) and countervailing duties are 
simultaneously applied to imports of a same good, it necessarily results that any domestic subsidy 
bestowed upon the production of that good is offset twice, once through the calculation of the 
dumping margin, and once as a result of the imposition of the countervailing duties.930 
14.48 By way of background, China notes that for a long time, the USDOC held the position that it 
could not apply countervailing duties to countries which it determined to be non-market economies, a 
position which the USDOC reversed in the CFS Paper case.931  The four investigations at issue in this 
dispute represent the first instances in which the USDOC simultaneously imposed anti-dumping 
duties calculated under its NME methodology and countervailing duties. 
14.49 China notes that the issue of double remedies has been the subject of extensive discussions in 
the United States and was acknowledged by all three branches of the Government of the United States, 
including the USDOC itself.932  In addition, China argues that, more generally, the USDOC has 
consistently recognized that the manner in which it calculates anti-dumping duties can offset subsidies, 
including domestic subsidies.  In particular, China argues that in numerous anti-dumping 
investigations of imports from market economy countries, the USDOC has recognized that by (i) 
adding subsidies to the producer's cost of production; (ii) deducting countervailing duties from the 
export price; or (iii) using a producer's reported costs, if these costs do not reflect subsidies received 
(or otherwise using unsubsidized costs) to determine constructed normal value; it would effectively 
                                                   
930 See, e.g., China first written submission, para. 326. 
931 Id., paras. 328-346.  See paras. 14.2-14.4, supra, for the Panel's discussion of the evolution of the 
USDOC's position on the applicability of the U.S. countervailing duty regime to NMEs. 
932 China oral statement at the first meeting of the Panel, para. 79; first written submission, paras. 347-
354; oral statement at the second meeting of the Panel, para. 60.  China notably refers to a 2005 report of the 
U.S. Government Accountability Office (the "GAO"), in which the GAO assessed whether it would be possible 
for the USDOC to apply countervailing duties to imports from China; to draft legislation (which was adopted by 
the U.S. House of Representatives but not the U.S. Senate) to provide the USDOC with explicit authority to 
address the issue of double remedies, should it apply the U.S. countervailing duty legislation to NMEs; to the 
recent decision of the U.S. Court of International Trade in GPX, (discussed in more detail below); and to 
statements made by the USDOC in relation to the CFS Paper case.  (Id., referring, inter alia, to U.S. 
Government Accountability Office, U.S. – China Trade:  Commerce Faces Practical and Legal Challenges in 
Applying Countervailing Duties, GAO-05-474 (June 2005) ("GAO Report"), Exhibit CHI-121; United States 
Trade Rights Enforcement Act, H.R. 3283, Exhibit CHI-122; and to United States Court of International Trade, 
GPX International Tire Corporation and Hebei Starbright Tire Co., Ltd., v. United States ("GPX"), Exhibit 
CHI-169). 


 
WT/DS379/R  
 
Page 221 
 
 
 
collect countervailing duties a second time.933  China submits that the United States fails to explain 
how the double remedy that arises from the use of an NME methodology differs from these other 
forms of double remedies, which the USDOC has taken all necessary steps to avoid.934 
14.50 In China's view, a double remedy arises in all instances of concurrent imposition of 
countervailing duties and of anti-dumping duties calculated pursuant to a methodology relying on 
surrogate values.935  This, in China's view, results from the overlapping rationales and effects of NME 
methodologies and of countervailing duties:  China explains that the rationale for using an NME 
methodology in an anti-dumping investigation subsumes the rationale for imposing countervailing 
duties and that these are two different approaches for remedying the fact that a producer's costs and 
prices were not determined by market forces.  China argues that when it uses its NME methodology, 
the USDOC places the producer in the position of having unsubsidized, market-determined costs of 
production,936 and calculates a dumping margin based on the difference between this market-
determined cost of production and the producer's export price.  China explains that in doing so, the 
USDOC necessarily captures any trade-distorting effects of alleged subsidies in the anti-dumping 
margin.  Thus, having brought the producer's costs of production "to the market", and having 
calculated a duty on this basis, the USDOC's NME methodology necessarily offsets any benefit that 
the producer obtained by receiving financial contributions from the government on terms more 
favourable than those available in the market.  When the USDOC simultaneously calculates the 
amount of subsidization in a parallel countervailing duty investigation – again by placing the producer 
in the position of having market-determined costs of production – it is repeating the same exercise 
undertaken in the anti-dumping NME calculation.  Thus, China explains, the same subsidy is offset 
twice. 
14.51 China notes the United States' arguments that the use of an NME methodology may not 
constitute a complete remedy for the subsidies.  Consistent with the explanation above, China argues 
that the existence of a double remedy occurs entirely on the cost side of the equation.  Accordingly, 
China rejects the United States' contention that the existence of a double remedy is a factual question 
and depends, in particular, on whether subsidies pass through, pro rata, to U.S. prices.937  China 
provides a number of examples from the investigations at issue (with respect to subsidies in the form 
of the provision of inputs), as well as theoretical examples which it considers support its arguments in 
this respect.938  China also rejects the United States' argument that the existence of a double remedy 
                                                   
933 China second written submission, paras. 214 and 227, response to Panel question 74 (first meeting).  
China adds that in these investigations, the USDOC did not consider the existence of a double remedy to be 
"theoretical", required any "evidence" or "presumptions" about the effects of subsidies on a producer's costs or 
prices, or suggest that it had no legal obligation to avoid the double remedy that it had identified.  (China second 
written submission, para. 215).  See Section XIV.C.5, infra, (Panel's consideration of China's claims under 
Article I:1 of the GATT 1994), for a more detailed review of China's arguments in this respect. 
934 China first written submission, para. 228. 
935 Id., para. 374. 
936 China argues that in calculating a constructed normal value, the USDOC seeks to ensure that the 
surrogate values that it uses are, in fact, market-determined values and avoids the use of any surrogate value that 
may itself be subsidized.  (China first written submission para. 371 and footnote 315, inter alia referring to 
Omnibus Trade and Competitiveness Act of 1988, Exhibit CHI-123). 
937 Id., paras. 330, 372 and 391-392; oral statement at the first meeting of the Panel, para. 81; second 
written submission, paras. 219, 233-238, response to Panel question 73 (first meeting).  China considers that 
whether subsidies pass through, pro rata, to U.S. prices, is entirely irrelevant.  But China argues that even 
assuming that the United States were correct and that the existence of a double remedy depends on the effects of 
subsidies on export prices, the only lawful basis on which an investigating authority could impose 
countervailing duties would be to presume that the subsidies had precisely that effect.  (China second written 
submission, para. 289 et seq.). 
938 China first written submission, para. 395; oral statement at the first meeting of the Panel, para. 81; 
second written submission, paras. 222-225, response to Panel question 73 (first meeting); response to Panel 
question 26 (second meeting); Exhibit CHI-142 ("Further Examples of Offsetting the Same 'Subsidies' Twice"); 


WT/DS379/R 
Page 222 
 
 
 
can be ascertained from a "mathematical" comparison between the dumping and countervailing duty 
margins.  China's response to the United States' argument in this respect is that the use of an NME 
methodology necessarily offsets any competitive advantage that the producer obtained from 
countervailable subsidies, but that this does not mean that an anti-dumping margin determined 
pursuant to an NME methodology is mathematically comparable to a countervailing duty margin 
calculated in respect of the same product, because:  (i) the use of an NME methodology is meant to 
address a broader set of distortions (e.g. non-specific subsidies); and (ii) the dumping margin is 
dependent on the level of the producer's export price, a variable that plays no role in the 
countervailing duty calculation.  Further, for China, the fact that, in a given instance, the USDOC 
could theoretically arrive at a zero dumping margin does not alter the fact that in using an NME 
methodology, it necessarily offset the benefit of any countervailable subsidies along the way.939 
14.52 Overall, China considers that the theories put forward by the United States demonstrate that 
the United States does not deny the existence of double remedies but rather, considers that the 
existence of double remedies is solely a matter of degree that depends on certain factual 
circumstances.940  Yet, China notes, in the investigations at issue, the USDOC did not take any steps 
to determine the extent of the double remedy that may have arisen.941  In any event, China considers 
that it has demonstrated, at a minimum, that there was at least "some overlap" between the method by 
which the USDOC determined normal value in the anti-dumping investigations and the subsidies that 
were identified and countervailed by the USDOC in the parallel countervailing duty investigations.942 
14.53 Finally, China draws the Panel's attention to the 2009 decision of the U.S. Court of 
International Trade ("CIT") in GPX International Tire v. United States, a judicial review of the 
determination in the OTR investigation at issue in the present dispute.  In GPX, the CIT held that the 
USDOC is obligated to avoid offsetting the same subsidies twice when it uses its NME methodology 
in conjunction with countervailing duties.943  China notes that the CIT observed that the USDOC 
addresses subsidization of NME producers "through the NME AD methodology" and that it is 
fundamentally incompatible with the purposes of the countervailing duty laws to offset the same 
subsidies twice; China also cites the CIT's conclusion that the USDOC has an obligation to investigate 
and to avoid double remedies.  China posits that in GPX, the CIT rejected U.S. arguments that are 
similar to those the United States makes before this Panel.944 
(ii) 
United States 
14.54 The United States asks the Panel to reject China's argument that a double remedy results from 
the imposition of countervailing duties concurrently with the imposition of anti-dumping duties 
                                                                                                                                                              
and Exhibit CHI-170 (examples, in scenarios in which subsidies "pass through" or do not "pass through" to 
export prices). 
939 China response to Panel question 93 (a)-(b) (first meeting). 
940 See, e.g., China's second written submission, para. 305.  China also argues that the United States has 
implicitly acknowledged before the Panel the potential for at least some degree of overlap between the two 
remedies.  In particular, China notes the United States' statements that the use of an NME methodology to 
determine normal value may not constitute a complete remedy for any subsidies received by the producer, and 
that it will "not necessarily capture the full amount" of any subsidies.  China argues that these statements are 
consistent with the USDOC's statement, in CFS Paper that "a possibility of double counting results from 
simultaneous antidumping and CVD investigations" of imports from NME countries and with the statement by 
the GAO that anti-dumping duties determined in accordance with the U.S. NME methodology "offset much of 
the value of both export subsidies and domestic subsidies".  (China response to Panel Question 92 (first 
meeting)). 
941 China oral statement at the first meeting of the Panel, para. 82; second written submission, para. 305. 
942 China response to Panel question 92 (first meeting). 
943 China oral statement at the second meeting of the Panel, paras. 56-73. 
944 Id. 


 
WT/DS379/R  
 
Page 223 
 
 
 
calculated under the U.S. NME methodology.  In particular, the United States contests what in its 
view is an argument of China that every calculation of a dumping margin using the NME 
methodology will be artificially inflated by the full amount of subsidies that are remedied by 
countervailing duties determined and imposed simultaneously on the subject goods.  The 
United States argues that China has not provided evidence to support its arguments in this respect.945 
14.55 The United States proffers that the theory advanced by China suggests that surrogate values 
used to determine normal value under the U.S. NME methodology are the mathematical equivalent of 
what actual production costs would be if China were a market economy plus the precise amount of 
subsidization.  The United States challenges what it sees as the theoretical premises and the 
assumptions underlying China's theory.  The United States argues that it cannot be assumed that 
replacement of actual (subsidized) values of factor inputs with surrogate values under the NME 
methodology results in an increase in the normal value by an amount that is equal to or greater than 
the amount of the subsidy.  The United States argues that it cannot be assumed that the normal value 
arrived at using the NME calculation is, in every instance, completely insulated from any of the 
effects of the countervailed subsidy.  The United States posits that the subsidy could actually lower 
the normal value, for instance by increasing a recipient's efficiency and reducing the quantity of 
factors used in production, or affect the surrogate (third-country) prices and/or profit and expense 
ratios.946  The United States further submits that another fundamental premise for China's arguments 
is that subsidies reduce costs of production, pro rata; the United States contends that this would be a 
necessary basis for arguing that normal values determined using the NME methodology are invariably 
inflated by an amount that fully remedies the subsidy.  The United States considers it far from clear 
that most subsidies achieve anything close to pro rata reductions in cost.947 
14.56 The United States characterizes as "self-serving" the illustrations offered by China using the 
investigations at issue in the current dispute, and asks the Panel not to consider that these establish 
that double remedies were imposed in these investigations.  The United States disagrees with China's 
suggestion that similarities between the surrogate values used in the anti-dumping calculations and the 
benchmarks used in the countervailing duty investigations prove that the resulting duties remedy the 
same economic "distortion".  In addition, the United States submits counter-examples to demonstrate 
that in some instances, the surrogate values used by the USDOC in its dumping margin calculation 
were in fact lower than both the producer's actual costs and the benchmarks used by the USDOC in its 
calculation of the amount of the subsidy.948 
14.57 Further, the United States argues that China incorrectly equates the normal value with the 
anti-dumping remedy, and notes that normal values are only one side of the anti-dumping equation.949  
The United States argues that even if it is assumed that a subsidy lowers the recipient's costs of 
production, it may not pass-through to prices.950 
14.58 The United States urges the Panel to reject the argument made by China that there are 
"overlapping rationales" for (i) the use of NME methodologies in anti-dumping investigations and (ii) 
the imposition of countervailing duties.  In the view of the United States, China mischaracterizes the 
relevant rationales and incorrectly assumes that subsidization is among the market distortions that the 
NME methodology is "meant to counteract".  The United States argues that under the GATT, the AD 
                                                   
945 United States first written submission, paras. 445-462; opening statement at the first meeting of the 
Panel, para. 56; response to Panel question 73 (first meeting). 
946 United States first written submission, paras. 451-454 and footnote 612; response to Panel 
question 71 (first meeting); second written submission, paras. 203-207; response to Panel question 27 (second 
meeting). 
947 United States first written submission, paras. 455-459. 
948 United States comments on China's response to Panel question 26 (second meeting). 
949 United States second written submission, paras. 198-202. 
950 United States response to Panel questions 71 (a) and 72 (first meeting). 


WT/DS379/R 
Page 224 
 
 
 
Agreement, and China's Protocol of Accession, subsidization is not relevant to the application of the 
NME methodology.  The United States submits in this regard that the USDOC does not and cannot 
ensure that the NME constructed normal value is "subsidy-free", and that in some instances, including 
in the investigations at issue, the surrogate value exceeds the producer's actual costs.951  The 
United States further submits that the effects of subsidies on costs or prices is not, under the covered 
agreements, relevant to the calculation of the amount of countervailing duties.  On the contrary, under 
Article VI:3 of the GATT and Article 19.2 of the SCM Agreement, countervailing duties may be 
imposed for the full amount of the subsidy found to exist, irrespective of the effects these subsidies.952 
14.59 Finally, the United States argues that even if it is accepted at face value, the GAO Report does 
not support China's argument that double remedies are inherent in the concurrent application of 
countervailing duties to offset domestic subsidies and of anti-dumping duties calculated under an 
NME methodology.  Rather, the United States argues, "the report agrees with Commerce's stated 
position [that] the concurrent imposition of AD and CV duties could create some potential for 
overlapping rationales".953  The United States also asks the Panel not to rely on, or consider 
dispositive or even persuasive, the Opinion of the CIT in the GPX case.  The United States argues that 
this decision represents the Court's ruling on U.S. law and results from other considerations than those 
focussed on by China in the current dispute.  The United States notes that the CIT concludes that 
some degree of double counting is likely and directs the USDOC to investigate the issue and report 
back to the Court.  Further, the United States considers the CIT ruling to be in error and notes that it is 
not final as it may be appealed.954 
(b) 
Main arguments of the Third Parties 
(i) 
Argentina 
14.60 Argentina argues that China incorrectly assumes that the use of an NME methodology in an 
anti-dumping investigation necessarily addresses any potential subsidization.  On the contrary, 
Argentina argues, using analogue country prices and costs to mirror market economy conditions does 
not mean that such costs and prices have been adjusted from subsidization.  Further, Argentina is of 
the view that the purpose of the NME methodology is to provide an alternative to obtain undistorted 
prices in circumstances where there are distortions in the economy, rather than to offset subsidies, and 
that even assuming arguendo that subsidies are the quintessence of distortions as China contends, they 
are not the only category of distortions affecting a market.  As a consequence, Argentina argues, the 
concurrent application of anti-dumping duties calculated under a surrogate country methodology and 
of countervailing duties does not, in itself, imply the situation of duplication alleged by China.955 
(ii) 
Australia 
14.61 Australia submits that anti-dumping and countervailing duties are distinct trade remedies with 
different purposes and effects.  Australia considers that the use of a surrogate market in an anti-
dumping investigation and the calculation of an NME normal value do not relate to an assessment of 
                                                   
951 United States second written submission, paras. 180-190; opening statement at the second meeting 
of the Panel, para. 80. 
952 United States second written submission, paras. 191-195; response to Panel question 71(b) (first 
meeting). 
953 United States response to Panel question 80 (first meeting).  The United States emphasizes that the 
GAO stated that "it appears that some double counting [...] could occur [...]".  (Id.).  (emphasis added by the 
United States). 
954 United States opening statement at the second meeting of the Panel, paras. 85-88; response to Panel 
Question 32 (second meeting). 
955 Argentina third-party submission, para. 33; third-party oral statement, paras. 6-9. 


 
WT/DS379/R  
 
Page 225 
 
 
 
whether a subsidy exists or a calculation of the amount of that subsidy, and notes that an anti-dumping 
investigation entails a price comparison between the normal value and the export price.956 
(iii) 
Brazil 
14.62 Brazil argues that the potential effects on pricing practices of subsidies to the "manufacture or 
production" of a product are normally much less direct than is the case for export subsidies and that it 
is therefore inappropriate to apply the logic behind Article VI:5 to domestic subsidies.957 
(iv) 
European Communities 
14.63 The European Communities expresses concern with China's allegation that there is an 
"inherent" double remedy in cases where normal value is established on the basis of a surrogate 
country and with China's apparent assumption that domestic subsidies inevitably affect prices, 
including export prices.  The European Communities also posits that there may be cases where export 
subsidies have no measurable impact on export price, or have no discernable impact on prices at all.958 
(v) 
Japan 
14.64 Japan considers that in certain situations, the dumping margin calculation captures not only 
the dumping behaviour of exporters, but also the effects of governmental financial contributions; if in 
such a situation, the importing Member also imposes a countervailing duty, it would counteract the 
effects of the financial contribution by the government twice.  Japan argues that a double remedy may 
or may not occur in situations other than situations of export subsidization, depending on the method 
used in the calculation of the margin of dumping in a given case.  For example, if a subsidy is 
conferred on inputs and the final product is sold both in the home and export markets, both the home 
market price and the export price would be lowered by the same amount due to the effects of the 
subsidy, and in such a case, a double remedy may occur if the dumping margin is calculated by 
adjusting the home market price upward for the per-unit amount of the subsidy without an adjustment 
of the actual export price.  Japan also considers that a double remedy unavoidably occurs in the case 
of export subsidies.959 
(vi) 
Mexico 
14.65 Mexico considers that China's argument that the application of a surrogate country 
methodology in an anti-dumping investigation yields a normal value free from distortions is without 
foundation.  Mexico is of the view that an NME methodology does not offset the effect of subsidies 
granted in the exporting country.  Further, Mexico argues that even assuming arguendo that the 
normal value determined on the basis of a surrogate country would reflect unsubsidized prices, these 
prices would be those in the surrogate country, not in China itself.960 
(vii) 
Norway 
14.66 Norway considers that the choice of the methodology and the costs elements that go into the 
calculation of the normal value can have an important bearing on the issue of subsidization.  Where 
the normal value is constructed on the basis of the producer's actual data for the inputs (i.e., 
subsidized input prices), the constructed normal value will be lower than for non-subsidized 
                                                   
956 Australia third-party submission, para. 42; third-party response to Panel questions 14 and 17. 
957 Brazil third-party submission, para. 17. 
958 European Communities third-party submission, paras. 53 and 56. 
959 Japan third-party submission, paras. 4-7; third-party oral statement, paras. 2-4. 
960 Mexico third-party submission, paras. 32-34; third-party oral statement paras. 6-8; response to Panel 
questions 21 and 23. 


WT/DS379/R 
Page 226 
 
 
 
production.  In such cases, simultaneous anti-dumping and countervailing duties may be applied.  If, 
on the other hand, the constructed normal value is calculated not with subsidized prices, but with 
"non-distorted" or "benchmark" prices (including prices from a surrogate county) for the (otherwise 
subsidized) inputs, then the effect of any subsidy is "extinguished" in the constructed normal value 
calculation and applying an anti-dumping duty up to the maximum permitted by the AD Agreement 
will provide a remedy for the subsidization at the same time.  Norway notes that China argues, and the 
United States does not appear to dispute, that in calculating the constructed normal value based on a 
third country market benchmark, the USDOC avoids the use of any surrogate value that may itself be 
subsidized.  Thus, Norway submits, it appears that the USDOC used a market-economy cost of 
production free from any dumping or subsidy distortion in the dumping margin calculation.  Norway 
submits that by applying the full anti-dumping duty up to this third-country market benchmark, all 
effects of the subsidization were extinguished.961 
(c) 
Assessment by the Panel 
14.67 As we explain in more detail in the following paragraphs, we have no difficulty accepting the 
general proposition that the use of an NME methodology likely provides some form of remedy against 
subsidisation, and therefore, that the simultaneous imposition of anti-dumping duties calculated under 
an NME methodology and of countervailing duties likely results in any subsidy granted in respect of 
the good at issue being offset more than once. 
14.68 An "NME methodology" is a methodology for the calculation of dumping margins under 
which the export price is compared to a normal value that is based on "surrogate" costs or prices from 
a third country.  The rationale behind the use of such an NME methodology is that prices and costs of 
production in the exporting country are distorted as a result of government intervention in the 
economy and therefore do not reflect market economy conditions.962  In such a situation, it is 
considered that neither the sales prices of the NME producer on its domestic market nor a normal 
value constructed on the basis of that producer's actual costs of production would offer a reliable 
source of comparison to calculate a margin of dumping.  This is why the normal value is determined 
on the basis of costs or prices prevailing in a third country where market economy conditions prevail, 
and hence where prices and costs are regarded as "undistorted".  In practice, the investigating 
authority typically "constructs" the normal value on the basis of costs of production in the third 
country market economy, an approach which the U.S. NME methodology generally follows.963 
14.69 It follows from this description of NME methodologies that, conceptually, the dumping 
margin calculated under an NME methodology – i.e., the difference between the constructed normal 
value and the export price – reflects not only price discrimination by the investigated producer 
between the domestic and export markets ("dumping"), but also, in addition, the economic distortions 
that affect the producer's costs of production.  Specific domestic subsidies granted to the producer of 
the good in question, in respect of that good – i.e., the same subsidies which are countervailed in the 
context of a countervailing duty investigation – are one of these economic distortions that are 
"captured" in the NME dumping margin calculation.964  Expressed differently, the dumping margin 
calculated under an NME methodology generally is higher than would be the case otherwise because 
                                                   
961 Norway third-party submission, paras. 43-47. 
962 See second Ad Note to Article VI:1; Section 15(a) of China's Protocol of Accession. 
963 See our description of the U.S. NME methodology, para. 14.2, supra. 
964 That other distortions are also captured – for instance non-specific subsidies – is irrelevant; what 
matters is that those same distortions which are countervailed under Part V of the SCM Agreement are also 
captured by the NME dumping margin calculation. 


 
WT/DS379/R  
 
Page 227 
 
 
 
it results from a comparison of the export price to market-determined, and hence unsubsidized, costs 
of production, rather than to the producer's actual, subsidized (or distorted) costs of production.965 
14.70 To the extent that part of the dumping margin found to exist resulted from subsidies provided 
in respect of the exported good, the anti-dumping duties calculated under an NME methodology will 
remedy both dumping and subsidization.  In this sense, it can be said that if countervailing duties are 
simultaneously applied to imports of the same good, the subsidy is likely to be "offset" more than 
once, i.e., once through the anti-dumping duty, and again at least partially through the countervailing 
duty.  For this reason, we consider that the concurrent imposition of anti-dumping duties calculated 
under an NME methodology and of countervailing duties creates the potential for imposition of a 
"double remedy", as China defines this term. 
14.71 We do not understand the United States to dispute the basic notion that double remedies may 
result from the concurrent use of its anti-dumping and countervailing duty laws on imports from 
China.  In fact, as China points out, the USDOC itself has recognized the potential for double 
remedies to arise in such circumstances.966  Rather, the United States in its arguments before us 
focuses on whether a double remedy can be demonstrated on the facts of each specific instance of 
concurrent imposition.967  One of the United States' arguments in this respect is that the existence of a 
"double remedy" depends on export prices (because, the United States argues, the normal value is 
only one half of the dumping margin equation) and in particular, on whether the subsidy leads to a 
reduction in the export price.968 
                                                   
965 It is noteworthy that the U.S. NME methodology takes into account the quantities of factors of 
production actually used by the investigated producer in the production of the investigated good (e.g. x tonne of 
input).  The USDOC then uses surrogate values (e.g. y dollar or renminbi/tonne of input) to calculate the costs 
for each of the various factors used in the production of the investigated good by that investigated producer.  
That the U.S. NME methodology factors in the investigated producer's actual use of factors of production does 
not, in our view, fundamentally alter the conclusion that using surrogate, market economy values presumptively 
puts the producer in the position of having unsubsidized costs of production. 
966 See, e.g., the USDOC statement that:   
 
"Since the possibility of double counting resulting from simultaneous anti-dumping and 
countervailing duty investigations is dependent on the specific facts arising in such 
investigations, to the extent that the parties to these proceedings provide evidence on the 
record of these investigations, Commerce will have to respond to these concerns in the course 
of our investigations".  (USDOC – Office of Public Affairs, "Commerce Applies Anti-Subsidy 
Law to China", (30 March 2007), Exhibit CHI-135). 
 
 
We also note that in response to a question from the Panel, the United States states 
that the GAO Report "agrees with Commerce's stated position [that] the concurrent 
imposition of AD and CV duties could create some potential for overlapping remedies."  
(United States response to Panel question 80 (a) (first meeting)).  (emphasis added). 
 
967 The USDOC seems to have taken a similar approach in the CFS Paper case.  (Coated Free Sheet 
Paper from the People's Republic of China:  Preliminary Determination of Sales at Less Than Fair Value and 
Postponement of Final Determination, CHI-137, p. 30760). 
968 We note the United States' insistence that China must demonstrate that each countervailed subsidy 
"passes through", in full (pro rata) to the export price, and that a double remedy for the full amount of the 
subsidy results from every instance of double imposition.  The parties' arguments concerning whether a subsidy 
"passes through" to the export price concerns the question whether the subsidy leads to a reduction of the export 
price, in totality (pro rata) or in part.  The United States explains that a pro rata "pass through" of the subsidy 
would be where one dollar or renminbi of subsidy reduces the export price by one dollar/renminbi, or where a 
ten dollar/renminbi subsidy bestowed upon a producer of ten widgets and expensed in one year would lower the 
price of each widget by one dollar/renminbi.  (United States response to Panel question 73 (first meeting), 
footnote 173).  Because the term "pass through" of subsidies is generally understood to refer to another concept 


WT/DS379/R 
Page 228 
 
 
 
14.72 Taking both sides of the dumping margin equation into consideration does not alter the 
conclusion that double remedies are likely to result from the concurrent imposition of anti-dumping 
duties calculated under an NME methodology and of countervailing duties.  Viewed from this 
perspective, the use of an NME methodology leads to an asymmetric dumping margin comparison 
between an unsubsidized normal value and a subsidized export price.969  Thus, once again, the 
difference between the two finds its source not only in price discrimination (dumping), but also in the 
subsidies that were granted to the investigated producer.  This was, in essence, the reasoning 
underlying the conclusions of the U.S. Government Accountability Office (GAO) in its 2005 report 
on the implications for the United States of applying countervailing duty laws to China.  The GAO 
explained that when an anti-dumping duty is calculated under the U.S. NME methodology, 
"the normal value of the product [...] is based not on Chinese prices (which might be 
artificially low as a result of domestic subsidies) but on information from a country 
where prices are determined by free markets.  Thus, when the normal value is 
compared with the export price, the difference will, at least in theory, reflect the price 
advantages that the exporting company has obtained from both export and domestic 
subsidies".970 
The GAO Report concludes, on this basis, that economic theory suggests that there is a substantial 
potential for domestic subsidies to be "double counted" in the event that the USDOC applied 
countervailing duties to NME country products while continuing to use surrogate country values to 
calculate anti-dumping duties on those same products.971  The decision of the U.S. Court of 
International Trade in GPX is based on a similar theoretical foundation – in fact, the Court cites to the 
GAO Report in support of its finding that without some type of adjustment being made, the 
concurrent imposition of anti-dumping duties and of countervailing duties with respect to Chinese 
products could very well result in a double remedy.972 
                                                                                                                                                              
(see, for instance, Section XII.D.2, supra) and to better reflect the meaning of the parties' arguments, in 
discussing this argument, we use the concept of the reduction in the export price that results from the subsidy, 
rather than the terms "pass through" used by the parties.  Also, we note that the United States argues that the 
USDOC only discussed the issue of "pass through" in its determinations in the investigations at issue because of 
China's arguments before the USDOC.  (United States first written submission, footnote 607; response to Panel 
question 73 (first meeting)).  Whether or not the question of the "pass through" of subsidies was first raised by 
China or by the USDOC, it is clear to us that the United States views this question as relevant to the existence of 
a double remedy. 
969 See Brian D. Kelly, "The Law and Economics of Simultaneous Countervailing Duty and Anti-
Dumping Proceedings", 3 Global Trade and Customs Journal, (2008), p. 41, Exhibit CHI-138, p. 48.  We note 
that this "theory" assumes that domestic subsidies lower both domestic prices and export prices. 
970 Exhibit CHI-121, p. 28.  (footnotes omitted). 
971 Id., pp. 27-28. 
972 Exhibit CHI-169, p. 17, citing to the excerpt of the GAO Report cited above.  Certain statements of 
the USDOC in market economy anti-dumping investigations illustrate why a similar "double remedy" arises in 
the context of export subsidies, and why it generally does not in the context of domestic subsidies granted by 
market economies:  in Cold-Rolled Corrosion-Resistant Carbon Steel Flat Products from Korea (quoted in LEU 
from France), the USDOC wrote that "domestic subsidies presumably lower the price of the subject 
merchandise both in the home and the U.S. markets, and therefore have no effect on the measurement of any 
dumping that might also occur".  The USDOC contrasted this situation with that of export subsidies, which, 
"benefit only exported merchandise" and therefore brings about "the potential for double remedies".  (Notice of 
Final Results of Antidumping Duty Administrative Review:  Low Enriched Uranium From France ("LEU from 
France"), Exhibit CHI-124, p. 46506).  In LEU from France, the USDOC reached a similar conclusion, and 
stated in passing that "domestic subsidies are assumed not to affect dumping margins, because they lower prices 
in both the U.S. market and the domestic market of the exporting country equally".  While the question is not 
before us, it would seem that a double remedy could arise in investigations involving market economy imports, 
depending on the costs that are used to calculate the normal value:  A double remedy may arise when the normal 


 
WT/DS379/R  
 
Page 229 
 
 
 
14.73 The United States puts forward a number of scenarios under which it is plausible that the 
subsidy would not have a one-for-one impact on the producer's costs of production or on export prices.  
The United States also points out that the imposition of countervailing duties is not conditioned upon 
a demonstration of the price effects of the subsidy973; in other words, that a Member is allowed to 
countervail subsidies that have no effects on the price of subsidized imports. 974 
14.74 All else being equal, one would expect a domestic subsidy to lower the recipient's production 
costs, allowing that producer to lower its prices in both the domestic and export markets.975  It would, 
in our view, be a rare case in which a subsidy bestowed upon the producer of an exported good has no 
effect at all on either the producer's costs of production or – assuming they are relevant – export prices, 
such that no portion of that subsidy would be subject to a double remedy where both anti-dumping 
duties based on an NME methodology, and countervailing duties, were imposed on imports of a given 
product. 
14.75 In sum, the United States' arguments raise the question of the extent of a double remedy in 
specific factual circumstances – whether a complete double remedy necessarily results from all 
instances of concurrent imposition of anti-dumping duties calculated under an NME methodology and 
of countervailing duties.  They do not, however, invalidate the general proposition that at least some 
double remedy will likely arise from the concurrent imposition of countervailing duties and anti-
dumping duties calculated under an NME methodology.  If anything, the arguments put forward by 
the United States reinforce the idea that ascertaining the precise extent of double remedy in specific 
investigations would be a complex task, a fact which is highlighted by both the GAO, in its 2005 
Report, and by the CIT in GPX.976 
14.76 Because in the next section of our findings, we conclude that China has not established that 
the imposition of "double remedies" is inconsistent with the provisions it cites, i.e., Articles 10, 19.3, 
19.4 and 32.1 of the SCM Agreement and Article VI:3 of the GATT, or with Article I:1 of the same 
Agreement, we do not need to examine further the extent to which the concurrent imposition of anti-
dumping duties determined under the USDOC's NME methodology and of countervailing duties 
resulted in the imposition of "double remedies" in the four investigations at issue.  For this reason, we 
do not decide whether China has conclusively established that, in the investigations at issue, double 
remedies resulted from the concurrent imposition of anti-dumping duties calculated under the U.S. 
NME methodology and of countervailing duties.  We therefore also do not consider the specific 
examples submitted by China from these investigations in order to determine whether they support its 
arguments. 
                                                                                                                                                              
value of a market economy producer is constructed using costs that do not reflect the subsidies that this producer 
received. 
973 United States second written submission, para. 192. 
974 The United States also contests the notion that surrogate values are necessarily "unsubsidized". It 
notes in this respect that in some instances in the investigations at issue, the surrogate value was inferior to the 
producers' actual costs.  (United States response to Panel question 27 (second meeting); comments on China's 
response to Panel question 26 (second meeting).  That this would be the case does not, in our view, undermine 
the conclusions we reach above:  what we conclude is not that the totality of every dumping margin calculated 
under an NME methodology results from subsidization but, rather that where a margin of dumping is found to 
exist under such a methodology, it likely reflects not only dumping, but also subsidization.   
975 The USDOC itself seems to have made this assumption in the past.  See footnote 972, supra. 
976 Exhibits CHI-121, p. 48; CHI-169, pp. 17-19.  We note that the GAO indicated that the experts it 
consulted agreed that in theory, the double remedy would be significant.  (Exhibit CHI-169, p. 28). 


WT/DS379/R 
Page 230 
 
 
 
3. 
Claims under Article VI of the GATT 1994 and Articles 10, 19.3, 19.4 and 32.1 of the 
SCM Agreement 
(a) 
Main arguments of the Parties 
(i) 
China 
14.77  China argues that by virtue of the collective operation of Article VI:3 of the GATT and 
Articles 10 of the SCM Agreement, read in light of Articles 19.1, 19.3, and 19.4 of the SCM 
Agreement, the United States has an affirmative legal obligation to (i) ensure that it does not impose 
countervailing duties to offset subsidies that it simultaneously offsets through the methods by which it 
calculates anti-dumping duties; (ii) take "all necessary steps" to ensure that this does not occur; and 
(iii) ensure that investigating authorities investigate and make a determination as to the "precise 
amount of a subsidy attributed to the imported products under investigation", taking into account that 
using simultaneously an NME anti-dumping methodology has the effect of offsetting the same 
subsidies.977  China submits that in the investigations at issue, the USDOC failed to investigate and 
avoid the imposition of double remedies, did not take any steps to determine "whether, and in what 
amount" the use of market-determined costs of production in the parallel anti-dumping investigations 
had the effect of offsetting the same subsidies that it identified in the countervailing duty 
investigations978, and therefore, did not "ascertain the precise amount of a subsidy attributed to the 
imported products under investigation".979 
14.78 China makes an analogy with panel and Appellate Body jurisprudence on extinction of 
subsidies in the context of privatization (US – Countervailing Measures on Certain EC Products), and 
on pass-through of subsidies to downstream producers (US - Softwood Lumber IV) and argues that, as 
in these cases, the calculation of a dumping margin pursuant to the U.S. NME methodology is an 
event that calls into question whether any subsidy remains to offset.  China further considers that, like 
a situation of "privatization" at arm's length for fair market value, using an NME methodology to 
calculate anti-dumping duties places the investigated producer in a position of having market-
determined costs of production, such that there remains no benefit to be countervailed.980 
14.79 China considers that the imposition of double remedies is inconsistent with Article 19.4 of the 
SCM Agreement because any countervailing duty imposed in addition to the anti-dumping duty is in 
"excess of the subsidy found to exist" given that the United States has already offset the subsidy 
                                                   
977 China second written submission, paras. 243-247; response to Panel question  76 (first meeting).  
China notes that in US – Countervailing Measures on Certain EC Products, the Appellate Body held that these 
provisions define "the obligation of Members to limit countervailing duties to the amount and duration of the 
subsidy found to exist by the investigating authority".  China further argues that as with arm's-length sales of 
subsidized input products, the use of an anti-dumping methodology, which has the effect of offsetting subsidies, 
calls into question whether there remains a "subsidy" to "offset" through the imposition of countervailing duties 
and that in such circumstance it is the obligation of the investigating authority to "establish[] whether, and in 
what amount" there is still a subsidy to offset in respect of the imported product.  On this, China cites to the 
Appellate Body Report in US – Softwood Lumber IV.  (China response to Panel question 76 (first meeting), 
citing to Appellate Body Reports on US – Countervailing Measures on Certain EC Products, para. 139 and US 
– Softwood Lumber IV, para. 141). 
978 China second written submission, paras. 248-250. 
979 China response to Panel question 76 (first meeting); second written submission, paras. 245 and 249.  
China argues that given that the United States will already have offset the entire amount of the subsidy found to 
exist through the application of countervailing duties, the United States acts inconsistently with its obligations 
under the covered agreements to the extent that the simultaneous imposition of anti-dumping duties determined 
in accordance with its NME methodology offsets any portion of these subsidies.  (China response to Panel 
question 92 (first meeting)). 
980 China second written submission, paras. 233-238. 


 
WT/DS379/R  
 
Page 231 
 
 
 
through the NME anti-dumping methodology.981  Further, China rejects the United States' argument 
that the "amount of the subsidy" in Article 19.4 is not the amount that should have been properly 
determined under WTO rules.982 
14.80 China also claims that the imposition of double remedies in the investigations at issue was 
inconsistent with the obligation, under Article 19.3 of the SCM Agreement, to impose countervailing 
duties "in the appropriate amounts".983  Citing the panel report in EC – Salmon (Norway), China 
argues that the "appropriateness" of the amount in Article 19.3 must be determined in light of the 
purpose of the duty.  Given that the purpose of countervailing duties is to "offset" subsidies, China 
argues that it is not "appropriate" to impose countervailing duties to offset subsidies that the 
investigating authority offsets through the method by which it calculates anti-dumping duties in 
respect of the same products.984 
14.81 China also rejects the United States' suggestion that its claims under Articles 19.3 and 19.4 
are about whether "the sum" of the anti-dumping and countervailing duties is in excess of the 
"appropriate amounts" or that anti-dumping duties are "actually CVDs in disguise" as the 
United States asserts.  Rather, China submits, its claims are that the countervailing duties imposed by 
the USDOC are not "in the appropriate amounts" since they are in excess of the subsidy found to 
exist.985  In addition, referring the Panel to prior decisions on the WTO-consistency of U.S. original 
investigations in which the panel and/or the Appellate Body made findings under Articles VI:3 of the 
GATT and 19.3 and 19.4 of the SCM Agreement or referred to these provisions, China rejects the 
United States' argument that the use of the term "levy" indicates that these provisions do not apply to 
U.S. original investigations determinations.986 
14.82 China also rejects the United States' characterization of its position as being that the importing 
Member must choose between the use of countervailing duties and the use of an NME methodology.  
China considers that the United States is free to engage in the concurrent application of countervailing 
and anti-dumping duties determined in accordance with an NME methodology, and that the question 
before the Panel is not a question of "concurrent application" per se, but rather a question of whether 
the United States may impose countervailing duties without accounting for the fact that it offsets the 
same subsidies through the manner in which it calculates anti-dumping duties.987  In other words, the 
USDOC is free to impose both remedies simultaneously, as long as it takes steps to ensure that no 
double remedy ensues.  China adds that in GPX, the U.S. Court of International Trade held that the 
USDOC may choose either to forego the imposition of countervailing duties on products to which it 
applies the NME methodology, or "adopt additional policies and procedures to adapt its NME AD and 
CVD methodologies to account for the imposition of countervailing duty remedies on merchandise 
from the PRC".988 
14.83 China also considers that the United States' position on the WTO-consistency of double 
remedies is based on a complete disregard for the object and purpose of the SCM Agreement.  China 
notes that the Appellate Body has observed that the object and purpose of the SCM Agreement is "to 
                                                   
981 China's first written submission, paras. 375-379; second written submission, paras. 255-257, citing 
to the Panel Report on US – Countervailing Measures on Certain EC Products, para. 8.1(a), and Appellate 
Body Report on US – Countervailing Measures on Certain EC Products, para. 161(a). 
982 China second written submission, footnote 218; response to Panel question 86 (first meeting). 
983 China first written submission, paras. 380-384. 
984 China second written submission, paras. 251-254; response to Panel question 89 (first meeting), 
citing to Panel Report on EC – Salmon (Norway), paras. 7.704-7.705. 
985 China second written submission, paras. 253-254 and 258. 
986 China response to Panel question 52 (first meeting). 
987 China oral statement at the first meeting of the Panel, paras. 75-76; second written submission, paras. 
208-209 and 212; response to Panel question 69; oral statement at the second meeting of the Panel, paras. 68-69. 
988 China oral statement at the second meeting of the Panel, para. 68. 


WT/DS379/R 
Page 232 
 
 
 
strengthen and improve GATT disciplines relating to the use of both subsidies and countervailing 
measures" and that Part V of the SCM Agreement, in particular, is meant to impose disciplines on the 
use of countervailing duties.  China considers that for a Member to obtain twice the remedy to which 
it is entitled is no discipline at all.989 
14.84 China rejects the United States' suggestion that the drafters of the GATT, of the SCM 
Agreement and of China's Protocol of Accession intended to allow the imposition of double remedies 
resulting from the concurrent use of NME methodologies and of countervailing duties.  In this respect, 
China argues that the fact that Article VI:5 of the GATT 1994 addresses one particular circumstance 
in which a double remedy could arise does not mean that (i) there are no other circumstances in which 
a double remedy could arise (as the USDOC has in fact recognized), or (ii) all these other forms of 
double remedies are therefore permissible.  Nor does China believe that the absence of an express 
provision in the SCM Agreement and/or the GATT relating to the imposition of double remedies in 
the case of domestic subsidies means that double remedies are permissible.  China notes that there are 
many issues – e.g. the WTO jurisprudence on "privatization" (effect of a privatization of state-owned 
assets on previously-conferred subsidies) and "pass-through" (treatment of subsidies conferred upon 
upstream inputs) – relating to subsidies and countervailing duties that the covered agreements do not 
expressly address.  This has not prevented panels and the Appellate Body from finding that the 
covered agreements nonetheless impose disciplines on a Member's actions in respect of those issues. 
14.85 Further, China considers that the fact that Article 15 of the Tokyo Round Subsidies Code was 
not replicated in the SCM Agreement cannot be interpreted to mean that double remedies arising from 
the use of an NME methodology in conjunction with countervailing duties are permissible.  China 
argues in this regard that the circumstances surrounding the Uruguay Round negotiations strongly 
suggest that issues relating to these double remedies were no longer considered relevant at the time:  
during the Uruguay Round, (i) no Contracting Party had a practice of applying an NME methodology 
concurrently with the application of countervailing duties to the same product; (ii) the United States – 
by far the largest user of countervailing duties – had taken a clear position at the beginning of the 
Uruguay Round that it would not apply countervailing duties to imports of NMEs; (iii) towards the 
end of the Uruguay Round, the USDOC's position was that it could apply countervailing duties to 
imports from NME countries, but only if it were to find that the industry in question was a "market-
oriented industry"; (iv) under U.S. practice, the former Soviet bloc countries (which were in a process 
of transition to market economies) were subject to the NME methodology, but not countervailing 
duties, until the United States classified them as market economies.  Against this backdrop, China 
considers that it is likely that the drafters of the SCM Agreement no longer considered the subject-
matter of Article 15 of the Tokyo Round Subsidies Code to be relevant. 990 
(ii) 
United States 
14.86 The United States takes the position that the covered agreements do not prohibit the 
imposition of double remedies in respect of domestic subsidies. 
14.87 The United States argues that anti-dumping and countervailing duties are two distinct 
instruments, meant to address different kinds of harm, and that where the criteria for the imposition of 
each remedy are satisfied, duties may be imposed up to a level prescribed by the respective 
agreement.991  The sole limitation in this respect is, the United States submits, the one found in 
Article VI:5 of the GATT 1994, which applies only in the case of export subsidization.992  The 
                                                   
989 Id., paras. 64-65. 
990 China second written submission, para. 211; response to Panel questions 69 and 70 (first meeting). 
991 United States first written submission, paras. 389-394. 
992 United States first written submission, paras. 388 and 395-409; opening statement at the first 
meeting of the Panel, para. 50 and 55; second written submission, para. 208; response to Panel questions 75, 84 


 
WT/DS379/R  
 
Page 233 
 
 
 
United States infers from the absence of any similar provision with respect to domestic subsidies that 
Members did not agree that any other circumstances warranted a restriction on the concurrent 
application of the AD and CVD instruments.  The United States also attaches significance to the fact 
that Article 15 of the Tokyo Round Subsidies Code (which provided that, for imports from NMEs, 
Members could resort to either anti-dumping or to countervailing duties) was not carried forward in 
the SCM Agreement.   The United States further reads Article 15 as an indication that the parties to 
the Code considered that no other provision in the GATT 1947 contained a similar requirement 
prohibiting the concurrent application of anti-dumping and countervailing duties to NMEs, and infers 
from the non-inclusion of a similar provision in the SCM Agreement that a prohibition on the 
concurrent use of anti-dumping and countervailing duties to NMEs no longer exists.993  The 
United States, repeating an argument made by Argentina, also notes that the Tokyo Round Code 
contained provisions that were virtually identical to Articles 19.3 and 19.4 of the SCM Agreement; 
had these provisions prohibited the imposition of double remedies, as China contends, there would 
have been no need to include in the same Code an express prohibition on concurrent anti-dumping 
and countervailing duty investigations.994  Finally, the United States submits that China's Protocol of 
Accession makes clear, at Section 15, that Members contemplated the concurrent application of 
countervailing duties and of anti-dumping measures calculated on the basis of surrogate values, 
without any limitation on the use of countervailing duties in such circumstances, and without any 
limitation on the concurrent application of both remedies. 
14.88 Related to this, the United States argues that the logic of China's argument necessarily 
imposes upon Members a choice between imposing anti-dumping duties on the basis of an NME 
methodology and imposing countervailing duties; in other words, that China is in fact challenging the 
concurrent application of countervailing duties and of anti-dumping duties calculated using the NME 
methodology.  The United States submits in this respect that while China suggests that the concurrent 
application of anti-dumping and countervailing duties would still be permissible where the 
investigating authority takes "steps" to ensure that the NME normal value does not offset the same 
subsidies twice, China also considers that the NME normal value "necessarily" fully offsets the same 
subsidies "in all cases".995 
14.89 Responding to China's argument that at the time of the Uruguay Round, the concurrent 
application of anti-dumping and countervailing measures in respect of NMEs was no longer 
"relevant", the United States argues that regardless of their specific reason for doing so, the fact 
remains that Members did not include Article 15 of the Tokyo Round Subsidies Code in the SCM 
Agreement.996  The United States further indicates that China's accession was negotiated against the 
backdrop of this provision, and that China's Protocol of Accession affirms Members' unqualified right 
                                                                                                                                                              
and 85 (first meeting).  The United States also finds it notable that the inclusion in the GATT, in 1955, of the 
second Ad Note to Article VI:1 (which recognizes that, in certain cases, surrogate prices would be used to 
construct the normal value) was not accompanied by a broadening of Article VI:5.  The United States indicates 
that it was an NME Contracting Party, Czechoslovakia, that proposed an amendment to the GATT 1947 which 
resulted in the second Ad Note to Article VI.  The United States notes that subsidies were not mentioned as one 
of the reasons for the amendment; rather, the focus was on finding appropriate price comparisons where the 
internal prices and costs of an NME were unreliable due to the State fixing prices or to State monopolization.  
(United States comments on China's response to Panel question 26(b)). 
993 United States first written submission, paras. 403-409, citing to Appellate Body Report on US – 
Underwear, pp. 14-15, DSR 1997:I, at 11. 
994 United States second written submission, para. 218; response to Panel question 28 (second meeting), 
referring to Articles 4.2 and 4.3 of the Tokyo Round Subsidies Code. 
995 United States second written submission, paras. 177-179; opening statement at the second meeting 
of the Panel, paras. 51-55. 
996 United States opening statement at the first meeting of the Panel, para. 53; second written 
submission, paras. 210-211; response to Panel questions 70 and 75 (first meeting). 


WT/DS379/R 
Page 234 
 
 
 
to apply anti-dumping and countervailing duties in the context of domestic subsidies while treating 
China as an NME.997 
14.90 Turning to China's arguments in support of its claims of violation, the United States submits 
that China's reliance on the privatization and pass-through jurisprudence is misplaced.  The 
United States notes China's argument that this jurisprudence concerned situations that the SCM 
Agreement did not explicitly address, and that panels and the Appellate Body nevertheless recognized 
the applicability of GATT and SCM provisions to those situations.  By contrast, the United States 
submits, the covered agreements are anything but silent on the issue before this Panel, that of the 
concurrent application of countervailing duties and of anti-dumping duties determined under an NME 
methodology.998 
14.91 The United States also notes that the provisions cited by China (primarily Articles 19.3 and 
19.4 of the SCM Agreement) only impose disciplines with respect to countervailing duties and that 
China does not claim that the countervailing duties imposed by the USDOC in the investigations at 
issue exceeded the amounts of the subsidies found to exist or that the USDOC did not properly 
calculate the subsidies amount.  Rather, in the view of the United States, China's claim under 
Article 19.4 is that the amount of the subsidy is exceeded by the sum of the anti-dumping duty in each 
anti-dumping investigation and of the countervailing duty in each corresponding countervailing duty 
investigation, and as a result, China erroneously implies that an anti-dumping duty calculated under 
the NME methodology must be understood to constitute a countervailing duty within the meaning of 
the SCM Agreement, whereas those anti-dumping duties are not "levied for the purpose of offsetting 
any subsidy".999  According to the United States, the fact that part of the methodology used to 
calculate the normal value rejects home market prices and costs due to broad distortions in a non-
market economy does not somehow transform the anti-dumping duty itself into a countervailing 
duty.1000 
14.92 The United States further argues that Article 19.4 is limited to the question of whether the 
countervailing duties levied correspond to the amount of the subsidy found to exist by the 
investigating authority and does not govern whether that amount was properly determined in 
accordance with WTO rules (i.e., the amount that should have been found had the investigating 
authority complied with other WTO rules).1001  For similar reasons – because China does not contest 
the fact that the duties imposed pursuant to the four countervailing duty investigations at issue in this 
                                                   
997 United States opening statement at the first meeting of the Panel, para. 54; second written 
submission, para. 212.  The United States also notes that during the period of China's accession negotiations, 
imports from China were the subject of 30 anti-dumping investigations conducted under the NME methodology, 
yet China's Protocol of Accession and Working Party Report do not reflect any concerns China may have had in 
respect of that methodology, and in particular, any concerns China may have had that the methodology 
addressed not only price discrimination, but also subsidization.  The United States also infers from 
paragraph 151(a) of the Working Party Report that China sought to ensure that Members that had not yet 
developed NME methodologies would do so along the lines of the U.S. NME methodology.  (United States 
opening statement at the second meeting of the Panel, para. 58). 
998 United States opening statement at the second meeting of the Panel, paras. 60-61. 
999 United States opening statement at the first meeting of the Panel, paras. 58 and 60-61; second 
written submission, paras. 216-217. 
1000 The United States also argues that if China's view that the NME methodology is designed to offset 
subsidization is accepted, then any anti-dumping duty calculated pursuant to the NME methodology would fall 
squarely within the definition of "countervailing duty" contained in footnote 36 to the SCM Agreement.  Thus, 
the United States adds, as required by Article 10 of the SCM Agreement, such an anti-dumping duty could "only 
be imposed pursuant to [an] investigation[] initiated and conducted in accordance with [the SCM Agreement]", 
and that this would be the case whether or not a concurrent countervailing duty case were ongoing.  
(United States opening statement at the second meeting of the Panel, para. 77). 
1001 See, e.g., United States response to Panel questions 86 and 87 (first meeting). 


 
WT/DS379/R  
 
Page 235 
 
 
 
dispute do not exceed the amount of the subsidy bestowed upon each exporter – the United States 
submits that China's claim under Article 19.3 has no merit.  The United States argues that the 
"appropriateness" of the amounts of countervailing duties under Article 19.3 relates to the 
subsidization rate calculated for each "source[] found to be subsidized and causing injury" and that 
China does not allege that the countervailing duty amounts are not those that the USDOC found for 
"each source".1002 
14.93 In addition to these arguments, the United States takes the view that the reference to "levy" in 
Article VI:3 of the GATT and in Articles 19.3 and 19.4 of the SCM Agreement, in conjunction with 
footnote 51 of the SCM Agreement, means that these provisions impose no disciplines with respect to 
original investigations.  This is because, in the  view of the United States, under the U.S. retrospective 
duty assessment system, duties are not actually collected until an administrative review is conducted 
or the deadline for such review lapses.1003 
14.94 Finally, the United States submits that the Opinion of the U.S. Court of International Trade in 
GPX should have no bearing on the Panel's consideration of this dispute because it is an opinion of a 
U.S. court interpreting U.S. law, whereas this dispute concerns the interpretation of the WTO 
agreements, including provisions from China's Protocol of Accession, that do not appear in U.S. law.  
In addition, the United States notes that the Court's decision in GPX is still subject to appeal.1004 
(b) 
Main arguments of the Third Parties 
(i) 
Argentina 
14.95 Argentina considers that Article VI:5 of the GATT 1994, the sole WTO provision expressly 
limiting the simultaneous imposition of both anti-dumping and countervailing duties, is limited to 
situations of "export subsidization", and that the concurrent application of both remedies in the case of 
actionable subsidies is therefore WTO-consistent.  In Argentina's view, had the drafters intended to 
prohibit the simultaneous imposition of anti-dumping and countervailing duties for situations other 
than export subsidization, they would have done so explicitly, as they did in Article VI:5.  Argentina 
also notes that China's Protocol of Accession recognizes not only the use of an NME methodology in 
anti-dumping investigations involving imports of Chinese origin but also that Chinese imports can be 
subject to countervailing duty investigations, and submits that to exempt China from the simultaneous 
imposition of anti-dumping and countervailing duties would give it preferential treatment compared to 
other Members.  Argentina considers that neither of the provisions on which China bases it claims, 
Articles 19.3 and 19.4, address, directly or indirectly, the issue of simultaneous imposition of anti-
dumping and countervailing duties or of double remedies.  Argentina also notes that the wording of 
Articles 19.4 is identical to the wording of Article 4.2 of the Tokyo Round Subsidies Code, and that 
Article 19.3 is almost identical to Article 4.3 of the Tokyo Round Subsidies Code.  Thus, Argentina 
argues, had the Tokyo Round Subsidies Code prohibited the concurrent imposition of anti-dumping 
duties calculated under an NME methodology and of countervailing duties, Article 15.1 of the Tokyo 
Round Code would have been devoid of meaning.1005 
(ii) 
Australia 
                                                   
1002 United States first written submission, paras. 424-427; opening statement at the second meeting of 
the Panel, paras. 64-65. 
1003 See, e.g., United States second written submission, para. 215; response to Panel question 87 (first 
meeting). 
1004 See above, para.14.59, for the United States' argument to the effect that the GPX decision is in error 
and that, even on its own terms, it does not support the position taken by China in the present dispute. 
1005 Argentina third-party submission, paras. 8-29; third-party oral statement, paras. 3-5. 


WT/DS379/R 
Page 236 
 
 
 
14.96 Australia considers that anti-dumping and countervailing duties are two distinct trade 
remedies and that nothing in Article VI of the GATT or elsewhere in the WTO Agreements prevents 
concurrent anti-dumping and countervailing duty investigations of the same product; in fact, Australia 
submits, the text of Article VI:5 reinforces the right of Members to do both.  In Australia's view, the 
calculation of the normal value in an anti-dumping investigation is an inquiry that is separate from 
that the determination of the existence and amount of a subsidy in a countervailing duty investigation.  
Australia also invites the Panel to clarify the meaning of the terms "situation of export subsidization" 
in Article VI:5, which it considers to be unclear.  Australia argues that it cannot be assumed that these 
terms agreed to in 1947 can be equated with any meaning attributed to the categories of subsidies as 
agreed to in the SCM Agreement in 1994 and that it is therefore conceivable that the expression 
"situation of export subsidisation" also cover certain situations in which a domestic subsidy is 
provided to a good which is exported.  Likewise, Australia submits that it is not clear whether the 
terms "same situation" of dumping or export subsidization in Article VI:5 refer to the existence of 
subsidization or dumping or to the injurious effects.1006 
(iii) 
Brazil 
14.97 Brazil argues that nothing in the AD and SCM Agreements suggests that parallel anti-
dumping and countervailing measures cannot be imposed, and notes that neither agreement contains 
any cross-reference conditioning the imposition of one remedy on the satisfaction of requirements 
established in relation to the other.  Brazil considers that Article VI:5 of the GATT 1994 contains the 
sole limitation on the concurrent application of anti-dumping and countervailing measures.  Further, 
Brazil submits, this provision shows that Members were well aware that if they intended to impose 
any restrictions or conditions on the parallel application of anti-dumping and countervailing measures, 
they had to do so explicitly.  Brazil considers that the existence of an explicit ban with respect to 
export subsidies can be read contrario sensu to allow for the concomitant application of both duties in 
all other situations.  Brazil also considers that the fact that Article 15 of the Tokyo Round Subsides 
Code was not replicated in the SCM Agreement underscores the intention of its drafters not to 
prohibit the combined imposition of anti-dumping and countervailing duties on imports from 
Members, irrespective of their status as market or non-market economies.  Brazil is of the view that 
the legal permissibility for the parallel application of anti-dumping and countervailing measures, and 
its underlying logic, apply indistinctly to investigations conducted in relation to market economy 
Members and non-market economy Members.  Accepting the argument that methodological 
challenges arising from price comparability difficulties in non-market economy Members somehow 
constrain the parallel application of anti-dumping and countervailing measures in relation to them 
would result in discrimination against "market economy" Members.1007 
(iv) 
Canada 
14.98 Canada agrees with the United States that the concurrent use of the NME methodology and 
countervailing duties is permissible under the SCM Agreement.  Canada's view is that when an 
imported product is both dumped and subsidized, the importing Member may impose both anti-
dumping duties equal to the margin of dumping and countervailing duties equal to the amount of the 
subsidy.  Canada submits that this right is confirmed – and circumscribed – by Article VI:5 of the 
GATT 1994, such that (read a contrario), this provision confirms the ability of WTO Members to 
impose concurrent anti-dumping and countervailing duties in circumstances other than export 
subsidization.  Canada further argues that if WTO Members had intended to prohibit the concurrent 
application of anti-dumping duties calculated on the basis of subparagraph 15(a)(ii) of China's 
Protocol of Accession and countervailing duties, they could have stated that intention in the Protocol 
as they had done earlier in the Tokyo Round Subsidies Code; instead, Sections 15(a) and 15(b) of 
                                                   
1006 Australia third-party submission, paras. 41-51; third-party response to Panel questions 19 and 23. 
1007 Brazil third-party submission, paras. 14-18; third-party oral statement, paras. 8-9. 


 
WT/DS379/R  
 
Page 237 
 
 
 
China's Protocol of Accession enable an importing WTO Member to impose anti-dumping duties 
calculated on the basis of out-of-country prices or costs, and countervailing duties.  Finally, Canada 
rejects China's theory that the anti-dumping duty, by itself, compensates for both the dumping and the 
subsidization.  Canada considers that duties in the amount of the subsidy would not violate 
Article 19.3 and 19.4 and that the amount of a concurrent anti-dumping duty has no bearing on the 
amount of a countervailing duty, except as provided for in Article VI:5 , which is not the case here.1008 
(v) 
European Communities 
14.99 The European Communities considers that anti-dumping and countervailing duties are two 
separate remedies to counter two different types of unfair trade practices under two distinct WTO 
agreements and that the only WTO provision expressly limiting the right of Members to impose both 
types of duty is Article VI:5 of GATT 1994.  The European Communities agrees with the 
United States that by choosing not to include a provision similar to Article 15 of the Tokyo Round 
Subsidies Code in the SCM Agreement, WTO Members recognised Article VI:5 as the only provision 
limiting the simultaneous imposition of both types of remedies.  The European Communities also 
agrees with the United States that nothing in China's Protocol of Accession expressly limits such a 
simultaneous imposition.  Further, the European Communities considers that there can be no breach 
of Article 19.4 if the duty imposed does not exceed the amount of subsidy properly established under 
the rules of the SCM Agreement and that just because a measure taken under another agreement (in 
this case, an anti-dumping duty) may be alleged to in some way offset subsidisation does not create a 
violation of Article 19.4.  The European Communities further agrees with the United States that the 
limited scope of Article VI:5 is explained by the fact that, where the normal value is based on sales, a 
neutral subsidy may reasonably be considered to press down equally on both sides of the dumping 
calculation, and therefore the dumping calculation would remain unaffected by the subsidy analysis.  
Finally, the European Communities considers that the SCM Agreement does not require the showing 
of any causal link between subsidies and exports and/or that subsidies have caused export prices to 
decrease; the inquiry is limited to the effects of the subsidised imports on prices in the importing 
country.1009 
(vi) 
India 
14.100 India considers anti-dumping and countervailing duties to be two separate remedies to counter 
two different types of situations of trade distortion.  India considers that the provision which expressly 
limits the right of WTO Members to impose both types of duty is Article VI:5 of GATT 1994.  India 
considers that the legal permissibility for the parallel application of anti-dumping and countervailing 
measures, and its underlying logic, apply to investigations conducted both in relation to market 
economy Members and non-market economy Members.1010 
(vii) 
Japan 
14.101 Japan submits that although Article VI:5 of GATT 1994 does not prohibit the simultaneous 
imposition of anti-dumping and countervailing duties in situations other than "export subsidization", 
this provision is the expression of an underlying principle that an importing Member may not impose 
a double remedy against the same subsidy, a principle to which Members should give due regard.  
Japan submits that Article VI:5 provides no explicit requirement on the prohibition of double 
remedies in situations other than export subsidization because a double remedy may or may not occur, 
depending on the method used in the calculation of the margin of dumping in a given case.  With 
                                                   
1008 Canada third-party submission, paras. 42-56; third-party response to Panel questions 12 and 14-16. 
1009 European Communities third-party oral statement, paras. 2-10; third-party response to Panel 
question 15. 
1010 India third-party oral statement.  (this statement contains no paragraph numbering). 


WT/DS379/R 
Page 238 
 
 
 
respect to the legal bases for China's claims, Japan considers that Article 19.4 is irrelevant to how an 
anti-dumping duty would be determined in the separate anti-dumping investigation in accordance with 
the provisions of the AD Agreement.  With respect to Article 19.3, Japan notes that this provision 
accords the importing Member the discretion to impose a countervailing duty deemed as appropriate 
to the extent that the duty does not exceed the amount of the subsidy found to exist, and that no 
further obligations are placed on the authorities' determination of the "appropriate amount".1011 
(viii) 
Mexico 
14.102 Mexico takes the view that when countervailing duties target domestic subsidies, the 
simultaneous application of anti-dumping and countervailing duties is consistent with the rules of the 
WTO.1012  Mexico argues that when the negotiators of the WTO Agreements considered it necessary 
to prohibit the simultaneous application of different mechanisms, they did so expressly.  In this 
respect, Mexico notes in particular that a provision similar to Article 15 of the Tokyo Round 
Subsidies Code was not included in the SCM Agreement.  Mexico also notes that Section 15 of 
China's Protocol of Accession recognizes the surrogate country methodology and acknowledges that 
Chinese imports may be subject to countervailing duty investigations.  Mexico argues that if China, in 
negotiating its accession, had succeeded in negotiating a prohibition on the simultaneous application 
of anti-dumping and countervailing duties on its products, this would have been specified in the 
Protocol.  Mexico considers that neither Article 19.3 nor Article 19.4 of the SCM Agreement provides 
a basis for China's claim.  Finally, Mexico argues that exempting China from the parallel imposition 
of anti-dumping duties and countervailing duties would give China preferential treatment relative to 
all other Members.1013 
(ix) 
Norway 
14.103 Norway considers that where the normal value is constructed on the basis of "non-distorted" 
or "benchmark" prices (including prices from a surrogate county) for the (otherwise subsidized) inputs, 
then the effect of any subsidy is "extinguished" in the constructed normal value calculation and that in 
such cases, applying an anti-dumping duty up to the maximum permitted under the AD Agreement 
will provide a remedy for the subsidization at the same time.  Norway argues that applying a 
countervailing duty in such cases will be neither appropriate under Article 19.3 of the SCM 
Agreement nor permissible under Article 19.4 of the SCM Agreement.1014 
(c) 
Assessment by the Panel 
(i) 
Introduction 
14.104 We understand the essence of China's argument to be that the imposition of anti-dumping 
duties calculated under the U.S. NME methodology in the four anti-dumping investigations at issue 
effectively "offset" any subsidy provided in respect of the goods concerned, such that there remained 
no subsidy left to countervail.  Thus, China's argument goes, when the United States simultaneously 
                                                   
1011 Japan third-party submission, paras. 3-14; third-party oral statement, para. 5. 
1012 Mexico considers that it is for interested parties to explain and demonstrate the reasons why a 
"double remedy" could arise in contexts other than that of "export subsidies". 
1013 Mexico third-party submission, paras. 12-31; third-party oral statement, paras. 2-5; third-party 
response to Panel questions 19-21. 
1014 Norway third-party submission, paras. 38-47.  As noted above, para.14.66, Norway argues that in 
the investigations at issue, the USDOC appears to have used a market-economy cost of production free from any 
distortion and therefore that by applying the full anti-dumping duty up to this third-country market benchmark, 
all effects of the subsidization would have been extinguished, such that applying a countervailing duty in such 
cases will be neither appropriate under Article 19.3 of the SCM Agreement, nor permissible under Article 19.4 
of the SCM Agreement. 


 
WT/DS379/R  
 
Page 239 
 
 
 
imposed countervailing duties on the same products, it levied duties in excess of the amount of 
subsidy "found to exist", contrary to Article 19.4 of the SCM Agreement, and acted inconsistently 
with its obligation to levy duties "in the appropriate amounts" pursuant to Article 19.3 of the SCM 
Agreement.  In addition, China claims that the USDOC failed to take "all necessary steps" to ensure 
that it imposed countervailing duties for the purpose of offsetting subsidies that continued to exist, 
thereby acting inconsistently with the requirements of Article VI of the GATT 1994 and of Article 10 
of the SCM Agreement. 
14.105 The USDOC's treatment of the issue of double remedies in the investigations at issue is not in 
debate.  The parties agree that where interested parties raised "double remedy" arguments in the 
investigations at issue, the USDOC rejected them and that the USDOC did not take into consideration 
the anti-dumping duties imposed on the same products when it imposed countervailing duties in the 
four countervailing duty investigations at issue:  it imposed countervailing duties corresponding to the 
full amount of subsidies found to have been conferred on each investigated producer.1015 
(ii) 
Claim under Article 19.4 of the SCM Agreement 
14.106 We first consider China's claim under Article 19.4 of the SCM Agreement.  China's argument 
in this respect is that the United States levied countervailing duties "in excess of the amount of 
subsidy found to exist" as a result of each of the countervailing duty orders at issue because it had 
already offset the subsidies at issue as a result of the concurrent imposition of anti-dumping duties 
calculated under the U.S. NME methodology. 
14.107 We begin our analysis by considering the text of Article 19.4 of the SCM Agreement: 
"No countervailing duty shall be levied51 on any imported product in excess of the 
amount of the subsidy found to exist, calculated in terms of subsidization per unit of 
the subsidized and exported product. 
_______________________________ 
 
51 As used in this Agreement "levy" shall mean the definitive or final legal assessment or 
collection of a duty or tax." 
14.108 By virtue of the ordinary meaning of its text, Article 19.4 of the SCM Agreement imposes a 
maximum limit on the amount of duties that may be "levied", corresponding to the amount of the 
subsidy that is found to exist.  By necessary implication, Article 19.4 also provides that no 
countervailing duties may be imposed on an imported product if no subsidy is found to exist given 
that in such a case, the amount of subsidy found to exist would be zero.1016 
14.109 The parties disagree as to whether Article 19.4 is at all applicable to the situation before us:  
The United States argues that, by virtue of the use in Article 19.4 of the term "levy" and of the 
definition of this term in footnote 51 as "the definitive or final legal assessment or collection of 
duties", Article 19.4 imposes obligations only with respect to the final collection of duties.  The 
United States notes that no such final collection of duties has taken place as a result of the 
investigations at issue.  China rejects this interpretation.  The parties also disagree as to whether the 
terms "found to exist" in Article 19.4 refer to the amount of subsidy calculated by the investigating 
authority, regardless of whether that amount was calculated consistently with the SCM Agreement.  
The distinction is important because China does not argue that the countervailing duties imposed in 
                                                   
1015 See above, para.14.6, and corresponding footnotes for a summary of the USDOC's treatment of the 
issue of double remedy in the anti-dumping and countervailing duty investigations at issue. 
1016 Panel Report on US – Lead and Bismuth II, para. 6.52. 


WT/DS379/R 
Page 240 
 
 
 
each of the investigations at issue, in and of themselves, exceeded the amount of the subsidy 
calculated by the USDOC.1017 
14.110 But a more fundamental disagreement between the parties is whether a subsidy existed in the 
first place, thereby allowing the USDOC to impose countervailing duties.  China argues that the 
USDOC's use of its NME methodology in the parallel anti-dumping investigations had the effect of 
offsetting subsidies, such that there remained no subsidy to "offset" through the imposition of 
countervailing duties. 
14.111 China likens the concurrent imposition of an anti-dumping duty determined in accordance 
with an NME methodology to the factual situations examined in prior panel and Appellate Body 
reports in which it was found that a subsidy granted to a state-owned producer may be extinguished 
by its arm's length acquisition for a fair market value in a context of privatization (US – 
Countervailing Measures on Certain EC Products)1018; or in which it was found that the benefit of a 
subsidy in respect of inputs may not "pass through" to producers of downstream products processed 
from that input where the downstream producer purchases the input for a fair market value in an arms' 
length transaction (US - Softwood Lumber IV).1019  In each case, the Appellate Body found that these 
situations called into question whether a subsidy had been received by the investigated producer.  
Consequently, the Appellate Body found that the investigating authority had an obligation to establish 
whether and in what amount a subsidy existed in respect of the imported product.  China sees the 
imposition of anti-dumping duties calculated under the U.S. NME methodology as a further situation 
of extinction of subsidy that was not explicitly dealt with under the SCM Agreement. 
14.112 On its face, the terms of Article 19.4 of the SCM Agreement establish a limit to the amount of 
duties that may be "levied", and this limit is dependent only upon "the amount of the subsidy found to 
exist".  Thus, by its own terms, Article 19.4 of the SCM Agreement is oblivious to any potential 
concurrent imposition of anti-dumping duties.  Hence, that an anti-dumping duty calculated under a 
methodology may have the effect of "offsetting" a subsidy in totality or in part has no effect on the 
existence of the subsidy which, under Article 1 of the SCM Agreement, depends on the existence of a 
financial contribution and of a benefit; nor would it have an effect on the amount of the subsidy which, 
under Article 14 of the SCM Agreement, must be determined by reference to the marketplace.1020  In 
sum, the narrowly-crafted discipline contained in Article 19.4 of the SCM Agreement does not 
address situations of "double remedies". 
14.113 Further, we do not consider that there is a pertinent analogy to be made between the facts of 
the present dispute and those in the pass-through and privatization decisions cited by China.  These 
decisions recognize that certain events related to the life of a subsidy may extinguish it or at least call 
into question whether it benefits the manufacture, production or export of the investigated product.  
By contrast, the arguments that China makes before us pertain to the effects of parallel anti-dumping 
duties (i.e., remedies) that are imposed concurrently with the countervailing duties, which effects 
derive from the calculations that lead to the imposition of these remedies.  Again, we consider that the 
fact that an anti-dumping duty calculated under a methodology may have the effect of "offsetting" a 
subsidy in totality or in part in no way means that it extinguishes that subsidy.  Likewise, China's 
                                                   
1017 China challenges the USDOC's benefit calculations, but these are separate claims of violations.  See 
Section X, supra. 
1018  China second written submission, para. 233, citing to Appellate Body Report on US – 
Countervailing Measures on Certain EC Products, para. 102. 
1019 China response to Panel question 76, citing to Appellate Body Report on US – Softwood Lumber IV, 
para. 141. 
1020 Indeed, it is obvious that the mere issuance of an anti-dumping order cannot have the effect of 
changing the position of the recipient in the marketplace. 


 
WT/DS379/R  
 
Page 241 
 
 
 
argument that the use of an NME methodology is tantamount to a "privatization" of the producer1021 is 
inapposite.  China's argument concerns a calculation, more specifically, the use by an investigating 
authority of figures replicating the situation the producer would be in but for government distortions, 
in calculating a margin of dumping.  This situation bears no analogy to the real world events 
examined in the privatization jurisprudence cited by China. 
14.114 It further appears that through its arguments, China seeks to draw an analogy between the 
situation before us and a situation in which more than one countervailing duty is imposed with respect 
to a given subsidy or group of subsidies.  It may very well be that in such a situation of multiple 
countervailing duty investigations on a given imported product, Article 19.4 of the SCM Agreement 
would preclude the cumulative levying of duties in excess of the amount of the subsidy found to exist 
in each of the investigations.  But this is not the situation before us.  By its terms, Article 19.4 only 
imposes disciplines with respect to the levying of countervailing duties, which the covered 
agreements define as special duties levied "for the purpose of offsetting" subsidies pursuant to 
investigations initiated and conducted in accordance with the provisions of the SCM Agreement.1022  
The facts that anti-dumping duties are calculated under an NME methodology and thus may be 
affected by subsidization, and/or that, as a result, the duties may effectively "offset" subsidies granted 
in respect of the product, change neither the purpose, nor the nature of these duties as anti-dumping, 
as opposed to countervailing, duties. 
14.115 In sum, notwithstanding China's efforts to demonstrate otherwise, the terms of Article 19.4 of 
the SCM Agreement do not provide the necessary legal basis for its "double remedy" claim.  Our 
interpretation of Article 19.4 is confirmed by the context to Article 19.4 provided by other relevant 
provisions of the covered agreements.  This context confirms that the common intention of the parties 
to the SCM Agreement was not to address or prohibit, in Article 19.4, the imposition of "double 
remedies" in respect of domestic subsidies. 
14.116 We note, first that the anti-dumping and countervailing duty instruments are provided for and 
addressed under two distinct agreements and are, with the notable exception of Article VI:5, 
addressed under distinct paragraphs of Article VI of the GATT 1994.  Article VI:5, which precisely 
addresses the issue of double remedies, is the only provision under which any limitations are 
explicitly imposed on the concurrent use of the two remedies.  It reads: 
"No product of the territory of any contracting party imported into the territory of any 
other contracting party shall be subject to both anti-dumping and countervailing 
duties to compensate for the same situation of dumping or export subsidization". 
14.117 Thus, by its very terms, Article VI:5 of the GATT 1994 is limited to "situation[s] of [...] 
export subsidization".  In our view, these terms are self-explanatory in their intention to limit the 
scope of the prohibition in Article VI:5 to situations involving export subsidies, to the exclusion of 
situations in which domestic subsidies are granted on exported goods.  Such a narrow reading of the 
terms "situation of [...] export subsidization" is supported by the context to Article VI:5, and in 
particular by the distinction made between domestic vs. export subsidies in Article VI:3 of the 
GATT 1994, which deals with countervailing duties, and by the separate treatment accorded to export 
subsidies under Article XVI of the GATT 1994.  These provisions demonstrate that the drafters 
intended to make a distinction between subsidies granted with respect to the production or 
manufacture of goods (i.e., domestic subsidies) and subsidies granted in respect of the export of goods 
(i.e., export subsidies).  Further, we consider that this interpretation is confirmed by the principle of 
effet utile:  since only imported goods are subject to anti-dumping or countervailing duties, reading 
Article VI:5 as encompassing situations in which domestic subsidies granted to exported goods are 
                                                   
1021 See, e.g., China second written submission, paras. 233-235. 
1022 Article 10 and footnote 36 of the SCM Agreement; Article VI:3 of the GATT 1994. 


WT/DS379/R 
Page 242 
 
 
 
countervailed would effectively read the term "export" out of the relevant sentence of that provision.  
Finally, we note the use of terms equivalent to the expression "export subsidies" in both the French 
and the Spanish texts of Article VI:5.1023 
14.118 Not only is Article VI:5 limited to potential double remedies in respect of export subsidies, 
but the explicit terms in which the drafters addressed the issue in that provision makes it all the more 
unlikely that they sought to prohibit the imposition of double remedies in respect of other types of 
subsidies through Article 19.4 of the SCM Agreement given, again, that Article 19.4 on its face makes 
no reference to that issue.1024 
14.119 We also consider it significant that the predecessor to the SCM Agreement – the Tokyo 
Round Subsidies Code – contained a provision that explicitly addressed the concurrent use of NME 
methodologies in anti-dumping investigations, and of countervailing duties, in respect of imports from 
NMEs.  Where imports from non-market economies were at issue, Article 15 of that Code imposed 
upon the importing Member a choice between the use of anti-dumping measures or of countervailing 
duties.  At the very least1025, the existence of a provision explicitly addressing the issue of the 
concurrent imposition of anti-dumping and countervailing duties on NME imports in the predecessor 
to the SCM Agreement would seem, once again, to lend support to our interpretation of Article 19.4 
of the SCM Agreement as not addressing or encompassing the question of the permissibility of double 
remedies.1026 
14.120 In sum, these two elements from the context1027 to Article 19.4 of the SCM Agreement 
suggest that the Contracting Parties to the GATT, now WTO Members, were aware of the fact that 
certain difficulties, e.g. double remedies, could arise from the concurrent imposition of anti-dumping 
and countervailing duties, and that where they wanted to address issues arising from the concurrent 
imposition of anti-dumping and countervailing duties, they did so in explicit terms.  This makes it all 
the more unlikely that the terms of Article 19.4 of the SCM Agreement reflect an implicit intent on 
the part of the drafters to prohibit the imposition of double remedies with respect to domestic 
subsidies. 
                                                   
1023 The French text reads "à une même situation résultant du dumping ou de subventions à 
l'exportation", whereas the Spanish text reads: "una misma situación resultante del dumping o de las 
subvenciones a la exportación" (our emphasis). 
1024 This is a further difference between the present dispute and the privatization and pass-through 
jurisprudence relied upon by China:  neither of these two issues is addressed explicitly under any of the 
provisions of the covered agreements. 
1025 The parties have not identified any documentary evidence from the Uruguay Round negotiations 
that would cast light on why Article 15 of the Tokyo Round Subsidies Code was not carried forward in the SCM 
Agreement. 
1026 We consider it likely that the rationale for the inclusion of Article 15 of the Tokyo Round Subsidies 
Code was the potential for double remedies to result from the concurrent imposition of NME methodologies in 
calculating anti-dumping duties and of countervailing duties, or at least the recognition that the use of an NME 
methodology would capture price differences resulting from subsidies granted on the product subject to anti-
dumping duties.  Furthermore, we note the argument of Argentina, Mexico and the United States that Article 15 
of the Tokyo Round Subsidies Code would have been redundant had double remedies been prohibited under the 
provisions of the Code imposing a limit on the amount of countervailing duties (i.e., the precursors to 
Articles 19.3 and 19.4 of the SCM Agreement). 
1027 The fact that a provision addressing the issue in dispute was formerly in place but disappeared in a 
successor agreement would seem to fall more properly under the heading of "context" to the treaty provision 
being interpreted (and therefore fall under Article 31 of the Vienna Convention) rather than under the category 
of "supplementary means of interpretation, including the preparatory work of the treaty and the circumstances of 
its conclusion".  This is how the Appellate Body characterized the "prior existence and demise" of a provision of 
a predecessor agreement in US – Underwear, where the Appellate Body characterized this as an "another 
element of the context" of the provision that it was interpreting.  (Appellate Body Report on US – Underwear, p. 
16 DSR 1997:I, at 11). 


 
WT/DS379/R  
 
Page 243 
 
 
 
14.121 Finally we note that by contrast, China's Protocol of Accession contains no provision 
explicitly addressing the issue of double remedies even though it appears to allow for the use of 
countervailing duties while China remains an NME.1028  We do not need to decide whether, as the 
United States argues, China effectively seeks to impose a choice between the use of NME 
methodologies and of countervailing duties where imports from NMEs are concerned.1029  In our view, 
the relevant question is that of the drafters' intent, not the intent behind China's arguments.  In 
addition, the thrust of the United States' arguments on double remedies would suggest that the 
United States itself does not consider the issue to be so clear cut:  the practical import of the 
United States' arguments is that the existence of double remedies is an evidentiary one, and therefore 
that the overlap between the two remedies may only be partial.  In any event, we need not decide 
whether the text of Section 15, viewed in isolation, allows the concurrent imposition of anti-dumping 
duties and countervailing duties in all circumstances without any limitation, thereby imposing no 
constraint on the imposition of double remedies.  Rather, we merely note the absence of any provision 
addressing the question of "double remedy" in China's Protocol of Accession.  In our view, such an 
absence again suggests that the drafters of Article 19.4 of the SCM Agreement did not intend this 
provision to address the issue of double remedies. 
14.122 Finally, we note China's argument that for a Member to obtain twice the remedy would 
frustrate the object and purpose of the SCM Agreement which, the Appellate Body indicated, is "to 
strengthen and improve GATT disciplines relating to the use of both subsidies and countervailing 
measures".  We view China's argument as implying that it is the object and purpose of the SCM 
Agreement to impose disciplines not only with respect to the use of countervailing duties, but also of 
anti-dumping duties.  As explained above, we are of the view that the object and purpose of Part V of 
the SCM Agreement is limited to imposition of disciplines with respect to the former. 
14.123 For these reasons, we find that China has failed to establish that the USDOC's use of its NME 
methodology in the anti-dumping determinations at issue, concurrently with its determination of 
subsidization and the imposition of countervailing duties on the same products in the four 
countervailing duty determinations at issue, was inconsistent with Article 19.4 of the SCM Agreement.  
In light of this finding, we do not need to address the other arguments of the parties with respect to the 
scope of application of Article 19.4 of the SCM Agreement, notably the United States' argument that 
this provision, as well as Articles VI:3 of the GATT 1994 and Article 19.3 of the SCM Agreement, 
cannot form the basis of a claim with respect to the investigations at issue since no duties were 
actually levied as a result of these investigations. 
(iii) 
China's claim under Article 19.3 of the SCM Agreement 
14.124 Article 19.3 of the SCM Agreement provides, in relevant parts: 
"When a countervailing duty is imposed in respect of any product, such 
countervailing duty shall be levied, in the appropriate amounts in each case, on a 
non-discriminatory basis on imports of such product from all sources found to be 
                                                   
1028 China concedes that its Protocol of Accession permits the concurrent imposition of anti-dumping 
duties calculated under an NME methodology and of countervailing duties.  (China response to Panel 
questions 77 and 85 (first meeting)). 
1029 See United States opening statement at the first meeting of the Panel, para. 38:   
 
"China said that it 'does not contend that the United States must 'choose' between the use of 
countervailing duties and the use of an NME methodology,' only that when applying both, 'it must do so in a 
manner that takes into account the fact that it offsets the same alleged subsidies through the manner in which it 
calculates antidumping duties.'  This is simply a distinction without a difference.  … the logic of China's 
argument necessarily suggests that the United States must choose between the use of countervailing duties and 
the use of an NME methodology".  (emphasis original). 


WT/DS379/R 
Page 244 
 
 
 
subsidized and causing injury, except as to imports from those sources which have 
renounced any subsidies in question or from which undertakings under the terms of 
this Agreement have been accepted. [...]".  (emphasis added) 
14.125 On its face, Article 19.3 of the SCM Agreement imposes upon the authorities of the importing 
Member the obligation to levy duties (i) on a non-discriminatory basis on imports from all sources 
found to be subsidized and causing injury and (ii) in "the appropriate amounts" in each case. 
14.126 China's arguments raise the question of the meaning to be given to the terms "appropriate 
amounts" in this provision.  Similar to its arguments under Article 19.4 of the SCM Agreement, China 
submits that the imposition of anti-dumping duties calculated under an NME methodology is a 
relevant consideration in assessing the appropriateness of the amount of duties levied.  China relies on 
the interpretation of Article 19.3 by the panel in EC – Salmon (Norway).  Specifically, China notes 
that the EC – Salmon (Norway) panel found that the "appropriate" amount of a duty is the amount that 
is "proper" or "fitting" in light of the purpose of the duty.1030  China argues, that, applying the same 
reasoning, the "appropriate" amount of a countervailing duty can be no greater than the amount 
necessary to offset the subsidy1031, such that the countervailing duty measures at issue are not "in the 
appropriate amounts" because they offset alleged subsidies that the United States has also offset 
through the manner in which it calculates anti-dumping duties under its NME methodology.1032  China 
also considers that it is not "appropriate" to offset a subsidy that the investigating authority 
simultaneously offsets through the manner in which it calculates anti-dumping duties in respect of the 
same products".1033 
14.127 The panel in EC – Salmon (Norway) considered a claim under Article 9.2 of the AD 
Agreement – which, aside from its reference to anti-dumping duties rather than to countervailing 
duties, is worded in terms that are virtually identical to those of Article 19.3 of the SCM 
Agreement.1034  In light of dictionary definitions of the term "appropriate", the panel considered that it 
was reasonable to interpret this term in Article 9.2 of the AD Agreement to mean that the 
"appropriate" amount of the duty is one which is "proper" or "fitting" in the context of an anti-
dumping investigation, and that what is "proper" or "fitting" should be determined in relation to the 
object and purpose of the collection and imposition of anti-dumping duties.  Consequently, the panel, 
in light of Article VI:2 of the GATT 1994 and of Article 9.1 of the AD Agreement, determined that 
the "appropriate" amount of anti-dumping duty must be an amount that results in offsetting or 
preventing dumping, when all other requirements for the imposition of anti-dumping duties have been 
fulfilled.  On this basis, and because dumping is defined in the agreements as the introduction of a 
product into the commerce of another country at a price which is "less than its normal value", the 
panel found that an anti-dumping duty may only be collected when the price of the imported product 
is less than its normal value, adding that "normal value constitutes a point of reference for 
determining when anti-dumping duties may or may not be imposed and collected".1035 
14.128 We fail to see how the EC – Salmon (Norway) panel's interpretation of the terms "appropriate 
amounts" could support China's claim under Article 19.3 of the SCM Agreement.  We recall that 
                                                   
1030 China second written submission, para. 254, citing to Panel Report on EC – Salmon (Norway), 
paras. 7.704-7.705. 
1031 China argues, on the basis of Article VI:3 and footnote 36 to the SCM Agreement, that the purpose 
of a countervailing duty is to "offset" the amount of any subsidy bestowed upon the product.  (China first 
written submission, para. 383). 
1032 Id., paras. 380-384. 
1033 China second written submission, para. 254. 
1034 The one notable difference between the terms of Article 9.2 of the AD Agreement and those of 
Article 19.3 of the SCM Agreement is that the former uses the term "collected" whereas the latter uses the term 
"levied". 
1035 Panel Report on EC – Salmon (Norway), paras. 7.704-7.705. 


 
WT/DS379/R  
 
Page 245 
 
 
 
countervailing duties are special duties that are collected for the purpose of "offsetting" subsidies.  
This suggests that, applying the reasoning of the EC – Salmon (Norway) panel, countervailing duties 
are collected in the appropriate amounts insofar as the amount collected does not exceed the amount 
of subsidy found to exist.  We further recall our conclusions above that the manner in which the 
dumping margin is calculated – through an NME methodology or otherwise – has no impact on the 
existence of subsidies, which may be found to "exist" in a parallel countervailing duty investigation; 
and that the fact that a "double remedy" may result from the imposition of anti-dumping duties does 
not transform these duties into countervailing duties under the covered agreements.  For these reasons, 
the imposition of anti-dumping duties calculated under an NME methodology has no impact on 
whether the amount of the concurrent countervailing duty collected is "appropriate" or not. 
14.129 Furthermore, we recall our conclusion that the context of Article 19.4 of the SCM Agreement 
confirms our interpretation that that provision does not address the issue of double remedies.  The 
same considerations likewise suggest that it was not the intention of the drafters to the SCM 
Agreement to address the question of double remedies in Article 19.3 of the SCM Agreement. 
14.130 We therefore find that China has failed to establish that the USDOC's use of its NME 
methodology in the anti-dumping determinations at issue in this dispute, concurrently with its 
determination of subsidization and the imposition of countervailing duties on the same products in the 
four countervailing duty determinations at issue, was inconsistent with Article 19.3 of the SCM 
Agreement.  Given these findings, we need not address the United States' argument that Article 19.3 
of the SCM Agreement finds no application in the present case given that no duties were actually 
levied as a result of the determinations at issue. 
(iv) 
China's claims under Article 10 of the SCM Agreement and Article VI:3 of the GATT 1994 
14.131 China argues that the United States had, under Articles 10 of the SCM Agreement and VI:3 of 
the GATT 1994, an affirmative legal obligation to (i) ensure that it did not impose countervailing 
duties to offset subsidies that it simultaneously offset through the methods by which it calculated anti-
dumping duties; (ii) take "all necessary steps" to ensure that this did not occur; and (iii) ensure that the 
USDOC investigated and made a determination as to the "precise amount of a subsidy attributed to 
the imported products under investigation", taking into account that using simultaneously an anti-
dumping methodology had the effect of offsetting the same subsidies.1036  China considers that in the 
investigations at issue, the USDOC failed to meet these obligations.  China notes in particular that the 
USDOC did not take any steps to determine "whether, and in what amount" the use of market-
determined costs of production in the parallel anti-dumping investigations had the effect of offsetting 
the same subsidies that it identified in the countervailing duty investigations1037, and therefore, did not 
"ascertain the precise amount of a subsidy attributed to the imported products under investigation".1038 
                                                   
1036 China second written submission, paras. 243-247, response to Panel question 76.  China argues, 
referring to the findings of the Appellate Body in US – Countervailing Measures on Certain EC Products and in 
US – Softwood Lumber IV, that, collectively, Articles 10, 19.1, 19.3, 19.4 of the SCM Agreement and 21.1 of 
the SCM Agreement and Article VI:3 of the GATT 1994 impose upon investigating authorities an affirmative 
legal obligation to take "all necessary steps" to ensure that they limit countervailing duties to the amount and 
duration of the subsidy. 
1037 China notes that the USDOC stated unequivocally that "it has no authority under U.S. law to 
examine in the context of a countervailing duty investigation whether the use of an NME methodology in a 
parallel anti-dumping investigation has the effect of offsetting the same alleged subsidies". 
1038 China second written submission, paras. 245 and 248-250; response to Panel question 76 (first 
meeting).  We address here China's claims as presented in its second written submission and subsequent 
submissions.  In its first written submission, China presented its claims under Articles VI:3 of the GATT and 10 
of the SCM Agreement and under Article 32.1 of the SCM Agreement as purely consequential to its claims of 
violation under Articles 19.3 and 19.4 of the SCM Agreement.  (China first written submission, para. 385). 


  
  
WORLD TRADE 
ORGANIZATION 
 
 
WT/DS379/AB/R 
11 March 2011 
 
(11-1239) 
 
 
 
Original:   English 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
UNITED STATES – DEFINITIVE ANTI-DUMPING AND COUNTERVAILING 
DUTIES ON CERTAIN PRODUCTS FROM CHINA 
 
 
 
AB-2010-3 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Report of the Appellate Body 


  
  
WORLD TRADE 
ORGANIZATION 
 
 
WT/DS379/AB/R 
11 March 2011 
 
(11-1239) 
 
 
 
Original:   English 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
UNITED STATES – DEFINITIVE ANTI-DUMPING AND COUNTERVAILING 
DUTIES ON CERTAIN PRODUCTS FROM CHINA 
 
 
 
AB-2010-3 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Report of the Appellate Body 


 
WT/DS379/AB/R 
 
Page 199 
 
 
  
537. 
In sum, the Panel made no relevant factual findings on the USDOC's proxy benchmark that 
would assist us in the completion of the legal analysis.  Moreover, an analysis of the Panel's record 
reveals that China not only questioned altogether the legality of resorting to external benchmarks, but 
that it also challenged specific elements of the proxy benchmark constructed by the USDOC.  
Therefore, we find that there are insufficient undisputed facts on the Panel record regarding the 
USDOC's proxy benchmark to enable us to complete the legal analysis and ascertain the consistency 
of the USDOC's proxy benchmark with the United States' obligations under Article 14(b) of the 
SCM Agreement. 
VII. 
Articles 10, 19.3, 19.4, and 32.1 of the SCM Agreement and Article VI:3 of the 
GATT 1994:  "Double Remedies" 
A. 
Introduction 
538. 
Before the Panel, China made both "as such"509 and "as applied"510 claims in connection with 
the alleged imposition by the United States of "double remedies" resulting from the application, in 
each of the four sets of investigations at issue, of anti-dumping duties calculated under the 
United States' NME methodology simultaneously with countervailing duties on the same products.   
                                                   
509China claimed that the United States' failure to provide sufficient legal authority for the USDOC to 
avoid the imposition of double remedies when it imposes anti-dumping duties determined pursuant to its NME 
methodology simultaneously with the imposition of countervailing duties on the same products was inconsistent 
with Articles 10, 19.3, 19.4, and 32.1 of the SCM Agreement and Articles I:1 and VI of the GATT 1994 (Panel 
Report, paras. 14.11 and 14.12).  The Panel found that the measure to which these claims related and, thus, the 
claims fell outside its terms of reference. (Ibid., paras. 14.11, 14.12, 14.42, and 17.1(e)(i)) 
510Panel Report, para. 14.44.  China claimed that in each of the four sets of anti-dumping and 
countervailing determinations at issue:  (i) the USDOC's use of its NME methodology to determine normal 
value in anti-dumping determinations, concurrently with the imposition of countervailing duties on the same 
products, was inconsistent with Articles 10, 19.3, 19.4, and 32.1 of the SCM Agreement and Article VI:3 of the 
GATT 1994 (ibid., para. 14.8);  (ii) the USDOC's failure to extend to imports from China the same 
unconditional entitlement to the avoidance of double remedies that the USDOC extends to like products 
originating in other Members was inconsistent with Article I:1 of the GATT 1994 (ibid., para. 14.9);  and 
(iii) the United States had acted inconsistently with Articles 12.1 and 12.8 of the SCM Agreement, due to the 
USDOC's failure to provide interested parties notice of the information that the USDOC required to evaluate the 
existence of double remedies, and failure to inform China and interested parties of the essential facts under 
consideration that would "form the basis" for the USDOC's determinations in respect of the issue of "double 
remedy" (ibid, para. 14.10). 


WT/DS379/AB/R 
Page 200 
 
 
  
539. 
With respect to one of China's "as applied" claims511, the Panel found that: 
China did not establish that the United States acted inconsistently 
with its obligations under Articles 10, 19.3, 19.4, and 32.1 of the 
SCM Agreement or under Article VI:3 of GATT 1994 by reason of 
the USDOC's use of its NME methodology in the four anti-dumping 
investigations at issue and the imposition of anti-dumping duties on 
that basis concurrently with the imposition of countervailing duties 
on the same products in the four countervailing duty investigations at 
issue.512 
540. 
China appeals this finding and requests us to:  (i) find that the Panel erred in its interpretation 
and application of Articles 10, 19.3, 19.4, and 32.1 of the SCM Agreement and Article VI:3 of the 
GATT 1994;  (ii) reverse the Panel's finding that China did not establish that the United States had 
acted inconsistently with its obligations under these provisions by imposing anti-dumping duties 
calculated under its NME methodology concurrently with the imposition of countervailing duties on 
the same products, without taking steps to avoid offsetting the same subsidies twice;  and 
(iii) complete the analysis and conclude that the USDOC acted inconsistently with the obligations of 
the United States under Articles 10, 19.3, 19.4, and 32.1 of the SCM Agreement and Article VI:3 of 
the GATT 1994, in all of the investigations at issue, by failing to take steps to avoid offsetting the 
same subsidies twice. 
541. 
Before turning to the specific issues on appeal, we consider it useful to outline the concept of 
"double remedies" at issue in this dispute.  In essence, "double remedies" may arise when both 
countervailing duties and anti-dumping duties are imposed on the same imported products.  The term 
"double remedies" does not, however, refer simply to the fact that both an anti-dumping and a 
countervailing duty are imposed on the same product.  Rather, as explained below, "double remedies", 
also referred to as "double counting", refers to circumstances in which the simultaneous application of 
anti-dumping and countervailing duties on the same imported products results, at least to some extent, 
in the offsetting of the same subsidization twice.  "Double remedies" are "likely" to occur in cases 
where an NME methodology is used to calculate the margin of dumping.513 
                                                   
511With respect to the other "as applied" claims raised by China, the Panel found that China had not 
established that the United States had acted inconsistently with its obligations under Articles 12.1 and 12.8 of 
the SCM Agreement or under Article I:1 of the GATT 1994 (Panel Report, para. 17.1(e)(iii) and (iv)).  
512Panel Report, para. 17.1(e)(ii). 
513The Panel had "no difficulty" accepting: 
... the general proposition that the use of an NME methodology likely 
provides some form of remedy against subsidisation, and therefore, that the 
simultaneous imposition of anti-dumping duties calculated under an NME 
methodology and of countervailing duties likely results in any subsidy 
granted in respect of the good at issue being offset more than once. 
(Panel Report, para. 14.67) 


 
WT/DS379/AB/R 
 
Page 201 
 
 
  
542. 
A more detailed explanation of how and why double remedies may occur is set out in 
paragraphs 14.67 through 14.75 of the Panel Report.  We recap the main points here.  When 
investigating authorities calculate a dumping margin in an anti-dumping investigation involving a 
product from an NME, they compare the export price to a normal value that is calculated based on 
surrogate costs or prices from a third country.514  Because prices and costs in the NME are considered 
unreliable, prices, or, more commonly, costs of production, in a market economy are used as the basis 
for calculating normal value.515  In the dumping margin calculation, investigating authorities compare 
the product's constructed normal value (not reflecting the amount of any subsidy received by the 
producer) with the product's actual export price (which, when subsidies have been received by the 
producer, is presumably lower than it would otherwise have been).  The resulting dumping margin is 
thus based on an asymmetric comparison and is generally higher than would otherwise be the case.516   
543. 
As the Panel explained, the dumping margin calculated under an NME methodology "reflects 
not only price discrimination by the investigated producer between the domestic and export markets 
('dumping')", but also "economic distortions that affect the producer's costs of production", including 
specific subsidies to the investigated producer of the relevant product in respect of that product.517  An 
anti-dumping duty calculated based on an NME methodology may, therefore, "remedy" or "offset" a 
domestic subsidy, to the extent that such subsidy has contributed to a lowering of the export price.518  
Put differently, the subsidization is "counted" within the overall dumping margin.  When a 
countervailing duty is levied against the same imports, the same domestic subsidy is also "counted" in 
the calculation of the rate of subsidization and, therefore, the resulting countervailing duty offsets the 
same subsidy a second time.  Accordingly, the concurrent imposition of an anti-dumping duty 
calculated based on an NME methodology, and a countervailing duty may result in a subsidy being 
offset more than once, that is, in a double remedy.  Double remedies may also arise in the context of 
domestic subsidies granted within market economies when anti-dumping and countervailing duties are 
                                                   
514Panel Report, para. 14.68. 
515Panel Report, para. 14.68.  The use of surrogate, market economy values presumptively puts the 
producer in the position of having unsubsidized costs of production. (Ibid., footnote 965 to para. 14.69) 
516The asymmetry is due to the comparison of an actual, subsidized export price to a constructed, 
unsubsidized normal value, rather than to an actual, subsidized normal value. (Panel Report, paras. 14.69 
and 14.72) 
517Panel Report, para. 14.69. 
518Panel Report, para. 14.70.  The potential for double remedies is even greater in the context of export 
subsidies, which benefit only exported goods and therefore presumably lower the export price. (Ibid., 
footnote 972 to para. 14.72) 


WT/DS379/AB/R 
Page 202 
 
 
  
concurrently imposed on the same products and an unsubsidized, constructed, or third country normal 
value is used in the anti-dumping investigation.519 
544. 
The Panel understood the United States to have accepted the principle that double remedies 
may result from the concurrent imposition, on the same product, of countervailing duties and anti-
dumping duties calculated using an NME methodology.520  The United States nevertheless argued that 
the existence of a double remedy depends on whether the subsidy leads to a reduction in the export 
price in any given instance, and contended that it cannot be presumed that domestic subsidies lower 
export prices pro rata, or one-for-one.521  The Panel was of the view that it would "be a rare case in 
which a subsidy ... has no effect at all on either the producer's costs of production or ... export 
prices."522  In any event, the Panel considered that the answer to the question of "whether a complete 
double remedy necessarily results from all instances of concurrent imposition of anti-dumping duties 
calculated under an NME methodology and of countervailing duties" would not "invalidate the 
general proposition that at least some double remedy will likely arise from the concurrent imposition 
of countervailing duties and anti-dumping duties calculated under an NME methodology." 523   
B. 
Interpretation of Articles 19.3 and 19.4 of the SCM Agreement and Article VI:3 of the 
GATT 1994 
545. 
On appeal, China contends that the Panel erred in its interpretation of the relevant provisions 
of the SCM Agreement and the GATT 1994, and in reasoning that, because these provisions do not 
expressly prohibit a Member from offsetting the same domestic subsidies through the imposition of 
two different duties, it was the intention of the drafters to authorize such actions.  China emphasizes 
that an importing Member is under an affirmative legal obligation to ensure that it does not impose 
countervailing duties to offset a subsidy that is simultaneously offset through the manner in which it 
calculates anti-dumping duties in respect of the same imported product.  In China's view, such 
obligation arises from:  (i) Article 19.3 of the SCM Agreement, which requires investigating 
authorities to impose countervailing duties in the "appropriate" amounts;  (ii) Article 19.4 of the 
                                                   
519However, double remedies are unlikely to result in the context of domestic subsidies granted within 
market economies if normal value is based on domestic sales.  In such cases, both the normal value and the 
export price will be lowered as a result of the domestic subsidy, so that the dumping margin should not be 
affected. (See Panel Report, footnote 972 to paragraph 14.72) 
520Panel Report, para. 14.71. 
521Panel Report, footnote 968 to para. 14.71, and para. 14.73.  The United States observed that, while 
certain domestic production subsidies will result in increased production and a reduction in export prices, other 
more general subsidies may be used for other purposes (payments of dividends, severance payments, research 
and development), thus not resulting in any increase in production. (Panel Report, para. 14.71 and footnote 968 
thereto;  United States' responses to Panel Questions 72 and 73 after the first Panel meeting)  A similar point is 
made by the European Union in its third participant's submission, at paragraph 56. 
522Panel Report, para. 14.74. (original emphasis) 
523Panel Report, para. 14.75. (original emphasis)  See also para. 14.67. 


 
WT/DS379/AB/R 
 
Page 203 
 
 
  
SCM Agreement and Article VI:3 of the GATT 1994, which prohibit Members from levying 
countervailing duties in excess of the amount of the subsidy found to exist;  (iii) Article 10 of the 
SCM Agreement, which requires Members to "take all necessary steps to ensure that the imposition of 
a countervailing duty ... is in accordance with the provisions of Article VI of [the] GATT 1994 and 
the terms of [the SCM] Agreement";  and (iv) Article 32.1 of the SCM Agreement, which prohibits 
Members from taking "specific action against a subsidy of another Member ... except in accordance 
with the provisions of [the] GATT 1994, as interpreted by [the SCM] Agreement".   
546. 
In addressing China's appeal of the Panel's "as applied" finding on double remedies in the four 
investigations at issue, we turn to the provisions of the SCM Agreement relied upon by China, 
beginning with Article 19.3. 
1. 
Article 19.3 of the SCM Agreement 
547. 
In its analysis of Article 19.3 of the SCM Agreement, the Panel found that:  (i) countervailing 
duties are collected "in the appropriate amounts" insofar as the amount collected does not exceed the 
amount of subsidy "found to exist"524;  (ii) "the imposition of anti-dumping duties calculated under an 
NME methodology has no impact on whether the amount of the concurrent countervailing duty 
collected is 'appropriate' or not"525;  and (iii) "it was not the intention of the drafters [of] the 
SCM Agreement to address the question of double remedies in Article 19.3".526  Accordingly, the 
Panel found that: 
... China has failed to establish that the USDOC's use of its NME 
methodology in the anti-dumping determinations at issue in this 
dispute, concurrently with its determination of subsidization and the 
imposition of countervailing duties on the same products in the four 
countervailing duty determinations at issue, was inconsistent with 
Article 19.3 of the SCM Agreement.527 
548. 
China claims that these findings, and the Panel's interpretation of Article 19.3 of the 
SCM Agreement, were in error.  China relies on the reasoning of the panel in EC – Salmon (Norway), 
which interpreted the corresponding provision set forth in Article 9.2 of the Anti-Dumping Agreement, 
and found that the "appropriate" amount of an anti-dumping duty "is the amount of duty that is 
'proper' or 'fitting' in the context of an anti-dumping investigation".528  China submits that under
                                                   
524Panel Report, para. 14.128. 
525Panel Report, para. 14.128. 
526Panel Report, para. 14.129. 
527Panel Report, para. 14.130. 
528 China's appellant's submission, para. 550 (quoting Panel Report, EC – Salmon (Norway), 
para. 7.704). 


WT/DS379/AB/R 
Page 204 
 
 
  
Article 19.3 of the SCM Agreement "any determination of the 'appropriate amount' of a countervailing 
duty must take into account the extent to which the investigating authority offsets the same subsidies 
through the manner in which it calculates anti-dumping duties in respect of the same imported 
products."529 
549. 
The United States considers that the Panel correctly found under Article 19.3 of the 
SCM Agreement that countervailing duties are collected in the "appropriate" amounts where the 
amount of countervailing duties collected does not exceed the amount of subsidy found to exist.530   
550. 
Thus, the main interpretative question before us concerns the meaning of the phrase "in the 
appropriate amounts in each case" in Article 19.3 of the SCM Agreement and whether, as China 
contends, it would not be appropriate, within the meaning of that provision, to levy countervailing 
duties that result in, or are likely to result in, the imposition of double remedies. 
551. 
Article 19.3 of the SCM Agreement reads: 
When a countervailing duty is imposed in respect of any product, 
such countervailing duty shall be levied, in the appropriate amounts 
in each case, on a non-discriminatory basis on imports of such 
product from all sources found to be subsidized and causing injury, 
except as to imports from those sources which have renounced any 
subsidies in question or from which undertakings under the terms of 
this Agreement have been accepted. Any exporter whose exports are 
subject to a definitive countervailing duty but who was not actually 
investigated for reasons other than a refusal to cooperate, shall be 
entitled to an expedited review in order that the investigating 
authorities promptly establish an individual countervailing duty rate 
for that exporter. (emphasis added) 
552. 
The first sentence of Article 19.3 of the SCM Agreement contains two elements:  first, a 
requirement that countervailing duties be levied in the appropriate amounts in each case, and, second, 
a requirement that these duties be levied on a non-discriminatory basis on imports of such product 
from all sources found to be subsidized and causing injury, except for imports from sources that have 
renounced the relevant subsidies or from which undertakings have been accepted.  Beginning with the 
term "appropriate amounts", we note that relevant dictionary definitions of the term "appropriate" 
include "proper", "fitting" and "specially suitable (for, to)".531  These definitions suggest that what is 
"appropriate" is not an autonomous or absolute standard, but rather something that must be assessed 
by reference or in relation to something else.  They suggest some core norm—"proper", "fitting", 
                                                   
529China's appellant's submission, para. 554.  
530United States' appellee's submission, para. 382.  
531Shorter Oxford English Dictionary, 6th edn, A. Stevenson (ed.) (Oxford University Press, 2007), 
Vol. 1, p. 106. 


 
WT/DS379/AB/R 
 
Page 205 
 
 
  
"suitable"—and at the same time adaptation to particular circumstances.  Within Article 19.3, the 
circumstance-specific quality of "the appropriate amounts" is further reinforced by the immediate 
context provided by the words "in each case".  We also note that the term "amount" is defined as 
something quantitative, a number, "a quantity or sum viewed as the total reached".532 
553. 
We consider that the two requirements in the first sentence of Article 19.3 inform each other.  
Thus, it would not be appropriate for an importing Member to levy countervailing duties on imports 
from sources that have renounced relevant subsidies, or on imports from sources whose price 
undertakings have been accepted.  Similarly, because the requirement that the duty be levied in 
"appropriate amounts" implies a certain tailoring of the amounts according to circumstances, this 
suggests that the requirement that the duty be imposed on a non-discriminatory basis on imports from 
all subsidized sources should not be read in an overly formalistic or rigid manner.  The second 
sentence of Article 19.3 provides a specific example of circumstances in which it is permissible not to 
differentiate amongst individual exporters, as well as of when and how differentiated treatment in the 
establishment of a countervailing duty rate is required. 
554. 
We continue our consideration of the meaning of the term "appropriate amounts" in its 
context, by turning to other paragraphs of Article 19 of the SCM Agreement.533  We observe, in this 
regard, that in interpreting "appropriate amounts" in Article 19.3, the Panel appears to have ascribed 
great significance to Article 19.4 of the SCM Agreement, which provides that "[n]o countervailing 
duty shall be levied on any imported product in excess of the amount of the subsidy found to exist, 
calculated in terms of subsidization per unit of the subsidized and exported product."  Article 19.4 
thus places a quantitative ceiling on the amount of a countervailing duty, which may not exceed the 
amount of the subsidization. 
555. 
The Panel's finding that countervailing duties are collected "in the appropriate amounts 
insofar as the amount collected does not exceed the amount of subsidy found to exist"534 points to 
Article 19.4 as the key determinant of what is an "appropriate" amount, for purposes of Article 19.3.  
We share the Panel's view that Article 19.4 provides context relevant to the interpretation of 
Article 19.3.  Yet, we are not persuaded, as the Panel seems to have been, that Article 19.4, alone,
                                                   
532Shorter Oxford English Dictionary, 6th edn, A. Stevenson (ed.) (Oxford University Press, 2007), 
Vol. 1, p. 71. 
533The Panel reviewed what it considered to be relevant contextual elements for its interpretation of 
Article 19.4 of the SCM Agreement.  However, the Panel also recalled these contextual elements in its 
interpretation of Article 19.3 and noted that "[t]he same considerations likewise suggest that it was not the 
intention of the drafters [of] the SCM Agreement to address the question of double remedies in Article 19.3 of 
the SCM Agreement". (Panel Report, para. 14.129) 
534Panel Report, para. 14.128. 


WT/DS379/AB/R 
Page 206 
 
 
  
defines when the amount of duty is "appropriate".  Indeed, if any amount of countervailing duty that 
does not exceed the amount of the subsidy is an "appropriate" amount within the meaning of 
Article 19.3, then the requirement in Article 19.3 would be rendered redundant, as Article 19.4 
already prescribes that duties not be levied in excess of the amount of the subsidy found to exist.   
556. 
Thus, while we agree that Article 19.4 informs Article 19.3, we do not see any indication that 
Article 19.4 exhausts the universe according to which "appropriateness" is to be gauged.  Article 19.4 
makes clear that the amount that could be "appropriate" cannot be more than the amount of the 
subsidy.  However, Article 19.4 neither requires that the amount of countervailing duties equal the 
full amount of the subsidy found to exist, nor bears upon the question of whether there may be 
circumstances in which the "appropriate amount" of a countervailing duty will be an amount less than 
the full amount of the subsidy found to exist.535 
557. 
It is, rather, Article 19.2 of the SCM Agreement that appears more relevant to this question.  
While expressly leaving to the importing Member's investigating authorities the decision as to 
whether the amount of the countervailing duty to be imposed shall be the full amount of the subsidy 
or less, Article 19.2 nevertheless states that it is "desirable" that "the duty should be less than the total 
amount of the subsidy if such lesser duty would be adequate to remove the injury".536  Article 19.2 
thus encourages such authorities to link the actual amount of the countervailing duty to the injury to 
be removed.   
558. 
Moreover, once a causal link between the subsidized imports and injury has been 
demonstrated, the imposition and levying of countervailing duties are not hermetically isolated from 
any consideration related to injury.  In addition to Article 19.2, a link between the amount of the 
countervailing duty and the injury that the subsidized imports are found to be causing is reflected in 
                                                   
535We would like to emphasize that, in this context, we are considering Article 19.4 as context relevant 
to our interpretation of Article 19.3.  In doing so, we are not addressing China's claim that the Panel erred in 
finding that a double remedy does not result in an amount of countervailing duty in excess of the subsidy found 
to exist, within the meaning of Article 19.4. 
536Article 19.2 of the SCM Agreement reads: 
The decision whether or not to impose a countervailing duty in cases where 
all requirements for the imposition have been fulfilled, and the decision 
whether the amount of the countervailing duty to be imposed shall be the 
full amount of the subsidy or less, are decisions to be made by the 
authorities of the importing Member.  It is desirable that the imposition 
should be permissive in the territory of all Members, that the duty should be 
less than the total amount of the subsidy if such lesser duty would be 
adequate to remove the injury to the domestic industry, and that procedures 
should be established which would allow the authorities concerned to take 
due account of representations made by domestic interested parties whose 
interests might be adversely affected by the imposition of a countervailing 
duty. (footnote omitted) 


 
WT/DS379/AB/R 
 
Page 207 
 
 
  
Article 19.3 itself, which provides that a "countervailing duty shall be levied, in the appropriate 
amounts in each case ... on imports of such product ... found to be subsidized and causing injury" 
(emphasis added).  Other provisions of the SCM Agreement also link the countervailing duty to the 
injury that the subsidized imports are found to be causing.  Article 19.1 allows for the imposition of 
countervailing duties when subsidized imports "are causing injury".537  The use of the present tense in 
this provision suggests that injury is a continuing prerequisite for the imposition and levying of 
countervailing duties.  This is confirmed by Article 21.1 that states that "[a] countervailing duty shall 
remain in force only as long as and to the extent necessary to counteract subsidization which is 
causing injury."   
559. 
Continuing with our examination of the context provided by other provisions of the 
SCM Agreement, we turn to Article 10, the first provision in Part V of the SCM Agreement, which 
provides:  
Application of Article VI of GATT 1994[*] 
Members shall take all necessary steps to ensure that the imposition 
of a countervailing duty[**] on any product of the territory of any 
Member imported into the territory of another Member is in 
accordance with the provisions of Article VI of GATT 1994 and the 
terms of this Agreement.  Countervailing duties may only be imposed 
pursuant to investigations initiated[***] and conducted in accordance 
with the provisions of this Agreement and the Agreement on 
Agriculture.  
[* original footnote 35] The provisions of Part II or III may be invoked in 
parallel with the provisions of Part V;  however, with regard to the effects of 
a particular subsidy in the domestic market of the importing Member, only 
one form of relief (either a countervailing duty, if the requirements of Part V 
are met, or a countermeasure under Articles 4 or 7) shall be available. ... 
[** original footnote 36] The term "countervailing duty" shall be understood 
to mean a special duty levied for the purpose of offsetting any subsidy 
bestowed directly or indirectly upon the manufacture, production or export 
of any merchandise, as provided for in paragraph 3 of Article VI of 
GATT 1994. 
[*** original footnote 37] The term "initiated" as used hereinafter means 
procedural action by which a Member formally commences an investigation 
as provided in Article 11. 
 
                                                   
537Article 19.1 of the SCM Agreement reads: 
If, after reasonable efforts have been made to complete consultations, a 
Member makes a final determination of the existence and amount of the 
subsidy and that, through the effects of the subsidy, the subsidized imports 
are causing injury, it may impose a countervailing duty in accordance with 
the provisions of this Article unless the subsidy or subsidies are withdrawn. 


WT/DS379/AB/R 
Page 208 
 
 
  
560. 
We believe that there are three main features of Article 10 of the SCM Agreement that are 
relevant to the interpretative task before us.  First, Article 10 establishes that Part V of the 
SCM Agreement relates to the application of Article VI of the GATT 1994, and that countervailing 
duties must conform to the dictates of that provision as well as to the SCM Agreement.  Second, by 
providing that "only one form of relief shall be available" for the effects of a subsidy, footnote 35 
makes clear that, at least within the four corners of the SCM Agreement, there can be no "double 
remedies" against the same subsidization.  Third, footnote 36 to Article 10 defines a "countervailing 
duty" as a special duty levied for the purpose of "offsetting" a subsidy.  
561. 
The link between the GATT 1994 and the SCM Agreement also figures prominently in 
Article 32.1 of the SCM Agreement, which states: 
No specific action against a subsidy of another Member can be taken 
except in accordance with the provisions of GATT 1994, as 
interpreted by this Agreement.[*] 
[* original footnote 56] This paragraph is not intended to preclude action 
under other relevant provisions of GATT 1994, where appropriate. 
562. 
Footnote 56 to Article 32.1 reaffirms the right of Members to take action under other relevant 
provisions of the GATT 1994, and at the same time recognizes that not all such action will be 
"appropriate". 
563. 
In our view, therefore, Articles 10, 19.1, 19.2, 19.4, 21.1, and 32.1 all provide context 
relevant to the interpretation of Article 19.3.  These provisions identify two situations in which the 
importing Member is prohibited from imposing two remedial measures as a response to the same 
subsidization.  Importing Members are required to choose between accepting price undertakings or 
imposing countervailing duties, and between taking countermeasures under Parts II and III of the 
SCM Agreement or imposing countervailing measures under Part V of that Agreement.  These 
provisions also confirm the close link between the GATT 1994, in particular its Article VI, and Part V 
of the SCM Agreement, and suggest that, among the purposes of countervailing duties are:  to offset or 
counteract injurious subsidization, and to remove the injury to the domestic industry.  Moreover, they 
indicate that the appropriateness of the amount of countervailing duties is not unrelated to the injury 
that is being caused.  We note, in this connection, that the Anti-Dumping Agreement contains 
provisions that parallel Articles 10, 19.2, 19.3, 19.4, 21.1 and 32.1 in the context of anti-dumping 
duties, a subject to which we return below.538   
                                                   
538The equivalent provisions in the Anti-Dumping Agreement to Articles 10, 19.2, 19.3, 19.4, 21.1, 
and 32.1 of the SCM Agreement are, respectively, Articles 1, 9.1, 9.2, 9.3, 11.1, and 18.1. 


 
WT/DS379/AB/R 
 
Page 209 
 
 
  
564. 
Before doing so, we turn to Article VI of the GATT 1994, which also provides context 
relevant to Article 19.3 of the SCM Agreement.  Article VI, entitled "Anti-dumping and 
Countervailing Duties", is the genesis of both the SCM Agreement and the Anti-Dumping Agreement.  
Paragraphs 1 and 2 deal exclusively with anti-dumping duties, paragraph 3 deals exclusively with 
countervailing duties, and the remaining four paragraphs each deals with both anti-dumping and 
countervailing duties.  Article VI:2 authorizes Members to levy anti-dumping duties "[i]n order to 
offset or prevent dumping", and Article VI:3 specifies that a countervailing duty is levied "for the 
purpose of offsetting any bounty or subsidy". 
565. 
Article VI:5 is the provision most pertinent to our inquiry.  It provides: 
No product of the territory of any contracting party imported into the 
territory of any other contracting party shall be subject to both anti-
dumping and countervailing duties to compensate for the same 
situation of dumping or export subsidization. 
566. 
The Panel relied on this provision as contextual support for its findings that Articles 19.3 
and 19.4 of the SCM Agreement do not address the issue of double remedies.  The Panel considered 
that "these terms are self-explanatory in their intention to limit the scope of the prohibition in 
Article VI:5 to situations involving export subsidies".539  The Panel considered that, because the 
explicit prohibition in Article VI:5 is limited to potential double remedies in respect of export 
subsidies, Members could not have intended to prohibit the imposition of double remedies in respect 
of domestic subsidies in Articles 19.3 or 19.4 of the SCM Agreement, which are, on their face, silent 
on the issue of double remedies.540 
567. 
We have concerns about the Panel's rather mechanistic, a contrario reasoning in this 
connection.  While it is true that omissions have meaning541, "omissions in different contexts may 
have different meanings, and omission, in and of itself, is not necessarily dispositive".542  In this 
instance, we do not agree with the Panel that the "explicit terms in which the drafters addressed the 
issue" of double remedies in Article VI:5 make it "all the more unlikely that they sought to prohibit 
the imposition of double remedies in respect of other types of subsidies".543  We note, rather, that 
Article VI:5 prohibits the concurrent application of anti-dumping and countervailing duties to 
compensate for the same situation of dumping or export subsidization.  In our view, the term "same 
situation" is central to an understanding of the rationale underpinning the prohibition contained in 
                                                   
539Panel Report, para. 14.117. (original emphasis) 
540Panel Report, para. 14.118.  See also para. 14.129. 
541Appellate Body Report, Japan – Alcoholic Beverages II, p. 18, DSR 1996:I, 97, at 111. 
542Appellate Body Report, Canada – Autos, para. 138. 
543Panel Report, para. 14.118. 


WT/DS379/AB/R 
Page 210 
 
 
  
Article VI:5, which in turn sheds light on the reason why, in the case of domestic subsidies, an 
express prohibition is absent. 
568. 
We recall that, in principle, an export subsidy will result in a pro rata reduction in the export 
price of a product, but will not affect the price of domestic sales of that product.544  That is, the 
subsidy will lead to increased price discrimination and a higher margin of dumping.  In such 
circumstances, the situation of subsidization and the situation of dumping are the "same situation", 
and the application of concurrent duties would amount to the application of "double remedies" to 
compensate for, or offset, that situation.  By comparison, domestic subsidies will, in principle, affect 
the prices at which a producer sells its goods in the domestic market and in export markets in the same 
way and to the same extent.  Since any lowering of prices attributable to the subsidy will be reflected 
on both sides of the dumping margin calculation, the overall dumping margin will not be affected by 
the subsidization.  In such circumstances, the concurrent application of duties would not compensate 
for the same situation, because no part of the dumping margin would be attributable to the 
subsidization.  Only the countervailing duty would offset such subsidization. 
569. 
To the extent that these assumptions hold true, then the presence, in Article VI, of an express 
prohibition on the concurrent application of duties to counteract the "same situation" of dumping or 
export subsidization, along with the absence of an express prohibition in connection with situations of 
domestic subsidization appears logical—at least when normal value is calculated on the basis of 
domestic sales prices.  We note, in this regard, that Article VI:1(a) of the GATT 1994, like Article 2.1 
of the Anti-Dumping Agreement, provides that the usual method for calculating normal value will be 
based on the comparable price for the like product in the exporter's domestic market.  Thus, in anti-
dumping investigations, normal value will typically be based on domestic sales prices and any 
domestic subsidy will have no impact on the calculation of the dumping margin.  Nonetheless, 
Article VI:1(b), like Article 2.2 of the Anti-Dumping Agreement, sets out exceptional methods for the 
calculation of normal value, which are not based on actual prices in the exporter's domestic market.  
The second Ad Note to Article VI:1, which provides the legal basis for the use of surrogate values for 
NMEs in anti-dumping investigations545, also authorizes recourse to exceptional methods for the 
                                                   
544See supra, footnote 518 of this Report;  and Panel Report, paras. 14.70, 14.72 and footnote 972 
thereto, and 14.74. 
545Ad Note to Article VI:1 of the GATT 1994 reads: 
It is recognized that, in the case of imports from a country which has a 
complete or substantially complete monopoly of its trade and where all 
domestic prices are fixed by the State, special difficulties may exist in 
determining price comparability for the purposes of paragraph 1, and in such 
cases importing Members may find it necessary to take into account the 
possibility that a strict comparison with domestic prices in such a country 
may not always be appropriate. 


 
WT/DS379/AB/R 
 
Page 211 
 
 
  
calculation of normal value in investigations of imports from NMEs.546  In case of domestic 
subsidization, it is only in these exceptional situations that there is any possibility that the concurrent 
application of anti-dumping and countervailing duties on the same product could lead to "double 
remedies".   
570. 
In our view, the references to Article VI of the GATT 1994 in Articles 10 and 32.1 of the 
SCM Agreement, Article VI itself, and the many parallels between the obligations that apply to 
Members imposing anti-dumping duties and those imposing countervailing duties, suggest that any 
interpretation of "the appropriate amounts" of countervailing duties within the meaning of 
Article 19.3 of the SCM Agreement must not be based on a refusal to take account of the context 
offered both by Article VI of the GATT 1994 and by the provisions of the Anti-Dumping Agreement.  
While we agree with the Panel that Articles 19.3 and 19.4 of the SCM Agreement are concerned with 
countervailing duties and not with anti-dumping duties, we are not persuaded that it necessarily 
follows that these provisions are, as the Panel noted, "oblivious to any potential concurrent imposition 
of anti-dumping duties".547  Such an interpretative approach is difficult to reconcile with the notion 
that the provisions in the WTO covered agreements should be interpreted in a coherent and consistent 
manner, giving meaning to all applicable provisions harmoniously.548  Members have entered into 
cumulative obligations under the covered agreements and should thus be mindful of their actions 
under one agreement when taking action under another.  We are reinforced in this view by the fact 
that, although the disciplines that apply to a Member's use of anti-dumping duties and its use of 
countervailing duties are legally distinct, the remedies that result are, from the perspective of 
                                                   
546We observe that, while Article VI:5 was included in the original text of the GATT in 1947, the 
second Ad Note to paragraph 1 of Article VI was added subsequently, following the 1954-1955 Review Session.  
L/334, adopted 3 March 1955, p. 2, para. 6, and Annex I, Section I.B, p. 10;  3S/222, 223, para. 6. 
547Panel Report, paras. 14.112 and 14.129. 
548Appellate Body Report, US – Upland Cotton, paras. 549 and 550.  We recall that in Argentina – 
Footwear (EC) and US – Upland Cotton, the Appellate Body affirmed that the Multilateral Agreements on 
Trade in Goods, contained in Annex 1A of the WTO Agreement, are "integral parts" of the same treaty, the 
WTO Agreement, and that their provisions, which are binding on all Members, are all provisions of one treaty, 
the WTO Agreement.  The Appellate Body thus considered that a treaty interpreter must read all applicable 
provisions of a treaty in a way that gives meaning to all of them, harmoniously. (Appellate Body Report, US – 
Upland Cotton, para. 549 (quoting Appellate Body Report, Argentina – Footwear (EC), para. 81 and footnote 72 
thereto (referring, in turn, to Appellate Body Report, Korea – Dairy, para. 81;  Appellate Body Report, US – 
Gasoline, p. 23, DSR 1996:I, 3, at 21;  Appellate Body Report, Japan – Alcoholic Beverages II, p. 12, 
DSR 1996:I, 97, at 106;  and Appellate Body Report, India – Patents (US), para. 45)))  In US – Upland Cotton, 
the Appellate Body agreed with the panel that "Article 3.1(b) of the SCM Agreement can be read together with 
the Agreement on Agriculture provisions relating to domestic support in a coherent and consistent manner which 
gives full and effective meaning to all of their terms". (Appellate Body Report, US – Upland Cotton, para. 549 
(quoting Panel Report, US – Upland Cotton, para. 7.1071)) 


WT/DS379/AB/R 
Page 212 
 
 
  
producers and exporters, indistinguishable.549  Both remedial actions increase the amount of duty that 
must be paid at the border. 
571. 
It follows that a proper understanding of the "appropriate amounts" of countervailing duties in 
Article 19.3 of the SCM Agreement cannot be achieved without due regard to relevant provisions of 
the Anti-Dumping Agreement and recognition of the way in which the two legal regimes that these 
agreements set out, and the remedies which they authorize Members to impose, operate.  To us, the 
requirement that any amounts be "appropriate" means, at a minimum, that investigating authorities 
may not, in fixing the appropriate amount of countervailing duties, simply ignore that anti-dumping 
duties have been imposed to offset the same subsidization.  Each agreement sets out strict conditions 
that must be satisfied before the authorized remedy may be applied.  The purpose of each authorized 
remedy may be distinct, but the form and effect of both remedies are the same.  Both the 
Anti-Dumping Agreement and the SCM Agreement contain provisions requiring that the amounts of 
anti-dumping and countervailing duties be "appropriate in each case", as reflected in Articles 9.2 
and 19.3 respectively.  Both agreements also set ceilings on the maximum amount of duties that can 
be imposed to remedy dumping and subsidization, respectively.  Article 19.4 of the SCM Agreement 
establishes that countervailing duties shall not exceed the amount of the subsidy found to exist and 
Article 9.3 of the Anti-Dumping Agreement establishes that anti-dumping duties shall not exceed the 
margin of dumping. 
572. 
Only if these provisions are read in wilful isolation from each other can it be maintained that 
the respective rules on the imposition and levying of duties are complied with when double remedies 
are imposed.  In contrast, reading the two agreements together suggests that the imposition of double 
remedies would circumvent the standard of appropriateness that the two agreements separately 
establish for their respective remedies.  In other words, considering that each agreement sets forth a 
standard of appropriateness of the amount and establishes a ceiling for the respective duties, it should 
not be possible to circumvent the rules in each agreement by taking measures under both agreements 
to counteract the same subsidization.  It is counterintuitive to suggest that, while each agreement sets 
forth rules on the amounts of anti-dumping duties and countervailing duties that can be levied, there is 
no obstacle to the levying of a total amount of anti-dumping and countervailing duties which, if added 
together, would not be appropriate and would exceed the combined amounts of dumping and 
subsidization found. 
                                                   
549Moreover, it may well be the case that the injury that the duties seek to counteract is the same injury 
to the same industry.  In this respect, we observe that, for each parallel anti-dumping and countervailing duty 
investigation at issue in this dispute, the USITC conducted a single injury determination in respect of imports of 
the relevant products. (United States' responses to questioning at the oral hearing) 


 
WT/DS379/AB/R 
 
Page 213 
 
 
  
573. 
We consider, next, the object and purpose of the SCM Agreement, and whether this sheds 
light on the meaning of Article 19.3.550  We recall that, in US – Carbon Steel, the Appellate Body 
explained that "Part V of the Agreement is aimed at striking a balance between the right to impose 
countervailing duties to offset subsidization that is causing injury, and the obligations that Members 
must respect in order to do so."551  Similarly, in US – Softwood Lumber IV, the Appellate Body stated 
that "the object and purpose of the SCM Agreement, ... is to strengthen and improve GATT disciplines 
relating to the use of both subsidies and countervailing measures, while, recognizing at the same time, 
the right of Members to impose such measures under certain conditions".552  The object and purpose 
of the SCM Agreement, as identified by the Appellate Body in these disputes, sets important 
limitations to Members' right to impose countervailing duties.  Members' right to impose 
countervailing duties to offset subsidies is not unfettered, but subject to compliance with the 
obligations set forth in the SCM Agreement.  Such duties must be for the purpose of offsetting an 
injurious subsidy.  The object and purpose of the SCM Agreement thus reveals that Members intended 
to allow for the use of countervailing duties to offset injurious subsidization under certain 
circumstances and subject to specific limitations. 
574. 
We do not see that the object and purpose of the SCM Agreement provides clear indications as 
to the intentions of the drafters of the SCM Agreement in respect of double remedies in case of 
domestic subsidization.  To the extent that the object and purpose of the SCM Agreement links the 
application of countervailing duties to their purpose—to offset injurious subsidization—this supports 
an interpretation of Article 19.3 that would render "inappropriate" the application of countervailing 
duties that, together with anti-dumping duties, exceed the full amount of the subsidy.  We emphasize 
that we are not suggesting that the object and purpose of the SCM Agreement encompasses the 
imposition of disciplines on the use of anti-dumping duties.553  Rather, we simply consider that the 
object and purpose of the SCM Agreement is not inconsistent with an approach that would accept that, 
in fixing the amount of countervailing duties that will be imposed, it is appropriate to take account of 
anti-dumping duties that are being levied on the same products and that offset the same subsidization. 
                                                   
550See also supra, para. 301 of this Report. 
551Appellate Body Report, US – Carbon Steel, para. 74. 
552Appellate Body Report, US – Softwood Lumber IV, para. 64. 
553The Panel observed that China's arguments with respect to object and purpose implied that "it is the 
object and purpose of the SCM Agreement to impose disciplines not only with respect to the use of 
countervailing duties, but also of anti-dumping duties".  The Panel expressed its view that "the object and 
purpose of Part V of the SCM Agreement is limited to imposition of disciplines with respect to the former". 
(Panel Report, para. 14.122) 


WT/DS379/AB/R 
Page 214 
 
 
  
575. 
The Panel rejected an argument by China based on the interpretation of Article 9.2 of the 
Anti-Dumping Agreement provided by the panel in EC – Salmon (Norway).554  Article 9.2 establishes 
that an anti-dumping duty "shall be collected in the appropriate amounts in each case", and is thus the 
provision in the Anti-Dumping Agreement that corresponds to Article 19.3 of the SCM Agreement.  In 
EC – Salmon (Norway), the panel found that the appropriate amount of an anti-dumping duty "must 
be an amount that results in offsetting or preventing dumping, when all other requirements for the 
imposition of anti-dumping duties have been fulfilled".555  We consider that the panel's interpretation 
of Article 9.2 of the Anti-Dumping Agreement in EC – Salmon (Norway) is consistent with our 
interpretation of the phrase "in the appropriate amounts" in Article 19.3 of the SCM Agreement, as 
prohibiting the imposition of double remedies, and with the notion that the two agreements should be 
read together in a consistent and coherent manner.  In fact, applying the reasoning of the panel in 
EC – Salmon (Norway), an appropriate amount of countervailing duty should be an amount that 
results in offsetting subsidization, with due regard being had to the concurrent application of anti-
dumping duties on the same product that offset the same subsidization. 
576. 
The Panel also considered as an "element of context" Article 15 of the Tokyo Round 
Agreement on Interpretation and Application of Articles VI, XVI and XXIII of the General Agreement 
on Tariffs and Trade556 (the "Tokyo Round Subsidies Code").  According to the Panel, the fact that 
Article 15, which explicitly addressed the issue of the concurrent imposition of anti-dumping and 
countervailing duties on NME imports, was not carried forward in the SCM Agreement lent support to 
an interpretation of Articles 19.3 and 19.4 of the SCM Agreement as not addressing or encompassing 
the question of the permissibility of double remedies.557 
577. 
Article 15 of the Tokyo Round Subsidies Code, entitled "Special situations", reads in relevant 
part: 
1. 
In cases of alleged injury caused by imports from a country 
described in NOTES AND SUPPLEMENTARY PROVISIONS to 
the General Agreement (Annex I, Article VI, paragraph 1, point 2) 
the importing signatory may base its procedures and measures either 
 
(a) 
on this Agreement, or, alternatively 
 
(b) 
on the Agreement on Implementation of Article VI 
 
 
of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade. 
                                                   
554Panel Report, para. 14.128. 
555Panel Report, EC – Salmon (Norway), para. 7.705. 
556BISD 26S/56, entered into force 1 January 1980. 
557Panel Report, para. 14.119. 


 
WT/DS379/AB/R 
 
Page 215 
 
 
  
578. 
Article 15 of the Tokyo Round Subsidies Code imposed upon an importing signatory a choice 
between the use of anti-dumping duties and the use of countervailing duties against imports from 
NMEs.  This provision thus prohibited the concurrent application of the two types of duties, 
regardless of whether this in fact resulted in the imposition of double remedies.558 
579. 
In our view, Article 15 of the Tokyo Round Subsidies Code cannot be considered as context 
within the meaning of Article 31 of the Vienna Convention.  Article 31 does not refer to a predecessor 
agreement—that is, an agreement on the same matter that has ceased to exist and has been replaced by 
the agreement being interpreted—as context or as one of the elements to be taken into account 
together with the context.  Rather, a provision in a predecessor agreement may, at most, form part of 
the circumstances of the conclusion of a treaty under Article 32 of the Vienna Convention and thus be 
considered as supplementary means of interpretation. 
580. 
In the present dispute, having reviewed Article 19.3 of the SCM Agreement and its relevant 
context559, we do not consider it necessary to confirm the interpretation of Article 19.3 of the 
SCM Agreement by relying on supplementary means of interpretation, such as the circumstances of 
conclusion of the treaty.  In any event, we are not persuaded that a provision that explicitly addressed 
the issue of the concurrent imposition of anti-dumping and countervailing duties in respect of imports 
from NMEs, clearly supports an interpretation of Articles 19.3 and 19.4 of the SCM Agreement "as 
not addressing or encompassing the question of the permissibility of double remedies".560 
581. 
In particular, we are not persuaded that the existence in a predecessor agreement of a 
provision prohibiting the concurrent imposition of anti-dumping and countervailing duties to imports 
from NMEs allows an interpreter to conclude, a contrario, that, in the SCM Agreement, Members 
intended to allow double remedies.  We have already cautioned, in respect of Article VI:5 of the 
                                                   
558As explained supra, paras. 541-544, "double remedies" does not refer simply to the fact that both 
anti-dumping and countervailing duties are imposed on the same product, but to circumstances in which the 
simultaneous application of anti-dumping and countervailing duties on the same imported products results, at 
least to some extent, in the offsetting of the same subsidization twice. 
559The Panel also considered China's Accession Protocol, which "contains no provision explicitly 
addressing the issue of double remedies even though it appears to allow for the use of countervailing duties 
while China remains an NME".  For the Panel, the absence of any such provision also suggested that the drafters 
of Articles 19.3 and 19.4 of the SCM Agreement did not intend these provisions to address the issue of double 
remedies. (Panel Report, para. 14.121;  see also para. 14.129)  We do not agree with the Panel that the fact that 
China's Accession Protocol does not explicitly address the issue of double remedies suggests that Articles 19.3 
and 19.4 of the SCM Agreement do not address double remedies.  In our view, the fact that China's Accession 
Protocol does not exclude the application of countervailing duties to China while it remained an NME may 
equally be read as suggesting a shared understanding that China would be protected against the imposition of 
double remedies by the provisions of the SCM Agreement.  On balance, however, we are not persuaded that the 
absence of a provision addressing double remedies in China's Accession Protocol suggests anything regarding 
the interpretation of Articles 19.3 and 19.4 of the SCM Agreement. 
560Panel Report, para. 14.119.  See also para. 14.129. 


WT/DS379/AB/R 
Page 216 
 
 
  
GATT 1994, against mechanistic a contrario reasoning, and recalled that "omissions in different 
contexts may have different meanings, and omission, in and of itself, is not necessarily dispositive".561  
Article 15 of the Tokyo Round Subsidies Code does more than merely prohibit double remedies, in 
that it prohibits the concurrent application of anti-dumping and countervailing duties, regardless of 
whether they offset the same situation of subsidization.  In the light of this, the absence of a provision 
like Article 15 of the Tokyo Round Subsidies Code in the SCM Agreement cannot be interpreted as 
indicating that Members intended to exclude from the scope of the SCM Agreement a different and 
narrower obligation, such as a prohibition on double remedies. 
582. 
In sum, based on all of the above, we consider that the Panel erred in its interpretation of 
Article 19.3 of the SCM Agreement and failed to give meaning and effect to all the terms of that 
provision.  Under Article 19.3 of the SCM Agreement, the appropriateness of the amount of 
countervailing duties cannot be determined without having regard to anti-dumping duties imposed on 
the same product to offset the same subsidization.  The amount of a countervailing duty cannot be 
"appropriate" in situations where that duty represents the full amount of the subsidy and where anti-
dumping duties, calculated at least to some extent on the basis of the same subsidization, are imposed 
concurrently to remove the same injury to the domestic industry.  Dumping margins calculated based 
on an NME methodology are, for the reasons explained above, likely to include some component that 
is attributable to subsidization. 
583. 
We, therefore, reverse the Panel's interpretation of Article 19.3 and, in particular, its findings 
that "the imposition of anti-dumping duties calculated under an NME methodology has no impact on 
whether the amount of the concurrent countervailing duty collected is 'appropriate' or not"562, and that 
Article 19.3 of the SCM Agreement does not address the issue of double remedies.563  We find instead 
that the imposition of double remedies, that is, the offsetting of the same subsidization twice by the 
concurrent imposition of anti-dumping duties calculated on the basis of an NME methodology and 
countervailing duties, is inconsistent with Article 19.3 of the SCM Agreement. 
                                                   
561Appellate Body Report, Canada – Autos, para. 138. 
562Panel Report, para. 14.128. 
563Panel Report, para. 14.129. 


 
WT/DS379/AB/R 
 
Page 217 
 
 
  
2. 
Article 19.4 of the SCM Agreement and Article VI:3 of the GATT 1994564 
584. 
The Panel found that Article 19.4 of the SCM Agreement imposes a maximum limit on the 
amount of duties that may be levied, corresponding to the amount of subsidy that is found to exist565, 
and that the use of an NME methodology in anti-dumping investigations does not have the effect of 
extinguishing the subsidy.566  In the Panel's view, Article 19.4 is "oblivious to any potential 
concurrent imposition of anti-dumping duties", and, therefore, "the narrowly-crafted discipline 
contained in Article 19.4 of the SCM Agreement does not address situations of 'double remedies'."567 
585. 
Accordingly, the Panel found that: 
... China has failed to establish that the USDOC's use of its NME 
methodology 
in the 
anti-dumping determinations 
at 
issue, 
concurrently with its determination of subsidization and the 
imposition of countervailing duties on the same products in the four 
countervailing duty determinations at issue, was inconsistent with 
Article 19.4 of the SCM Agreement.568 
586. 
For the same reasons, the Panel also found that: 
... China has not established that the United States imposed duties in 
excess of the subsidy "determined to have been granted" in the 
investigations at issue inconsistently with Article VI:3 of the 
GATT 1994.569 
587. 
China argues that the Panel erred in finding that Article 19.4 of the SCM Agreement does not 
address situations of double remedies and argues that, if a subsidy has been offset through the manner 
in which the importing Member calculates anti-dumping duties, the subsidy no longer "exists" within 
the meaning of Article 19.4, because it can no longer be attributed to the imported products as a cause
                                                   
564Article 19.4 of the SCM Agreement states: 
No countervailing duty shall be levied on any imported product in excess of 
the amount of the subsidy found to exist, calculated in terms of 
subsidization per unit of the subsidized and exported product. (footnote 
omitted) 
Article VI:3 of the GATT 1994 reads in relevant part: 
No countervailing duty shall be levied on any product of the territory of any 
Member imported into the territory of another Member in excess of an 
amount equal to the estimated bounty or subsidy determined to have been 
granted, directly or indirectly, on the manufacture, production or export of 
such product in the country of origin or exportation, including any special 
subsidy to the transportation of a particular product. 
565Panel Report, para. 14.108.  
566Panel Report, para. 14.113.  
567Panel Report, para. 14.112.  
568Panel Report, para. 14.123. 
569Panel Report, para. 14.136. 


WT/DS379/AB/R 
Page 218 
 
 
  
of injury to domestic producers.  China thus claims that the imposition of double remedies is 
inconsistent with Article 19.4 of the SCM Agreement, because it results in the imposition and levying 
of countervailing duties in excess of the subsidy "found to exist".570  China makes similar arguments 
in respect of Article VI:3 of the GATT 1994. 
588. 
The United States considers that Article 19.4 of the SCM Agreement is not concerned with the 
existence of subsidies, but with ensuring that any countervailing duties imposed do not exceed the 
subsidies attributable to the imported goods, in terms of subsidization per unit.  The United States 
agrees with the Panel that, by its own terms, Article 19.4 only imposes disciplines with respect to 
countervailing duties (not anti-dumping duties), and is, thus, "oblivious to any potential concurrent 
imposition of anti-dumping duties".571  We understand the United States to make the same arguments 
in respect of Article VI:3 of the GATT 1994. 
589. 
In addressing China's claims under Article 19.3, we have explained that the provisions of the 
Anti-Dumping Agreement and the SCM Agreement should be interpreted together in a coherent and 
consistent manner, so as to avoid any possible circumvention of the rules governing, and ceilings on, 
anti-dumping and countervailing duties that are set forth in the respective provisions in the two 
agreements.  We, therefore, disagree with the Panel's statement that "Article 19.4 of the SCM 
Agreement is oblivious to any potential concurrent imposition of anti-dumping duties."572 
590. 
However, since we have already found that the imposition of double remedies is inconsistent 
with Article 19.3 of the SCM Agreement, we need not continue our analysis and address China's 
appeal with respect to the interpretation and application of Article 19.4 of the SCM Agreement and 
Article VI:3 of the GATT 1994.  We consider, rather, that a ruling on the interpretation of Article 19.4 
of the SCM Agreement or Article VI:3 of the GATT 1994 is unnecessary for purposes of resolving 
this dispute.  The Panel's interpretation of these provisions is, in our estimation, moot and of no legal 
effect. 
3. 
Conclusion 
591. 
We have reversed the Panel's interpretation of Article 19.3 of the SCM Agreement.  Because it 
was based on an erroneous interpretation of Article 19.3, we must also reverse the Panel's ultimate 
                                                   
570China's appellant's submission, paras. 499-509. 
571United States' appellee's submission, para. 396 (quoting Panel Report, para. 14.112). 
572Panel Report, para. 14.112. 


 
WT/DS379/AB/R 
 
Page 219 
 
 
  
finding in paragraph 17.1(e)(ii) of the Panel Report that China did not establish that the United States 
acted inconsistently with its obligations under Articles 19.3573, 10574, or 32.1575 of the SCM Agreement. 
C. 
Completion of the Analysis 
592. 
Having reversed these findings, we must consider China's request that we complete the 
analysis and find the USDOC's concurrent imposition of anti-dumping duties calculated on the basis 
of its NME methodology, and countervailing duties on the same products in the four countervailing 
duty determinations at issue to be inconsistent with Article 19.3 of the SCM Agreement. 
593. 
China contends that it necessarily follows from any reversal of the Panel's legal interpretation 
of a relevant provision that the United States has acted inconsistently with its obligations under that 
provision.576  China argues that it is undisputed that the USDOC took no steps to investigate and avoid 
the imposition of double remedies, notwithstanding its recognition of the possibility of "double 
counting".  China emphasizes that, contrary to the suggestion of the Panel, it was not for China to 
"conclusively establish" 577  that double remedies resulted from the concurrent imposition of 
countervailing duties and anti-dumping duties calculated under an NME methodology.  Rather, the 
USDOC had an affirmative obligation to determine whether, and in what amount, double remedies 
would occur in these investigations, and it indisputably did not do so.  China also refers to 
submissions that it made before the Panel that it considers show that China did, in fact, demonstrate, 
based on undisputed evidence in the record, that double remedies occurred in the investigations at 
issue. 
594. 
The United States contests China's assertions that a finding of inconsistency would follow 
directly from the reversal of the Panel's legal interpretations, that there are no disputed facts that the 
Appellate Body need examine to rule on this issue, and that China's submissions before the Panel 
amount to a demonstration, based on undisputed evidence, that double remedies occurred in the 
investigations at issue.  The United States emphasizes that China bore the burden of proof in front of 
the Panel, yet made no attempt to present hard evidence that double remedies had occurred, just as it 
made no such attempt before the USDOC.