Dalian Maritime Court Report on Trials (2020)



Special Statement: This paper is announced in Chinese and English, and the Chinese Version shall prevail. 



TABLE OF CONTENTS

Foreword

I. Basic information

1. General situation

2. Case classification

3. Judicial openness

II. Work highlights

1. Focus on the big picture, and serve the construction of maritime hub with more strength

2. Go deep and solid, and build the law-based business environment with more commitments

3. Stimulate the vitality, enforce the laws and handle the cases with more efficiency

4. Promote the convenience, and build the one-stop diversified dispute resolution mechanism with more attention

5. People-oriented, and provide smart litigation service with more humanity

6. Toughen quality and ability, and build the team with more effectiveness

7. Clear and transparent, and implement judicial openness with more content

III. Problems and Suggestions

1. Suggestion for the domestic export enterprise

2. Suggestion for the insurance company

3. Suggestion for the ocean seamen

Suggestion for the fishery boat accident investigation authority

IV. Typical Cases

The period which has substantial impact on the contract performance is included into the duration of contract performance affected by the force majeure of COVID-19 pandemic

Where the entity who declared imported goods to the Customs loses the identity of consignee, the related interested party is entitled to request the entity to cancel the declaration

The multimodal transport operator, who does not issue the multimodal transport documents, takes the entire transport responsibility only to the shipper

On condition that the claimant provides sufficient and effective guarantee, the maritime injunction should be granted and executed, not affected by the possessory lien on goods argued by the person against whom a claim is made

The International freight forwarding company who does not accomplish the entrusted affairs has no right to require the principal to pay remuneration, if it fails to prove there are reasons not attributable to it

When the contract-offering party is at fault for the invalidity of the construction subcontract which made his letter of guarantee invalid, he should assume joint and several liability for the corresponding payment in accordance with the law

When the creditor and the debtor agree to change the principal contract of the ship operation loan, they shall have beforehand the written consent from the guarantor. Otherwise, the guarantor shall no longer bear the guarantee responsibility

Consumers who purchase yachts are protected by the Law of the People’s Republic of China on the Protection of Consumers’ Rights and Interests, and producers shall bear punitive compensation liability for their frauds

In the absence of evidence to the contrary, the maritime accident report made by the administrative organ can be used as evidence for the court to determine the facts of the case, but the responsibility of the parties should be determined by the court after examining the facts

The evaluation of “land reclamation” should be based on both the actions and the objective results, rather than just the state of sea surface

The Court upholds the ideal of enforcement with goodwill and politeness, combining enforcement measures with mediation means to provide high-quality judicial services for the development of enterprises

Where the real estate is mortgaged before the lease, the auction of real estate made by the court with the mortgagee’s consent does not affect the realization of the mortgage right, even without the consent of lessee or secondary lessee

Concluding remarks



Foreword

With the continuous advancement of Maritime Power Strategy, Belt and Road Initiative, Pilot Free Trade Zone and Construction of International Maritime Judicial Center, the international credibility and influence of China’s foreign-related maritime adjudication has been increasingly enhanced, with a more positive and active attitude to integrate into the big picture, more quality and efficient judicial services to serve the national strategy and more pragmatic and fairer measures to safeguard the national strategy. Maritime courts need to grasp new requirements, assume new missions, and take practical actions to promote maritime justice to achieve new accomplishments. The giant ship of maritime adjudication will also follow the direction and channel guided by General Secretary Xi Jinping Thought on the Rule of Law, with the goal of letting the people feel fairness and justice in every judicial case, speed up the construction of international maritime judicial center, brave the wind and waves to open a new chapter, and set sail again with strong will and steady behavior.

In 2020, Dalian Maritime Court fully implemented Xi Jinping Thought on the Rule of Law, consciously practiced the new development concept, gave full play to the role of maritime adjudication, made every effort to create a market-oriented, law-based and international business environment, vigorously promoted reform and innovation, and accelerated the construction of “first-class maritime court”, and strove to promote various tasks to be in the forefront of Liaoning courts. The various tasks progressed steadily and continued to progress, providing powerful maritime judicial services and guarantees for the overall promotion of pandemic prevention and control and high-quality economic and social development.



I. Basic information 

1. General situation

1.1 The numbers of accepted and closed cases were basically the same as last year. In 2020, the Court accepted 2,429 cases of various types, a decrease of 1.78% over last year. Among these cases, 2,339 cases were newly accepted, an increase of 0.43% over last year; 90 cases were left over from previous years, a decrease of 37.5% over last year; 2,367 cases were closed, a decrease of 0.67% over last year; the clearance rate reached 97.45%, an increase of 1.09 percent points over last year, ranking the first among the eleven maritime courts in China and the fourth among the intermediate courts in Liaoning Province.



1.2 Major quality and effectiveness targets were well accomplished. The ratio of cases reversed or set aside for retrial by the second trial was 2.15%, a decrease of 1.32 percent points over last year, ranking the first among the intermediate courts in Liaoning Province; the conciliation ratio was 27.78%, an increase of 9.96 percent points over last year; the litigation withdrawal ratio was 23.29%, an increase of 5.53 percent points over last year; the question answering ratio after judgment was 100%, ranking the first among the intermediate courts in Liaoning Province; the ratio of satisfactory settlement without appeal was 84.79%, an increase of 6.93 percent points over last year; the application ratio of summary procedure was 65.92%, an increase of 18.55 percent points over last year; 125 open cases over 6 months were cleared up, and the clearance ratio reached 93.28%.



Case classification 

2.1 Civil cases data: 1,507 cases were accepted, an increase of 6.28% over last year. Among these cases, 1,451 cases were newly accepted, an increase of 8.2% over last year; 1,471 cases were closed, an increase of 8% over last year; the clearance rate reached 97.61%, an increase of 1.56 percent points over last year; the subject amount of the cases was RMB 2.966 billion, a decrease of RMB 3.805 billion over last year. 

Among these civil cases, the Court accepted 1,339 admiralty and maritime cases, an increase of 2.45% over last year. Among the cases, 1,312 cases were newly accepted, an increase of 6.41% over last year; 1,305 cases were closed, an increase of 4.23% over last year; the clearance rate was 97.46%, an increase of 1.67 percent points over last year. Of the new contentious cases accepted, the number of the top 10 admiralty and maritime cases reached 1,113. The types of the above cases were as follows: 



2.2 Administrative cases data: The Court accepted 96 maritime administrative cases, a decrease of 48.11% over last year. Among the cases, 83 cases were newly accepted, a decrease of 54.14% over last year; 93 cases were closed, a decrease of 46.55% over last year; the clearance rate was 96.88%, an increase of 2.83 percent points over last year; the subject amount of the cases was RMB 138 million, a decrease of RMB 285 million over last year.

2.3 Enforcement cases data: 752 cases were accepted, an increase of 0.8% over last year. Among the cases, 731 cases were newly accepted, an increase of 5.94% over last year; 730 cases were closed, an increase of 0.69% over last year; the arrival rate of enforcement subject was 66.06%, ranking the first among Liaoning provincial courts. The first three among the “four core targets” of “Basically Solving the Difficulties in Enforcement Work” achieved 100% and the fourth achieved 97.07% in clearance rate, far exceeding the criteria of three 90%s and one 80%. 12 cases involving the Party and government organs as special subjects were accepted, and 11 cases were actually closed, with an actual clearance rate of 91.67%; the total amount of application for enforcement was RMB 2.407 billion, with arrival of RMB 2.167 billion, and the arrival rate of enforcement was 90.03%, which successfully completed the target of “90% of the cases are actually executed and 90% of the money is in place” made by Liaoning High People’s Court.



2.4 Dispatched tribunal cases data: Five dispatched tribunals accepted 1,010 cases of various types, an increase of 16.63% over last year. Among the cases, 975 cases were newly accepted, an increase of 18.76% over last year; 35 cases were left over from previous years, a decrease of 22.22% over last year; 992 cases were closed, an increase of 19.37% over last year; the clearance rate reached 98.22%, an increase of 2.22 percent points over last year. The ratio of cases reversed or set aside for retrial by the second trial was 1.78%, 0.37 percent point lower than the Court’s data; the conciliation ratio was 23.17%, 4.61 percent points lower than the Court’s data; the litigation withdrawal ratio was 30.74%, 7.45 percent point higher than the Court’s data.

Five dispatched tribunals accepted 849 admiralty and maritime cases, accounting for 63.41% of the total number of admiralty and maritime cases of the Court. Among the cases, 830 cases were newly accepted, accounting for 63.26% of the total admiralty and maritime cases of the Court; 832 cases were closed, accounting for 63.75% of the total admiralty and maritime cases of the Court; the subject amount of the cases was RMB 2.09 billion. The number of the top 5 admiralty and maritime cases reached 617. The types of the above cases were as follows:



2.5 Arrest and auction of ships data: 50 ships were arrested, of which 4 involved foreign, Hong Kong, Macao and Taiwan affairs. 38 ships were auctioned, all of which were Chinese.

2.6 Cases involving foreign, Hong Kong, Macao and Taiwan affairs: The Court accepted 51 cases involving foreign affairs and 15 cases involving Hong Kong, Macao and Taiwan affairs, accounting for 2.72% of the Court’s total number; 47 cases involving foreign affairs and 13 cases involving Hong Kong, Macao and Taiwan affairs were closed. The cases involved nearly 20 countries and regions, including United Arab Emirates, Bermuda, Panama, Denmark, Germany, France, Gambia, South Korea, Marshall Islands, Japan, Switzerland, Spain, Greece, Singapore, North Korea, Congo (Brazzaville), Liberia, India，Hong Kong, and so on.

3. Judicial openness

1,011 trials were broadcast live on China Open Trials Online, with a total of 656,765 views. Live rate of trial was 66.97%, ranking the second among the intermediate courts in Liaoning Province. 3,305 judgment documents made in 2020 were issued on China Judgments Online, ranking the first among the intermediate courts in Liaoning Province. The Court disclosed the related judicial process information on China Judicial Process Information Online with an effective disclosure rate of 100%, ranking the first among the intermediate courts in Liaoning Province.



II. Work highlights 

1. Focus on the big picture, and serve the construction of maritime hub with more strength

The Court fairly and efficiently adjudicated 51 cases involving foreign affairs, 15 cases involving Hong Kong, Macao and Taiwan affairs and equally protected the legal rights and interests of the litigants at home and abroad. The Court held the “Maritime Judicial Guarantee Forum for Urban Development” and provided the special research report named by Some Thoughts on the Construction of Dalian Maritime Hub for Dalian Municipal Party Committee, Dalian Municipal Government and Dalian Municipal People’s Congress. The Court issued the maritime trial report in Chinese and English versions and the judicial review report on maritime administrative cases, summarized and refined “Top Ten Typical Cases” “Top Ten Cases on Judicial Service for the People” and “Typical Cases involving the Belt and Road” to serve the new  opening-up pattern.

2. Go deep and solid, and build the law-based business environment with more commitments

The Court issued the Work Plan for 4+9, visited more than 20 port & shipping enterprises, government organs, islands and fishing villages inside and outside Liaoning province, and convened 9 symposiums to solicit opinions and suggestions broadly. The Court thoroughly investigated 31 prominent problems concerning the law-based business environment, immediately rectified 27 thereof and constantly promoted 4 thereof with long-term mechanisms. The Court issued “Ten Commitments of Litigation Service”, winning a wide praise from the representatives of provincial and municipal people’s congress and news media. The Court introduced the experience of building the law-based business environment in Liaoning courts working conference. A case of confirming illegal administrative registration and compensation was selected in “Typical Cases on Strengthening the Construction of Law-based Business Environment in Liaoning Province”. 

Stimulate the vitality, enforce the laws and handle the cases with more efficiency

The Court reached a new record with the clearance rate 97.45%, ranking the first among the eleven maritime courts in China and the fourth among the 17 intermediate courts in Liaoning province. 125 open cases over 6 months were cleared up, and the clearance rate reached 93.28%. The Court realized new breakthrough in trial quality strategy, 3 cases were selected as Typical Cases of Maritime Trial in China and 3 as Typical Cases in Liaoning courts; In the selection activity of 5 “One Hundred Excellent Works” among Liaoning courts, 10 cases were selected into “One Hundred Excellent Cases”, 2 trials into “One Hundred Excellent Trials” and 2 judgments into “One Hundred Excellent Judgments”. In the “Annual Event of Improving Trial Quality, Efficiency and Public Credibility and Double Incentives Platform” of Liaoning courts, the comprehensive index of the Court ranked the first among the 17 intermediate courts. The Court perfected the long-term mechanism of solving the difficulties in enforcement, ranking the first concerning the quality and efficiency of enforcement among the three special courts in Liaoning province. The Enforcement Bureau was awarded “Collective Second Class Merit” by Liaoning High People’s Court in “Basically Solving the Difficulties in Enforcement Work”.

4. Promote the convenience, and build the one-stop diversified dispute resolution mechanism with more attention

The Court improved the one-stop diversified dispute resolution mechanism, and completed online inquiry and mediation by making full use of People’s Court Mediation Platform and China Maritime Trial System, and promoted all-round interconnection among diversified dispute resolution forces. The Court implemented the mode of “speedy trial judge handle cases at service counters” and “one-stop distribution, mediation, speedy trial and speedy hearing”, improved consecutively 74 “one-stop” quality and efficiency indicators, smoothed online and offline litigation service channels, implemented the commitments of handling cases immediate, one-off and online, endeavored to achieve “round-the-clock litigation services”, and pushed forward to realize “three prohibitions of influencing the impartiality of judicial trials through interested parties”.

5. People-oriented, and provide smart litigation service with more humanity

The Court dedicated to building a modern litigation service center, set up a vanguard post of Communist Party member, a president reception office for market entity, a judge reception room, a professional mediation room and a lawyer office. The “Legal Aid Workstation” was put into operation. The Court first released “Ten Commitments on Litigation Service” to the public to provide litigation risk assessment, self-filing, self-payment, cross-jurisdiction case filing, self-printing of documents and related litigation service, comprehensively improving the people’s judicial experience. The quality and efficiency evaluation of litigation service topped the ranking jointly among Liaoning courts. The Court was awarded the Advanced Unit of “Internet + Government Service”, and the litigation service center was awarded the provincial landmark litigation service center. The Court was awarded the Advanced Unit of Court Informatization Construction in China. The Court introduced the experience of smart court construction in the Liaoning court conference, and made a special report in the special informatization conference hosted by the Supreme Court, which was fully affirmed by Zhou Qiang, president of the Supreme Court.

6. Toughen quality and ability, and build the team with more effectiveness

The Court adheres to the revolutionary, standardized, specialized and professional direction, and strives for a loyal, clean and responsible judicial team. A group of young cadres were appointed to the middle and senior leading positions. The Court held six sessions of “Maritime Law Forum” integrated with politics learning, hotspots forecasting and practices exchanging. The Court set up 10 professional-judge-conference teams, a maritime trial report drafting team, a project researching team, a translation team and a cultural construction team. The Court made a comparative study on maritime justice among China, Japan and South Korea with great learning enthusiasm and research ability. A tribunal was awarded “The Advanced Collective of the National Courts”, a judge was awarded “Case Handling Model of the National Courts”, two cadres gained second-class merits, a judge was selected into “One Hundred Case Handling Experts” of Liaoning courts, a cadre was selected into “One Hundred Grassroots Pioneer” of Liaoning courts. In 2020, 42 research achievements won the awards, including 14 national-level items with an increase of 40% over last year and 28 provincial-level items with an increase of 3 times over last year. 3 research projects were completed, 1 of which was the key project of judicial research of Liaoning courts in 2020.

Clear and transparent, and implement judicial openness with more content

The Court ranked highly among the intermediate courts in Liaoning Province in the effective disclosure rate of judicial process information, online live broadcasting rate of court trials and judgments online issuance rate. The Chinese and English website served as an impressive showcase for maritime justice. The WeChat official account updated daily, ranking the first among Chinese maritime courts on the total number of readings and likes. The Court held 4 press conferences, released 154 news articles on media and mainstream websites at provincial level or above, and filmed 10 promotional videos. The Court ranked the fifth in China Maritime Judicial Transparency Index Assessment issued by the Chinese Academy of Social Sciences, which was the best result in the Court’s history.



III. Problems and Suggestions

To fully exert the judicial function of maritime trial, foster a sound business environment, and provide a strong maritime judicial protection for the economic and social development, the Court summarizes the maritime trial practices and offers some suggestions for the following maritime entities on how to deal with the risks in operation, management or profession.

1. Suggestion for the domestic export enterprise

Forwarder’s Certificate of Receipt (FCR) is a receipt issued by a freight forwarder. It is not a document whereby the carrier warrants the delivery of the goods. It is commonly used in trade terms such as FCA and FOB. According to the FCR document, the foreign trade buyer is generally responsible for transport, ship chartering and space booking, while the domestic export enterprise, as the actual shipper, delivers the goods to the freight forwarder (usually designated by the foreign trade buyer) who issues the FCR to indicate receipt of the goods, then delivers the goods to the carrier and obtains a bill of lading or a sea waybill. Under the international trade contract, the domestic export enterprise negotiates payment with the bank on the presentation of the FCR, then the FCR passes through the bank to the foreign consignee, and the bill of lading or sea waybill passes to the agent of the freight forwarder at the foreign port of destination, who accepts the goods from the carrier on presentation of the bill of lading or sea waybill and then delivers the goods to the consignee. In accordance with Article 8 (1) of the Provisions of the Supreme People's Court on Several Issues Concerning the Trial of Cases of Disputes over Marine Freight Forwarding, the domestic export enterprise, as the actual shipper, may request the freight forwarder to deliver the bill of lading, sea waybill or other transport documents obtained from the carrier. If the domestic export enterprise does not make such a request, but directly accepts the FCR and uses it for settlement of foreign exchange, when it does not receive payment due to the risk of international trade and sue the freight forwarder for payment loss in a court, such a claim will not be upheld.

Suggestion: The domestic export enterprises should prudently evaluate the transaction risks in international trade, choose the trade term CIF or CFR as far as possible, and designate the freight forwarders to arrange transportation by themselves. Even after comprehensive consideration, the foreign trade buyer appoints the freight forwarder to arrange the transportation, and the domestic export enterprise shall also actively consult with the foreign trade buyer to adopt the bill of lading as the transportation and negotiation document. Meanwhile, the domestic export enterprise should fully comprehend the characteristics of the FCR, and realize that it does not have the function of delivering the goods guaranteed by the carrier. To avoid trade risks, under the provisions of Article 72 (1) of the Maritime Code of the People’s Republic of China and Article 8 (1) of the Provisions of the Supreme People's Court on Several Issues Concerning the Trial of Cases of Disputes over Marine Freight Forwarding, the domestic export enterprise should take appropriate measures to make known to the carrier a request for the issuance of a bill of lading or a request for delivery of a bill of lading to the freight forwarder, apply for a maritime injunction to a maritime court if such a request is frustrated, and actively exercise the right of claim for the issuance and delivery of the relevant documents.

2. Suggestion for the insurance company

In the disputes over marine insurance contracts tried by the Court, some insurance companies trigger exhausting litigations because of operating or managerial negligence, reducing their efficiency of claim settlement and increasing their operating cost. If the insurance agent entrusted by the insurance company, by its fault, fails to input the information of the insured which should have been entered into the list of the insured in the process of the insurance business, the insured (or his beneficiary) brings an action when the insurance company refuses to compensate after the insured incident. The court holds that the insurance company bears civil liability for negligence of the insurance agent. Since the crew members who work on the ship face multiple risks and the insured changes during the insurance period because of the mobility of crew members, such as the insured members increase, decrease and substitute from time to time, many ship operators tend to take out group personal accident insurance for a fixed number of crew members on their ships. In the event of the insured accident stipulated in the insurance contract, the insurance company dares not pay the insurance compensation until the court decides whether the crew member(s) involved in the insured accident is/are in the list of the insured. When the applicant applies river hull insurance for his inland river vessel, the insurance company does not record the scope of liability in the insurance policy, nor require the applicant to sign the policy or show the insurance clauses to the applicant. In the event of an accident involving an inland river vessel sailing beyond its approved inland river navigation area, a dispute arises between the applicant and the insurance company as to whether “coastal” falls within the scope of insurance liability. The court decides that the navigation beyond the approved area does not belong to the insurance liability of the insurance company and the insurance company shall not assume the insurance liability.

Suggestion: The insurance company should strengthen the supervision and management of the insurance agent, strictly examine the insurance agent’s qualification, effectively regulate the operation of the insurance agent, and prudently check the insurance policy, applicant’s eligibility information, the subject matter of the insurance and the insured amount filled out by the insurance agent to avoid the loss caused by his negligence. When accepting group personal accident insurance, the insurance company shall explicitly instruct the applicant that it may change the insured during the insurance period, and shall inform the applicant in detail and with an accuracy of the application process and time requirements for the change of the insured. When the applicant applies for a change of the insured, the insurance company shall timely examine such a request and modify the insurance contract and the list of the insured upon approval. When underwriting inland river hull insurance, the insurance company shall explicitly record the scope of liability agreed with the applicant in the application for insurance and the insurance policy, and shall precisely inform the applicant of the scope of insurance liability, to avoid exhausting litigations caused by the parties’ dispute over the scope of insurance liability.

Suggestion for the ocean seamen 

In judicial practice, when it is a foreign ship served by the seamen who engage in ocean operation, some seamen sign the labor contract with the dispatch entities in China, while others sign the contract of seaman service directly with the foreign shipowners. The former seamen establish the labor contract relationship with the dispatch entities, and the seamen’s rights and interests can often be fully and comprehensively protected in accordance with the Labor Contract Law of the People’s Republic of China. The latter seamen establish the service contract relationship with the foreign shipowners, which are not within the applicable scope of the above law, can be only confirmed in accordance with Article 41 in the Law of the People's Republic of China on the Application of Law in Foreign-related Civil Relations and clauses of application of law stipulated in the contract. In addition to the difficult delivery and enforcement, the seamen’s rights cannot be so comprehensively and fully protected as in accordance with the Labor Contract Law of the People's Republic of China. The confirmation and exercise of the maritime lien can be separated in accordance with Article 6 in the Provisions of the Supreme People’s Court on Several Issues concerning Trial of Cases Involving Seaman-related Disputes.The exercising period of the maritime lien is the scheduled period, and such a period will be terminated if the maritime lien has not been enforced within one year of the existence of such maritime lien.In judicial practice, the confirmations of the maritime lien requested by the seamen beyond one year of the existence of such maritime lien are not supported by the court.

Suggestion: The seamen engaging in ocean operation shall prefer to sign the labor contract and establish the labor contract relationship with the shipowner, ship operator or dispatch entity in China to comprehensively protect their rights and interests   in accordance with the Labor Contract Law of the People's Republic of China. When the other party of the contract is behind in payment of wages, other remuneration, crew repatriation and social insurance costs attached by a maritime lien to the seamen, it is necessary for the seamen to confirm that they enjoy the maritime lien through litigation as soon as possible within one year of the existence of such maritime lien even though the ship attached with the maritime claim is not found. After the confirmation, the seamen shall also actively exercise the maritime lien within the above-mentioned one year to make their creditor’s rights fully guaranteed and avoid the extinguishment of the maritime lien because the one-year period expires. 

Suggestion for the fishery boat accident investigation authority 

In recent years, the relevant administrative lawsuits have been often brought because the fishery boat accident investigation authority fails to perform duties according to law after the overwater work safety accident occurs to the fishery boat. The conflicts mainly focus on the failure of the fishery boat accident investigation authority in reporting the accident according to law, fully performing investigative functions with incomprehensive and incomplete investigation report content, or delivering the closing report of the accident to the parties concerned or delivering it timely.The failure of fishery boat accident investigation authority to perform duties legally goes against handling the follow-up civil disputes related to the accident and is harmful for the administrative organ to establish the good image of law-based governance. 

Suggestion: The fishery boat accident investigation authority shall comprehensively master the working form of accident investigation which it has the right to conduct stipulated in the Provisions for Reporting, Investigating and Handling Overwater Safety Accidents of Fishery Boats and the content required in the accident investigation report, perform the investigation functions according to law, carry out the complete investigation on the content which shall be included in the accident investigation report, form a complete and detailed accident investigation report and timely deliver the accident closing report covering the accident investigation report content to the parties involved. As a result, the parties involved will be convinced of the results of the report, and it will further embody the administrative organ’s working attitude of being dedicated, serious and rigorous, honest and fair in handling the accident. 



IV. Typical Cases

1. The period which has substantial impact on the contract performance is included into the duration of contract performance affected by the force majeure of COVID-19 pandemic

In the case of dispute over charter party between Tangshan Caofeidian Xiangkun Shipping Co., Ltd. (hereinafter referred to as Xiangkun Company) as the plaintiff and Dalian Shipbuilding Industry Co., Ltd. (hereinafter referred to as DSIC) as the defendant, DSIC chartered the floating crane ship owned by Xiangkun Company for the overwater hoising operation with the agreement that the operating period was from October 16, 2019 to January 24, 2020, the grace period was from January 25 to February 8, 2020 with no charge, and the demurrage shall be charged for extended use. Xiangkun Company completed the majority of hoising operation from October 16, 2019 to January 23, 2020. DSIC had no arrangement for hoising operation from January 24 to 30, 2020. Affected by the COVID-19 pandemic, Dalian COVID-19 pandemic prevention and control command issued the NO.3 order on January 31, 2020, which commanded all kinds of enterprises in the city shall resume work no earlier than 24:00 on February 9, 2020. Both the two companies resumed work on February 10, 2020. Through mutual consultation, Xiangkun Company completed the rest of hoising operation from February 11 to 24, 2020. Xiangkun Company argued that DSIC should be responsible for the demurrage from February 9 to 24, 2020. The Court held that, after the COVID-19 pandemic was identified as a public health emergency, the prevention and control measures taken by governments at all levels and relevant departments to protect people’s health and safety should constitute force majeure. The period from January 25 to 30, 2020 was the Spring Festival and also the legal holiday in China. DSIC did not arrange Xiangkun Company to carry out the hoising operation during the period, nor prove that DSIC made preparation work related to the hoising operation during the period. The period was the duration of force majeure affected by the COVID-19 pandemic but had no substantial impact on the contract performance, thus it should not be included into the duration of contract performance affected by the COVID-19 pandemic. The duration of contract performance affected by the COVID-19 pandemic was from January 31 to February 8, 2020. The Court ruled that DSIC paid Xiangkun Company RMB 1,133,600 of demurrage and its interest.

Where the entity who declared imported goods to the Customs loses the identity of consignee, the related interested party is entitled to request the entity to cancel the declaration

In the case of dispute over removal of obstacles between Cocamar Cooperativa Agroindustrial (hereinafter referred to as Cocamar Company) as the plaintiff and Liaoning XinShi Trading Company (hereinafter referred to as XinShi Company) as the defendant, Cocamar Company as the shipper, consigned soybeans from Brazil, and Evergreen Company as the carrier, issued three original bills of lading, which noted the consignee was to order by XinShi Company. When the goods arrived at Dalian port, XinShi Company declared to China Customs against the copy of bill of lading as consignee. Later, Cocamar Company returned the above-mentioned full set of original bills of lading, Evergreen Company altered the consignee at the request of Cocamar Company and reissued the bills of lading. The legal holder of the second set of bills of lading was unable to declare and take delivery of the goods since Xinshi Company had made declaration. The Court held that, the soybean involved was imported goods, and customs declaration was the compulsory procedure for taking delivery of goods. XinShi Company was not the holder of the original bills of lading and had no right to take the delivery of above-mentioned goods. Evergreen Company and Cocamar Company had the right to negotiate and change the articles such as the consignee of the contract. The second set of bills of lading should be effective and valid in the case. XinShi Company was not the consignee anymore and its customs declaration hindered Cocamar Company from realizing the rights under bill of lading in accordance with the law. Therefore the Court ruled that XinShi Company cancelled the customs declaration. 

The multimodal transport operator, who does not issue the multimodal transport documents, takes the entire transport responsibility only to the shipper

In the case of dispute over contract of carriage of goods by sea between Cathay Century Products Insurance Co., Ltd. (hereinafter referred to as Cathay Company) as the plaintiff and Damu International Logistics Group Co., Ltd. and Liaoning Xindamu Logistics Co., Ltd. (hereinafter referred to as Xindamu Company) as the defendants, Xindamu Company entered a transport contract with Dalian Huarui Heavy Industry International Trade Co., Ltd. (hereinafter referred to as Huarui Company), the outsider of the case, agreeing that Xindamu Company was responsible for inland transportation of goods, export declaration and inspection to delivery of goods EX-ship’s hold at the port of destination from China factory to Shanyong port of Vietnam. Under a voyage charter, Xindamu Company transported the above goods by chartering MV YINGFU from Tairong International Shipping Company, the outsider of the case. The shipping agency issued the bill of lading on behalf of the captain. When MV YINGFU arrived at the port of destination, some of the goods were found damaged. The right of subrogation to claim for compensation was transferred to the cargo insurer, Cathay Company, after Cathay Company paid the indemnity to Taisu Hejing Company, the consignee noted in the bill of lading. The Court held that, Xindamu Company and Huarui Company established the legal relationship of multimodal transport contract in accordance with the Maritime Code of the People’s Republic of China. As multimodal transport operator, Xindamu Company, who did not issue the multimodal transport documents, took the entire transport responsibility only to its counterpart of the contract, Huarui Company. Cathay Company failed to prove that the bill of lading involved in the case was authorized by Xindamu Company or issued by the shipping agency on behalf of Xindamu Company, the contract of carriage goods by sea proved by the bill of lading was not established between Xindamu Company and Taisu Hejing Company. Therefore, the Court rejected the whole claim of Cathay Company.

4. On condition that the claimant provides sufficient and effective guarantee, the maritime injunction should be granted and executed, not affected by the possessory lien on goods argued by the person against whom a claim is made

In the case of compulsory delivery between Xiamen Jianfa Products CO., Ltd. (hereinafter referred to as Jianfa Company) as the Claimant and Maersk A/S (hereinafter referred to as Maersk Company) as the person against whom a claim is made, Maersk Company, in the hearing organized by the Court, argued that it did not release goods but exercised the possessory lien on goods in accordance of the law, which didn’t breach the terms of contract of carriage of goods by sea. The Court held that, the breach of legal provisions or contractual stipulations by the person against whom a claim is made should be one of conditions where the maritime injunction is granted. Maersk Company, the carrier under the contract of carriage of goods by sea, was obliged to deliver the goods to the consignee or the holder of bill of lading, and the failure to deliver the goods breached its duty. In addition, the purpose of exercising the possessory lien on goods is to guarantee the realization of creditor’s right. Maersk Company argued to exercise the possessory lien on goods, but Jianfa Company, as the consignee noted in the bill of lading, provided the sufficient and effective bank guarantee for releasing the goods, which not only guaranteed the realization of the carrier’s creditor’s right and interest, but also avoid the further expansion of goods loss and expenses. Therefore, the Court granted the maritime injunction in accordance with the law and ordered Maersk Company to release the goods to Jianfa Company.

5. The International freight forwarding company who does not accomplish the entrusted affairs has no right to require the principal to pay remuneration, if it fails to prove there are reasons not attributable to it

In the case of dispute over contract of freight forwarding by sea between Yantai Anxin International Logistics Co., Ltd. (hereinafter referred to as Anxin Company) as the plaintiff and Dalian Jincheng Logistics Supply Chain Co., Ltd. (hereinafter referred to as Jincheng Company) as the defendant, Anxin Company authorized Jincheng Company to handle the general affairs about five shipments from Dalian, China to Singapore, including export booking (BBK split hoisting), stacking, packing, strapping, reinforcement and inbound transportation. Jincheng Company accepted the authorization but was frustrated during the process of arranging the goods to enter the port. The goods failed to ship as scheduled, but Jincheng Company still required Anxin Company to pay remuneration. Anxin Company claimed the reason the goods failed to enter the port was that Jincheng Company did not hoist the special container involved in the case by BBK split hoisting. Jincheng Company argued that the failure was due to the weather. Both the parties failed to provide sufficient evidence to support their opinions. The Court held that, in accordance with Article 405 of the Contract Law of the People's Republic of China which provides that if the entrustment contract is dissolved or the entrusted affairs cannot be accomplished due to reasons not attributable to the agent, the principal shall pay corresponding remuneration to the agent, Jincheng Company, as the trustee, failed to prove that the failure to ship the goods was due to reasons not attributable to it, therefore there was no legal basis for it to accept Anxin Company’s remuneration and it should returned the remuneration.

6. When the contract-offering party is at fault for the invalidity of the construction subcontract which made his letter of guarantee invalid, he should assume joint and several liability for the corresponding payment in accordance with the law

In the case of dispute over port dredging contract between Ningbo Yongyi Ocean Engineering Co., Ltd.(hereinafter referred to as Yongyi Company) as the plaintiff and Dalian Hangsheng Port Construction Engineering Co., Ltd. (hereinafter referred to as Hangsheng Company) as the defendant and Dalian Huichang Terminal Co., Ltd. (hereinafter referred to as Huichang Company) as the defendant, Huichang Company offered the port berth construction project to Hangsheng Company without port construction qualification, and Hangsheng Company subcontracted the dredging project of the harbor basin to Yongyi Company without construction qualification. Both the above-mentioned contracts were invalid. Although the latter contract was cancelled before the completion of the project, yet Hangsheng Company recognized the quality of completed project. Therefore, the Court ruled that Hangsheng Company should make the corresponding payments to Yongyi Company. Since the contract between Hangsheng Company and Yongyi Company was invalid, the letter of guarantee issued by Huichang Company to Yongyi Company for the payment of the project was invalid, too. Knowing that Hangsheng Company did not have the relevant construction qualifications, Huichang Company still offered the port berth construction project to Hangsheng Company and confirmed that Hangsheng Company subcontracted the dredging project of the harbor basin to Yongyi Company, which belonged to the situation of providing a guarantee for the principal contract knowing that it is invalid, and Huichang Company is thereupon at fault for the invalidity of the guarantee contract. In accordance with the provisions of Article 8 of the Interpretation of the Supreme People's Court on Several Issues Concerning the Application of the Guarantee Law of the People’s Republic of China, the Court ordered Huichang Company to assume joint and several liability for one third of the aforementioned project prices.

7. When the creditor and the debtor agree to change the principal contract of the ship operation loan, they shall have beforehand the written consent from the guarantor. Otherwise, the guarantor shall no longer bear the guarantee responsibility

In the case of dispute over loan contract for ship operation between Bank of China Limited Dandong Branch (hereinafter referred to as Bank of China Dandong Branch) as the plaintiff and Dandong Jinshengshui Fishery Co., Ltd. (hereinafter referred to as Jinshengshui Company), Dandong Feng’ao Ship Industry Co., Ltd. (hereinafter referred to as Feng’ao Company), Song X and Zhang X as the defendants, as agreed, Feng’ao Company’s term of guarantee was up to the date when the ship was registered for mortgage. Since the lender Bank of China Dandong Branch and the borrower Jinshengshui Company failed to register the mortgage for the ship as agreed in the loan contract, the consequence of unreasonable extension of the guarantee term shall not be borne by Feng’ao Company. Moreover, Bank of China Dandong Branch did not pay the loan to Feng’ao Company, the borrower’s counterparty and the guarantor of the loan contract, as agreed in the loan contract, and changed the loan recipient who had been agreed in the contract. In accordance with Article 24 of the Guarantee Law of the People's Republic of China which provides “When the creditor and the debtor change the principal contract, they shall have beforehand the written approval from the guarantor. The guarantor assumes no more guarantee responsibilities if the change is made without its approval”, the Court rejected Bank of China Dandong Branch’s request for Feng’ao Company to bear joint and several responsibility.

Consumers who purchase yachts are protected by the Law of the People’s Republic of China on the Protection of Consumers’ Rights and Interests, and producers shall bear punitive compensation liability for their frauds

In the case of dispute over contract of sale and purchase of ship between Yu X as the plaintiff and Dalian Cihang Yacht Co., Ltd. (hereinafter referred to as Cihang Company) as the defendant and Wehai JinyunYacht Co., Ltd. (hereinafter referred to as Jinyun Company) as the defendant, Yu X ordered a new yacht from the seller, Cihang Company. As agreed, Cihang Company was responsible for handling the ship inspection procedures of the yacht. Later, Cihang Company delivered a yacht and ship inspection certificates of the same model built by the manufacturer Jinyun Company. In the process of negotiating and handling the case of a bottom break of the yacht, Yu X discovered that there were discrepancies in the ship inspection procedures on where the yacht left the factory and where it was naturalized. Yu X believed that Cihang Company and Jinyun Company had sales fraud, and requested to rescind the yacht sales contract, and requested Cihang Company and Jinyun Company to jointly refund RMB 180,000 of the purchase price and jointly compensate for the loss of RMB 360,000. The Court held that, Cihang Company delivered an unqualified yacht as the subject of the sales contract, and failed to prove that he had ordered a new yacht from Jinyun Company, paid the price, transported the new yacht to Dalian or done the related things. It was presumed that Cihang Company intentionally concealed the true status of the yacht when he entered into the contract, which constituted a fraud. The design and purpose of this yacht were for private use, which was within the scope of commodities specified in Article 2 of the Law of the People's Republic of China on the Protection of Consumers’ Rights and Interests. According to the Law, the Court ruled to rescind the yacht sales contract signed between Yu X and Cihang Company, ordered Cihang Company to refund the purchase price of the yacht to Yu X and bear punitive compensation liability, and rejected Yu X’s claim against Jinyun Company.

In the absence of evidence to the contrary, the maritime accident report made by the administrative organ can be used as evidence for the court to determine the facts of the case, but the responsibility of the parties should be determined by the court after examining the facts

In the case of dispute over liability for personal injury at sea between Li X, Wei X, Liu X as the plaintiffs and Xu X as the defendant, Xu X hired Sang X to drive the motorboats at Dalian Changxing Island Beach and charged tourists to experience the motorboat sailing at sea. In the sea ride process, the motorboat driven by Sang X cut Liu XX with an injury in the head who was swimming in the sea, and Liu XX died despite emergency rescue efforts. In accordance with the employer’s liability provided in Paragraph 1 of Article 9 of the Interpretation of the Supreme People's Court on Several Issues concerning the Application of Law in the Trial of Personal Injury Compensation Cases, Sang X was responsible for the accident, and Xu X as an employer bore the tort liability. In addition, Article 26 of the Tort Liability Law of the People's Republic of China provides that, “Where the infringee is also attributable to the damage, the liability of the infringer may be mitigated.” Although the maritime accident report made by the administrative organ held that Liu XX was not obviously at fault as a tourist, the Court held that in the case of several motorboats sailing on the sea, Liu XX should know the danger of swimming and take necessary protection and warning measures. Liu XX didn’t take necessary warning measures，and was at fault for the accident, too. The Court ruled that Xu X’s liability as the infringer was reduced by 10%.

The evaluation of “land reclamation” should be based on both the actions and the objective results, rather than just the state of sea surface

In the case of revocation for administrative penalty decision between Zou X as the plaintiff and Dalian Jinpu New District Agriculture and Rural Bureau as the defendant, Zou X claimed that the part of sea use in 2015 was just to level out the historically formed waste accumulation area, and the survey report also showed that the accumulation area had been formed in 2014, so the sea use should not be considered as land reclamation. Dalian Jinpu New District Agriculture and Rural Bureau argued that according to the coastline revision data published in 2009, the accumulation area belonged to the sea area and had been formed into the land, so Zou X’s use of the sea should be identified as land reclamation. The Court held that, according to the relevant provisions of sea area management, “land reclamation” was referred as the land that can become an effective shoreline after building disks and modifying sea areas, completely changing the natural properties of the sea area. The criterion of land reclamation should be the act of building embankments and reclaiming the sea for land, resulting in the formation of a new stable boundary between land and sea. Zou X did not build the embankment to enclose the sea area, and the new stable sea-land boundary was formed before the use of the sea, Zou X’s leveling and construction in the accumulation area should not be considered as land reclamation. Therefore, the Court revoked the administrative penalty decision of Dalian Jinpu New District Agriculture and Rural Bureau.

The Court upholds the ideal of enforcement with goodwill and politeness, combining enforcement measures with mediation means to provide high-quality judicial services for the development of enterprises

In the case of application for dispute over recourse of guarantee contract between China Orient Asset Management Co., Ltd. Liaoning Branch (hereinafter referred to as Orient Asset Liaoning Company) as the applicant and China Zhonghaizhi Co., Ltd. (hereinafter referred to as Zhonghaizhi Company) as the person subjected to execution, which was to enforce designated by Liaoning High People’s Court. Since the end of 1999, Zhonghaizhi Company owed Orient Asset Liaoning Company US $2,288,514.57 and its interest. After placing the case on the docket, the Court immediately and fully inquired and controlled the bank accounts of Zhonghaizhi Company and froze more than RMB 700 thousand. According to the property clues provided by Orient Asset Liaoning Company, the Court found that Zhonghaizhi Company, as the major shareholder, held the stocks of the listed company, and the case could be closed by selling the stocks directly, but Zhonghaizhi Company requested the suspension of enforcement. In order to avoid incalculable negative impact on the business development of the enterprise, the Court did not rigidly take sell-off measures, but actively organized both the two parties to calculate and negotiate repeatedly on the principal and interest of the creditor's rights. Finally, the two parties reached a settlement. Zhonghaizhi Company actively fulfilled the outstanding principal and interest with the total number of about RMB 47 million. After the case was closed, the listed company’s additional stock placement was on schedule and not adversely affected.

12. Where the real estate is mortgaged before the lease, the auction of real estate made by the court with the mortgagee’s consent does not affect the realization of the mortgage right, even without the consent of lessee or secondary lessee

In the case of lawsuit of enforcement opposition between Hu X as the plaintiff and Wang X, Wang XX, Zheng X as the defendants, Shenyang Metal Materials General Factory, Zhou X, Shenyang Jiadian Logistics Co., Ltd., Qu X as the third parties, Hu X as the secondary lessee raised an opposition for enforcement on the grounds that the Court’s auction was illegal without his consent and removal of the lease in advance, and claimed that he had a legal and valid lease on the real estate and refused to perform the enforcement duty of vacating the house requested by the Court. The Court held that the real estate had been mortgaged before the lease, and the auction of real estate with the mortgagee’s consent was a specific way for the mortgagee to exercise the right of mortgage to realize the repayment of the debt. The proceeds of the auction had priority in paying off the mortgagee’s claim, and the lease right did not adversely affected the realization of the prior mortgage, and should not accord with the articles about the lease right provided in the Provisions of the Supreme People Court on Auction and Sale of Properties in Civil Enforcement Proceeding by People's Courts, “continuous existence in the to-be-auctioned property may affect the realization of the prior real right for security and other priorities of getting repaid, the people's court may eliminate them prior to the auction”, so the auction did not need to obtain the consent of the secondary lessee and remove the right of lease in advance. The Court held that the auction was justified and rejected Hu X’s claim.



Concluding remarks

With the rapid development of marine economy, managing the oceans has become an integral part of national governance system. Over 30-year development and practice of maritime courts has fully demonstrated that maritime courts are specialized courts for not only adjudicating maritime and admiralty cases, but also providing a solid judicial guarantee to enhance the implementation of national strategies and promote the construction of a maritime community with a shared future during the historical intersection of the “two centuries”. Working hard to write the opening answer sheet and striving to create the future of maritime court, Dalian Maritime Court will always insist that the justice should respond to what the people need. From the perspective of serving the big picture, the Court will clarify the responsibilities, assume the missions and make the implementations. The Court will make a good start and escort it well with the power of maritime justice. The Court will protect people’s livelihood, relieve people’s worries and warm people’s hearts with cozy and smart services. The Court will enhance the responsibility, activate the vitality and promote the first-class building with a strong style. The Court will strive to press the accelerating key of the first-class maritime court’s construction, and endeavor to paint a magnificent picture scroll of first-class construction.





             (The above information provided by Dalian Maritime Court）





 
 
 
青岛海事法院 
海事审判情况通报 
Qingdao Maritime Court  
Report on Maritime Trials 
2020 
 
 
 
 
青岛海事法院 
Qingdao Maritime Court 
2021 年5 月 
May 2021 
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 
 
Preface 
 
In 2020, as the guidance of Xi Jinping Thought on Socialism with 
Chinese Characteristics for a New Era, the Qingdao Maritime Court 
thoroughly study and implement the guiding principles of the Party’s 19th 
National Congress of the Communist Party of China and the second, third, 
fourth and fifth plenary sessions of its 19th Central Committee in full. 
The Court firmly focus on a series of strategic plans including the Strong 
Marine Province, the Shandong Pilot Free Trade Zone, Qingdao Shanghai 
Cooperation Organization Local Economy and Trade Demonstration 
Cooperation Zone, National Coastal Important Central City and the 
International Maritime Trade and Finance Innovation Center. The Court 
firmly grasp general requirement of “leading edge, comprehensive 
pioneering” and the main work line of judicial justice for fairness and the 
people, faithfully perform the duties assigned by the Constitution and 
laws, give full play to the role of the maritime judicial function and 
accordingly made new developments in all judicial works. 
For better social supervision, continuous improvement in maritime 
judicial work, and further advance of the credibility and influence of 
maritime justice, we have complied the Qingdao Maritime Court Report 
on Maritime Trials (2020), which briefly introduces the maritime trial 
work of Qingdao Maritime Court in 2020 and ten typical cases. 
 
Editor 
May 2021 
 
Contents 


 
 
 
Part Ⅰ  Overview of Maritime Trail Work 
I. Overview of the cases ......................................................................... 1 
II. Overview of main works 
.................................................................... 5 
1. Persisting in serving the overall situation and continuously 
optimizing the business environment.................................................. 5 
2. Adhering to justice for the people and comprehensively 
promoting the transformation and upgrading of Maritime Litigation 
Service................................................................................................. 9 
3. Adhere to judicial openness and strive to enhance the 
transparency and influence of maritime justice ................................ 11 
4. Adhere to Political Leadership and strive to build a strong 
maritime judicial team. ..................................................................... 14 
Part Ⅱ  Typical Cases 
Case one: Case concerning the seizure auction and the action of 
affirming rights of the “SAM LION” and a series of litigation 
............ 18 
Case Two: China Pacific Property Insurance Co., Ltd. Qingdao Branch 
v. Dairong Shipping Co., Ltd., etc. (Case about disputes over the Cargo 
Damage)................................................................................................ 21 
Case Three: A Qingdao Industry and Trade Co., Ltd. v. A French 
Shipping Company (Case about disputes over carriage of goods by sea 
contracts) .............................................................................................. 26 
Case Four: Dispute on voyage charter between a logistics company in 
Qingdao and a shipping company in Tianjin 
........................................ 29 


 
 
Case Five: Lebang Holding Group Co., Ltd. v. Qingdao Port 
Dongjiakou Ore Co., Ltd. (Case about disputes over Port cargo storage 
contract) ................................................................................................ 33 
Case Six: Liang etc. v. Shouguang Shipping Co., Ltd. etc(Case about 
dispute over shipbuilding contract) ...................................................... 37 
Case Seven: National Bank of Greece v. the Republic of Liberia Blue 
Laura Shipping Co., Ltd. (Case about disputes over mortgage of ships 
contracts) .............................................................................................. 41 
Case Eight: Feng v. A Chinese Property Insurance Company Limited, 
Weihai Rongcheng Branch (Case about disputes over contract of 
maritime insurance) .............................................................................. 44 
Case Nine: The Bank in Rongcheng, Shandong Province v. The 
Company in Marshall Island (Case about the dispute over subrogation)
 .............................................................................................................. 50 
Case Ten: The Marine Biotechnology Co., Ltd. in Shandong Province v. 
Oil Tanker Transportation Co., Ltd. at Changdao (Case about disputes 
over the liability for damage to mariculture) 
........................................ 55 
 


 
-1- 
 
 
Part Ⅰ  Overview of Maritime Trail Work 
 
In 2020, Qingdao Maritime Court adhere to the guidance of Xi 
Jinping Thought on Socialism with Chinese Characteristics for a New Era, 
earnestly study and implement Xi Jinping Thought on Rule of Law, 
closely around the construction of a Strong Marine Province, the 
Shandong Pilot Free Trade Zone, focusing on Qingdao SCO 
Demonstration Zone, the National Coastal Important Central City and 
International Shipping Trade Innovation Financial Center and other major 
strategic planning, firmly grasp the general requirements of “leading edge, 
comprehensive pioneering” and the main work line of justice for the 
people and judicial fairness, faithfully perform the duties entrusted by the 
Constitution and laws, give full play to the role of maritime judicial 
functions. 
I. Overview of the cases 
In 2020, the Court in total handled 4013 cases and concluded 4054 
cases, involving more than 30 countries and regions, successfully handled 
a number of cases in which the court gained jurisdiction because foreign 
parties took the initiative to apply for the arrest of ships in ports under our 
jurisdiction, reflecting the recognition and trust of foreign parties in 
China's maritime justice, and demonstrating the international credibility 
of China’s maritime justice. 
2213 cases concerning maritime and maritime administrative cases 
were accepted in first instance, including 258 cases concerning maritime 
tort disputes, 1756 cases concerning maritime contracts and 19 cases 


 
-2- 
 
concerning maritime administrative. In addition, 213 foreign-related cases, 
42 cases involving Hong Kong, Macao and Taiwan, 740 cases involving 
special maritime procedures, and 1016 enforcement cases were accepted. 
2321 cases concerning disputes over maritime affairs and maritime 
administrative cases were settled in first instance, including 270 cases 
concerning maritime tort disputes, 1829 cases concerning maritime 
contracts and 18 cases concerning maritime administrative. In addition, 
224 foreign-related cases, 48 cases involving Hong Kong, Macao and 
Taiwan, 743 cases involving special maritime procedures, and 1035 
enforcement cases were settled. 37 ships were auctioned online through 
Taobao platform, including 12 freighters, 17 fishing boats and 8 tugs and 
barges. 
Figure 1  Maritime Cases Accepted of First Instance in 2020 
 
 


 
-3- 
 
Table 1  Maritime Cases Accepted of First Instance in 2020 
 
 
 
Cause of Action 
Total 
Proportion 
Dispute over seaman service contract 
748 
33.8% 
Dispute over liability for personal injury at 
sea or at waters leading to the sea 
201 
9.1% 
Dispute over contract of supply of ship stores 
and spares 
171 
7.7% 
Dispute over contract of freight forwarding 
by sea or by waters leading to the sea 
143 
6.5% 
Dispute over contract of carriage of goods by 
sea or by waters leading to the sea 
128 
5.8% 
Dispute over contract of salvage at sea 
115 
5.2% 
Dispute over confirmation of maritime 
claims 
75 
3.4% 
Dispute over insurance contract arising at sea 
or at waters leading to the sea 
74 
3.3% 
Other disputes 
558 
25.2% 


 
-4- 
 
Figure 2  Maritime Cases of First Instance Concluded in 2020 
 
 
 
Table 2  Maritime Cases of First Instance Concluded in 2020 
 
Ways of Case Settlement 
Total 
Proportion 
Sentence 
866 
37.3% 
Mediate 
602 
25.9% 
Withdrawal 
442 
19.0% 
Involuntary Withdrawing 
251 
10.8% 
Dismissed 
93 
4.0% 
Transferred 
62 
2.7% 
Other 
5 
0.2% 


 
-5- 
 
II. Overview of main works 
1. Persisting in serving the overall situation and continuously 
optimizing the business environment. 
First, the court improves the safeguard measures for Maritime 
Judicial Services and strive to optimize the legalized marine business 
environment. Through In-depth study and understanding the important 
statement of General Secretary Xi's “the rule of law is the best business 
environment”, the court put continued and in-depth optimization of the 
marine business environment in a prominent position. On the basis of full 
investigation and combining with the maritime justice practice, the court 
formulated and published 12 specific measures. Through fair justice and 
performing duties in accordance with law, the Court strove to achieve 
precise and accurate service. The Court resolutely implement the major 
decisions and deployments of the CPC Central Committee on the 
integrated promotion of epidemic prevention and control and economic 
and social development. In the face of the problems and challenges posed 
to maritime justice by the Covid-19 pandemic, the court followed the 
general requirements of “strengthen confidence, help each other to cope 
with the trials and tribulations, adopt science-based approaches and 
implement precise policies”, adhering to the epidemic prevention and 
control and the trial execution in both hands. The Court organized a 
seminar on services for epidemic prevention and control and resuming 
work and production, inviting more than 10 relevant units involving port 
and shipping, shipbuilding, foreign trade, and sea-related finance and 
insurance ,etc., having a discussion on the full understanding of port and 
shipping enterprise on the new expectations and requirements of maritime 


 
-6- 
 
justice, taking the initiative to listen to opinions and suggestions, and to 
properly handle maritime judicial response. Qingdao Maritime Court 
strove to provide strong maritime judicial services and security of 
winning the battle against the epidemic, promoting the resumption of 
work and production, and restoring normal business order. By organizing 
seminar on use maritime judicial services to ensure the high-quality 
development of Qingdao, conducting on-site investigations in Qingdao 
Port and inviting representatives of the National People’s Congress to 
participate in supervision and liaison work meetings, etc., the Court 
extensively solicit opinions and suggestions from deputies to the national 
and provincial people's congresses, experts and professors, as well as 
relevant units of ports and shipping, shipbuilding, foreign trade, maritime 
finance and insurance, etc. Focus precisely on using maritime judicial 
services to guarantee the building of Qingdao as an important national 
coastal central city, a global marine central city and an international 
shipping trade and financial innovation center, the Court study and 
develop specific measures to gather global resource to provide 
high-quality and efficient maritime judicial services for Qingdao, striving 
to provide strong support for better serving Qingdao's high-quality 
development, which was approved by the main leading comrades of 
Qingdao Municipal Party Committee. 
Second, the Court focus on the trial of foreign-related cases and 
strives to optimize the international marine business environment. Based 
on the strong foreign-related characteristics of maritime trial, the Court 
takes the initiative to dock with the construction of Qingdao SCO 
Demonstration Zone and Shandong Pilot Free Trade Zone, actively 


 
-7- 
 
exercise the jurisdiction over foreign-related maritime cases, give full 
play to the functional advantages of maritime justice in coordinating the 
domestic and foreign-related rule of law, and create the preferred place 
for international maritime judicial dispute resolution. Effectively 
enhancing the confidence of all kinds of market entities to invest 
Shandong and Qingdao, the Court strive to provide powerful maritime 
judicial safeguard for the construction of the “Belt and Road” and 
high-quality opening up in the district. In the successful trial of the “Lion”, 
seven overseas parties successively applied to our court for arresting the 
ship, involving Germany, Sweden, Panama, Liberia, Ukraine, the 
Philippines and other countries and regions, with a total amount of more 
than $20 million. When the ship owner abandoned the ship, the court 
actively coordinated to repatriate 21 foreign crew members and 
successfully auctioned the “Lion” according to the law. The auction price 
was RMB 67.836 million, and the premium rate was as high as 19.7%. 
The embassies of Ukraine and the Philippines spoke highly of the work of 
the court and expressed their heartfelt thanks for the proper handling of 
crew repatriation. The case was selected into the work report of the Two 
Conferences of the Province. Such cases not only reflect the recognition 
and trust of foreign parties in our country's maritime justice, but also 
demonstrate the international credibility of our country's maritime justice, 
and a solid manifestation of our Court's service to guarantee the 
expansion of opening and continue to in-depth optimize the international 
business environment. 
Third, the Court accelerated the construction of Intelligent Court and 
strive to optimize the convenient business environment. The Court take 


 
-8- 
 
the initiative in deploying and launching a full-process online case 
handling system, and continuously promoted the upgrading and 
improvement of the system during the process of using, and gradually 
realized the integration of litigation affairs such as case filing, payment, 
mediation, service, appraisal, court hearing, and enforcement. Making full 
use of the achievements of intelligent court construction, vigorously 
promoting online trial, we explore the construction of a new mode of 
“online maritime justice”. Throughout the year, 249 cases of various 
types were tried through the Internet, including online court sessions, 
online mediation, online judicial assistance cases, online release of ship 
arrests, etc., to maximize the protection of litigant rights and legal rights 
and interests of the parties. For example, a creditor meeting was held via 
the Internet for the first time. The meeting spanned four provinces and 
was completed within 15 minutes. The distribution plan of a nearly 30 
million RMB ship auction price was determined and distribution on the 
same day. This case was selected as one of the top ten typical cases of the 
courts serving to protect epidemic prevention and control and promote 
economic and social development in Shandong Province, and was 
reported by the Supreme Court as a typical experience in People’s Court 
Daily. Promoted by China Court website and WeChat official account of 
the Supreme Court. The innovative online auction including online ship 
viewing, online Q&A and online webcast was implemented. Among them, 
Zhenghe 58 was successfully sold at a transaction price of RMB 28.88 
million and a premium rate of 78%, which exceed the executor’s 
expectation and reduced the debt burden of the executee. More than 20 
media such as People's Daily and People’s Court Daily carried out 


 
-9- 
 
reports. 
2. Adhering to justice for the people and comprehensively 
promoting the transformation and upgrading of Maritime Litigation 
Service. 
First, the Court made every effort to improve the quality and 
efficiency of case handling, and strove to provide high-quality and 
efficient maritime judicial services. The Court intensify the dispatch of 
the trial execution, strengthen the notification of the quality and 
effectiveness of the trial execution, and timely study and solve the 
practical difficulties and problems encountered in the work. A meeting of 
all judges is held every quarter to analyze and evaluate cases of the 
remand and overrule case by case, and enhance communication with the 
court of second instance on the issues of inconsistent understanding. The 
Court sorts out the issues involved in four types of appeal cases, including 
maritime cargo transportation contracts, marine development and 
utilization, marine insurance contracts, and construction engineering 
contracts, and strengthened the guidelines for judgments in such cases. 
The Court focus on the core indicators of “3+1”, strengthen the execution 
efforts, strengthen the coordination between filing, hearing and execution, 
improve the joint of execution punishment mechanism and maritime 
enforcement, pay more attention to fair, good faith and civilized 
implementation, effectively guarantee the parties’ rights in winning the 
lawsuit. 
Second, the Court improved the diversified dispute resolution 
mechanism to meet the maritime judicial needs to the maximum extent. In 
accordance with the requirements of “promoting the separation of 


 
-10- 
 
complicate and simple cases, the separation of light and heavy cases, and 
the separation of speed and slowness”, we study and formulate opinions 
on the quick trial of crew service contracts and personal injury 
compensation cases, improve the mechanism and procedures of 
accelerated procedures, and give full play to the advantages of accelerated 
procedures. In view of different types of maritime cases, we found 
corresponding industry organizations, and achieve full coverage of key 
industries and key areas in pre-litigation mediation. We coordinate the 
establishment of seven professional mediation agencies, publicly recruit 
118 specially invited mediators and conciliators, and carried out 
pre-litigation and in litigation mediation. Throughout the year, 127 
mediation cases were successfully assigned or entrusted. In response to 
the significant increase in disputes involving port and shipping in the past 
two years, the Court and Shandong Port Group enhance communication 
and jointly establish a platform of litigation and mediation, carry out 
pre-litigation and pre-execution mediation for disputes involving ports, 
shipping, and freight forwarding to create a harmonious and non-litigation 
port. In view of the fact that the disputes concerning the protection of 
seafarers' rights and interests are relatively concentrated in Rongcheng 
City, we discussed with the Rongcheng Municipal Government, the 
Political and Legal Committee of the Municipal Party Committee and 
other relevant units for many times, strengthen the cooperation, and 
actively promote the governance of litigation sources. The pre-litigation 
resolution rate of disputes concerning the protection of seafarers' rights 
and interests has reached more than 80%. 
Third, the Court innovated trial methods to maximize the protection 


 
-11- 
 
of people's rights and interests related to the sea. The Court increased the 
efforts of judicial assistance, innovated the way of assistance, made full 
use of policies, increased the scope and strength of judicial assistance, 
closed 24 cases in the form of judicial assistance, issued assistance funds 
nearly RMB 92 million, and applied RMB 88 million for provincial 
courts’ assistance. We strengthen the protection of the parties involved in 
people's livelihood cases, such as the recovery of labor remuneration, 
open up a “green channel”, implement quick registration, quick trial and 
quick execution, and properly concluded 1003 cases of crew service 
contracts and personal injury compensation, maximize the protection of 
the legitimate rights and interests of vulnerable groups. Qingdao Maritime 
Court strengthened the supervision and guidance of the trial work of five 
dispatched courts in Yantai, Weihai, Rizhao, Shidao, Dongying. Each 
dispatched Court handled the cases on site in port and shipping 
enterprises and fishing village docks, effectively solving a large number 
of contradictions and disputes in a timely manner and promoted social 
harmony and stability. 
3. Adhere to judicial openness and strive to enhance the 
transparency and influence of maritime justice 
First, the Court has been deepening judicial openness. For two 
consecutive years, the White Paper on Maritime Trials in 2019 and ten 
typical cases were published both in Chinese and English, and more than 
20 media such as Learning from Powerful Countries and People’s Court 
Daily carried out publicity and reports. The Court conducted online trial 
of all cases that should be held in public in accordance with the law. More 
than 1,400 cases were webcast throughout the year. In accordance with 


 
-12- 
 
the principle of judgement document online, and disclosed 3340 
documents on China judicial documents website; every quarter, the 
judgment documents that are not made public shall be made public 
reversely to explain the reasons for not making public. The Court 
highlight the role of portal website as the first platform of judicial 
publicity, strengthen the management and maintenance of Chinese and 
English websites, and timely update the column information of each 
section. The official account of WeChat publishes daily announcements 
of court sessions and online court hearings and dynamic information. The 
public open day of the Court is regularly held, and representatives from 
all walks of life such as deputies to the National People's Congress, 
members of the Chinese People's Political Consultative Conference, 
media reporters, teachers and students of colleges and universities are 
invited to attend, and the breadth, depth and strength of judicial openness 
have increased significantly. 
Second, the Court strengthen the news promotion, including 
highlighting the characteristics of maritime justice and trying to tell a 
good maritime judicial story. More than 160 information bulletins were 
compiled and distributed throughout the year, and more than 130 
manuscripts were published in national and provincial media. Among 
them, 2 articles were published by new media of People's Daily, 12 
articles were published by xuexi.cn, and 5 articles were published by 
People's Court Daily. The level and quantity of publishing reached a new 
breakthrough. The court held a press conference online for the first time, 
inviting some deputies to the national and provincial people's congresses 
and the media at the central and provincial levels to attend, and reported 


 
-13- 
 
the promotion of “online maritime justice” and ten typical cases, which 
achieved good results. The Court also held a forum for lawyers and legal 
workers for the first time, and invited some deputies to the national, 
provincial and municipal people’s congresses and representative lawyers 
and legal workers to participate in the forum. It was dedicated to 
promoting the whole process of online case handling system and 
soliciting opinions and suggestions on the work of the court. Through the 
ways and means of visiting and investigating the Law Association under 
the jurisdiction led by the leaders of the court, strengthening the 
cooperation with the Qingdao branch of other part of the country, etc., the 
special publicity film of “Shandong court litigation service guide” was 
widely distributed, and the whole process online case handling system 
was comprehensively promoted. The Court strengthen network 
propaganda, in the internal and external web sites, WeChat official 
account and other self-media create column such as Today's Duty Shift, 
All of the judges, court staff and judical personnel Style Collection and 
Typical Cases, promoting the advocacy of epidemic prevention and 
control and resuming production from multiple angles and levels, and to 
promote the whole process of online handling. Not only created a positive 
maritime image but also expanded the influence of maritime justice. 
Third，
the Court strengthen external communication. For the judicial 
needs of the Belt and Road initiative, highlighting the unique position of 
Qingdao as a Double Node connecting not only the north and the south 
but also the east and the west. Relying on the advantages of maritime 
court system to integrate shipping trial resources, the Court took the 
initiative to strengthen communication and cooperation with Qingdao 


 
-14- 
 
Banking and Insurance Regulatory Commission, Judiciary, Arbitration, 
Port, Civil and Commercial Law Research Association, Bar Association 
and other organizations, exploring the construction of the jurisdiction 
mechanism and international multimodal transport law application 
mechanism which is in line with the advantages of land, sea and air rail 
linkage of Qingdao city positioning. The court successively held 
symposiums on the prevention and control of epidemic situation, 
resuming work and production and the high-quality development of 
Qingdao, inviting experts and professors and more than 10 relevant units 
such as port and shipping, shipbuilding, foreign trade, maritime related 
finance and insurance to discuss the situation tasks and countermeasures 
faced by maritime justice, providing strong intellectual support for better 
serving the high-quality development of marine economy in the 
jurisdiction. 
4. Adhere to Political Leadership and strive to build a strong 
maritime judicial team. 
First, the Court enhance ideological and political construction. 
Carrying out the Two Insistences thematic education, the Court organize 
the all of the judges, court staff and judicial personnel to conscientiously 
study and implement Xi Jinping’s thought of rule of law, and thoroughly 
study and implement the spirit of the nineteen and nineteen second, third, 
fourth and fifth plenary sessions of the party. The court guided all of the 
judges, court staff and judicial personnel to enhance Four Consciousness, 
strengthen Four Self-confidences and achieve Two Maintenances. On the 
premise of strengthening learning and education, the Court deeply 
examine and analyze the problems, implement rigorously management of 


 
-15- 
 
the problems, and clarify the rectification measures and time limit. The 
Court 
establish 
the 
Sea 
Classroom 
learning 
system, 
which 
institutionalized the study of political theory, trial business, excellent 
traditional culture and red culture. The Court regularly invited 
well-known domestic and international experts and professors to give 
lectures; the symposium of all of the youth judges, court staff and judicial 
personnel was held to study the series of Party building activities such as 
Xi Jinping’s rule of law ideology, party-day activities and other activities, 
which effectively enhanced the political awareness and spiritual realm of 
the police force. 
Second, the Court strengthen the construction of quality and ability. 
The Court highlight the practical and effective guidance of actual combat, 
focus on comprehensively improving maritime judicial ability, and 
strengthen education and training in a targeted way. The Court formulate 
and implement the action plan of reading in the scholarly court and the 
plan of improving the foreign language ability of all of the youth judges, 
court staff and judicial personnel, which created a strong learning and 
research atmosphere. all of the judges, court staff and judicial personnel 
were selected to attend 36 training classes throughout the year; Yin Ping, 
a deputy to the National People's Congress, was invited to preach the 
spirit of the Two Sessions. The Court organized training activities for all 
members of the Civil Code for several times, and actively organized 
various research papers and typical cases collection activities. By taking 
various measures, the Court promoted the improvement of the 
professional ability and comprehensive quality of the all of the judges, 
court staff and judicial personnel. 1 monograph won the second prize of 


 
-16- 
 
the provincial law excellent achievement selection. Several research 
papers and judicial documents won awards in the national and provincial 
selection activities, and some papers were published in the national 
authoritative journals. 
Third, the Court strengthen the construction of incentive mechanism. 
The Court carried out the selection activities of “Outstanding judges, 
Outstanding policemen and Outstanding employees” to create a good 
atmosphere of entrepreneurship by giving full play to the exemplary role 
of advanced models. The Court revised the performance appraisal and 
bonus payment methods for post judges, judicial assistants and judicial 
administrative personnel in 2020, and reasonably set the weight 
coefficient of post judges’ appraisal content according to the type of cases 
and the number, quality, efficiency, effect and difficulty of handling cases; 
the court established a work log system for judicial assistant and judicial 
administrative personnel, and took the log as an important basis for 
performance appraisal and promotion; the Court normalized the 
promotion of Posts and ranks, and selected and appointed cadres to 
highlight their work performance. Through a series of measures, the 
Court established a correct guidance for selecting and employing 
personnel, greatly mobilized the work enthusiasm of the all of the judges, 
court staff and judicial personnel, and stimulated the endogenous vitality 
of them to start a business and strive for excellence. 
Forth, the Court strengthen construction of Party Work Style and 
Honest Government. The Court consciously accept the supervision of the 
discipline inspection and supervision group dispatched by the provincial 
Commission for Discipline Inspection and Supervision, and pay attention 


 
-17- 
 
to using the “Four Forms” of supervision and discipline enforcement to 
promote the transformation of discipline style. The court signed a letter of 
responsibility for the party's work style and clean government, detailed 
the list of responsibilities, and conducted pressure at all levels. The court 
carried out a solid education and rectification of discipline and style. The 
discipline inspection group held collective honest talks with branches of 
the party and strengthened education and guidance to enhance the sense 
of discipline and rules of all of the judges, court staff and judicial 
personnel. The court has improved the anti-corruption risk prevention and 
control mechanism, strengthened the tracking and supervision of the daily 
behavior of tall of the judges, court staff and judicial personnel, and 
regularly organized to watch warning education feature films. The court 
has improved the anti-corruption risk prevention and control mechanism, 
strengthened the tracking and supervision of the daily behavior of all of 
the youth judges, court staff and judicial personnel, and regularly 
organized members to watch warning education feature films, which 
guided the police in the whole hospital to be aware of awe, guard against 
fear, and to keep the bottom line, so as to ensure the integrity of judges, 
the integrity of the court, and the integrity of the judiciary. 
 
 
 
 
 
Part Ⅱ  Typical Cases 
 


 
-18- 
 
Case one: Case concerning the seizure auction and the 
action of affirming rights of the “SAM LION” and a series 
of litigation 
 
【Basic Facts】 
Since April 30, 2020, seven foreign parties and a Hong Kong 
company had applied to Qingdao Maritime Court for the seizure of the 
Liberian ship “SAM LION” under legal process. The applicants hereof 
involved Germany, Panama, Estonia, Ireland, Sweden, Cyprus and Hong 
Kong, China. After the ship was seized, the owner of the ship, a 
Panamanian company, did not provide appropriate security within the 
limitation period, and eventually abandoned the ship. Therefore, a 
German lending bank applied for the auction sale of the ship in 
accordance with law. The Court issued notices to the creditors of the ship, 
requiring them to register their claims relating to the ship within the 
period 
of 
the 
public 
announcement. 
During 
the 
period, 
the 
above-mentioned 8 foreign-related parties and 21 foreign crew members 
of the “SAM LION” applied for the Court to register their claims and 
brought an action to affirm their maritime claims. The dispute included a 
ship mortgage loan contract, ship insurance contracts, ship material and 
spare parts supply contracts, etc., and the sums of money under the case 
exceeded 20 million US dollars. Among them, the principal amount owed 
to the German loan bank was 16,393,129.25 US dollars, and the interest 
and penalty interest was 741,326.44 dollars, totaling 17,134,455.69 US 
dollars. 
 


 
-19- 
 
【Judgement】 
After review, Qingdao Maritime Court conducted an examination 
and made an order to approve the auction of the “SAM LION” ship. On 
December 16, 2020, the ship was successfully auctioned on the Ali 
Judicial Auction Website for RMB 67,836 million, with a premium of 
RMB 11.18 million and the premium rate was 20%.  
The case concerned a dispute over a Ship Mortgage Loan Contract 
between a German lending bank and a Panama company (the ship owner). 
Qingdao Maritime Court held that the two parties clearly agreed in the 
Mortgage Contract to apply Liberian Law, in accordance with the Article 
41 of the Law of the People's Republic of China on Choice of Law for 
Foreign-related Civil Relationships, the contracting parties are entitled to 
choose the law applicable to the contract. Accordingly, it was confirmed 
by the Court that the Liberian Law was applicable to the dispute over the 
Loan Contract in this case. When signing the Loan Contract and a 
Mortgage Contract establishing a mortgage on the “SAM LION”, the 
Panama company was a legally established and existing company, thus 
enjoying the full capabilities and qualifications according to Liberian laws, 
and have the capability to fulfill the obligations stipulated in the terms of 
the Loan Contract and the Mortgage Contract. The mortgage of the ship 
involved in the case had been established in accordance with the law and 
has been registered in accordance with the law by the Liberian Maritime 
Department, therefore the mortgage was effective and enforceable for the 
Panamanian company. The Court entered into judge that the Panamanian 
company shall repay the plaintiff's principal and interest and penalty 
interest owing to the German lending bank, affirmed that the German 


 
-20- 
 
lending bank had a mortgage on the “SAM LION” and had priority over 
other claims from the proceeds of the sale of the ship. After the verdict, 
neither the plaintiff nor the defendant appealed. 
In the other 7 cases concerning disputes over Insurance Contracts, 
Ship Material and Spare Parts Supply Contract and the affirmation of 
wages of the 21 crew members, the Court confirmed the creditor’s rights 
in accordance with laws and regulations, and the 21 crew members’ 
wages had priority over other claims from the proceeds of the sale of the 
ship. 
 
【Significance】 
The typical significance of the “SAM LION” series of cases are that 
both parties in dispute are foreign-related entities, including 7 foreign 
applicants or plaintiffs, and 1 Hong Kong company, 21 foreign crew 
members (5 Ukrainian and 15 Filipino) and a foreign ship. The dispute 
itself had no connection with the mainland of China. The applicants chose 
to apply for the arrest of the ship at the port under the jurisdiction of 
Qingdao Maritime Court in accordance with the provisions of China’s 
Maritime Procedure Law and relevant judicial interpretations. According 
to Article 19 of the Special Maritime Procedure Law of the People's 
Republic of China, the Court had the jurisdiction of the cases by arresting 
the ship, which means that the parties actively chose the Court to solve 
their disputes. During the trial, some applicable laws applied foreign laws 
with the agreement between the parties, and some had applied Chinese 
laws. 
The Court had also overcome the impact of epidemic prevention and 


 
-21- 
 
control and the ship-owner’s abandonment of the ship, and actively 
carried out humanitarian assistance to the 21 foreign crew members, and 
advanced part of their wage, which solved the ship’s supply and the 
crew’s 
daily 
life 
and 
medical 
needs. 
Through 
multi-party’s 
communication and coordination, all foreign crew members were 
properly settled and repatriated. From being abandoned to the orderly 
promotion of all procedures, the Liberian ship “SAM LION” experienced 
a special "voyage" in Qingdao Maritime Court for seven months, which 
was highly praised and sincerely thanked by the embassies of the Ukraine 
and the Philippines.  
The proper handling of the “SAM LION” series of cases is a useful 
exploration for the Court to create an optimal solution for international 
maritime disputes. It fully reflects the recognition and trust of foreign 
parties on China's maritime justice, demonstrating the international 
credibility of China's maritime justice, manifesting the maritime services 
to guarantee the expanding opening up and the further optimization of the 
international business environment. 
 
 
 
 
Case Two: China Pacific Property Insurance Co., Ltd. 
Qingdao Branch v. Dairong Shipping Co., Ltd., etc. (Case 
about disputes over the Cargo Damage) 
 
【Basic Facts】 
On January 31, 2019, the captain of the “Aquila” ship signed four 


 
-22- 
 
sets of B/L to transport 54,178 metric tons of Brazilian soybeans with a 
moisture content of 13.23% to China. The defendant Dairong Shipping 
Co., Ltd. (hereinafter Dairong) was the ship owner and the defendant 
MMSL private Co., Ltd. (hereinafter MMSL) was the bareboat character 
of the “Aquila” ship. The ship arrived at the anchorage of Qingdao Port 
on March 21, and finished discharge on May 20. The carrier applied the 
“three-degree rule” for the ventilation during transportation, and there is 
the case that ventilation is not provided at the right time. 
A joint inspection made before the discharge revealed that the 
soybeans on the surface of the cargo hold had obvious mildew. The 
plaintiff claimed that the mildew was caused by the failure of timely and 
effective ventilation, and the defendant claimed that the mildew was 
caused by the quality condition at the loading port and the delayed 
discharge at Qingdao Port. 
The soybean involved in the case was found to contain a variety of 
weeds, therefore the Customs required the consignee to perform 
disinfection treatment. China's national soybean standards specify that the 
moisture content of soybeans shall be no more than 13%. 
After indemnifying the consignee, the plaintiff was entitled to the 
right of subrogation under insurance contract. The plaintiff claimed that 
the two defendants shall be jointly liable for the economic losses of RMB 
4.89 million and the corresponding interest in accordance with the law. 
 
【Judgement】 
Qingdao Maritime Court held that this case is a dispute over cargo 
damage under a foreign-related contract of carriage of goods by sea, and 


 
-23- 
 
the applicable law is the law of the People's Republic of China. Issue one 
is the legal relationship between the plaintiff and the two defendants. 
Although Dairong was the registered owner of the ship, the captain was 
the representative of MMSL (the bareboat charterer) instead of Dairong. 
MMSL was the carrier and shall bear the responsibility. As the insurer of 
the goods involved, the plaintiff was entitled to the right of subrogation. 
Issue two is the liability for cargo damage. The cause for the damage of 
the soybean involved in the case shall be analyzed from three perspectives: 
whether the quality of the soybean involved in the case met the 
requirements of voyage, whether the ventilation measures during the 
carrier’s liability period were appropriate and the impact of delayed 
discharge on the cargo damage. In this case, the soybeans were not 
suitable for voyage due to the certain quality defects of slightly higher 
moisture content and contained weed. The improper ventilation of the 
“Aquila” was not in proper and prudent control of the cargo, which was 
necessarily causally related to the damage. The cargo was placed in the 
cabin and the discharge was delayed for 38 days, which also had a causal 
relationship with the cargo damage. Taking all the above factors into 
consideration and based on the degree of fault of the carrier’s breaching 
of responsibilities and obligations, the Court concluded that it was 
reasonable for MMSL to bear 50% of the compensation liability for the 
cargo loss in this case. Issue three was the determination of the amount of 
the damage of goods. The amount of RMB 4.89 million was reasonable 
for the necessary repair cost of the damage of goods, and the plaintiff had 
actually paid it, therefore, the court supported the plaintiff’s claim. 
MMSL shall bear the liability for compensation at a rate of 50%. The 


 
-24- 
 
Court entered the judgement that MMSL private Co., Ltd. shall 
compensate the plaintiff for losses of RMB 2.445 million and the 
corresponding interest. After the judgement, both parties accepted the 
verdict without appeal. 
 
【Significance】 
This case was a complicated dispute over soybean cargo damage 
under a foreign-related contract of carriage of goods by sea, involving 
several countries such as China, Panama, Singapore, the United Kingdom 
and Brazil. The defendant, MMSL, was a Singapore company along the 
“Belt and Road” member states. During the trial, the foreign parties were 
treated fairly and impartially, which effectively provided a judicial 
guarantee for the construction of the “Belt and Road” and achieved proper 
demonstration effects. The case has specific guiding significance in the 
following two aspects. 
On the one hand, the case innovated the methods of court trials and 
enhanced the effectiveness of foreign-related justice. In November 2020, 
due to the severe epidemic in the UK, the expert appraiser Chris 
commissioned by the Singapore company could not testify in court offline. 
Qingdao Maritime Court applied a remote video for the first time to allow 
him to testify in court, accepting the inquiries from both parties and 
webcast the whole process. The trial spanned half of the world, while the 
cross-border connection was smooth and barrier-free, providing a basis 
for the identification of case facts and achieving a good trial effect. It 
effectively improves the quality and effectiveness of the trial of 
foreign-related cases, and also demonstrated the internationalization, 


 
-25- 
 
specialization and intelligence of China’s maritime justice. 
On the other hand, the adjudication rules established in this case 
have a guiding significance for similar soybean cargo damage cases. 
There are many cases involve soybean heat damage, and the defenses of 
both parties generally focus on the three aspects: cargo quality, ventilation 
measures, and delayed discharge. An in-depth and detailed analysis was 
made in this case. Eventually, the Court determined a 5 to 5 liability ratio 
according to the degree of the fault of the cargo party and the ship party. 
The Singapore company obeyed the judgment and fulfilled its payment 
obligations. 
Soybean cargo damage often involves a series of carter parties 
including foreign ship owners, bareboat charterers, large time charterers, 
small time charterers, voyage charterers and other legal entities under 
Charter Contract Therefore, the validity of the judgment made in this case 
is not limited to the Chinese and foreign parties involved, but also the 
basis for the Singapore company’s claim against its next renter, the 
Norwegian company. After the judgment, the fact that defendant did not 
appeal also showed the joint acceptance to the court’s judgment of the 
defendant and his next tenant. Therefore, the judgment made in this case 
manifests that the judgment rules of the Chinese courts have been 
recognized by more foreign companies in addition to the involved parties, 
which has a positive meaning to increase the voice and influence of 
China’s maritime trials in the international community, and to improve the 
international credibility of China’s maritime justice. 
 
 
 


 
-26- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Case Three: A Qingdao Industry and Trade Co., Ltd. v. 
A French Shipping Company (Case about disputes over 
carriage of goods by sea contracts) 
 
【Basic facts】 
In January 2019, the plaintiff Qingdao Industry and Trade Co., Ltd. 
(“Qingdao Industry”) shipped a shipment to Valencia, Spain through a 
French shipping company (“French Shipping”). After the goods were 
loaded, the defendant, a Qingdao branch of a shipping company (China) 
Co., Ltd. (“Qingdao Shipping”) as the agent of French Shipping, issued 
triplicate original B/L to Qingdao Industry, which stated that the shipper 
was Qingdao Industry and the carrier was French shipping. French 
Shipping unloaded the cargo at the Port of Valencia and delivered it to the 
consignee on March 20th, 2019. To the date of filing this lawsuit, Qingdao 
Industry still held the full set of original B/L. 
The French Shipping provided a “Certificate of Lost or Stolen of Bill 


 
-27- 
 
of Lading” (“the Certificate”) issued by the Notary Office of Valencia, 
Spain, which recorded the consignee’s application to cancel the validity of 
the B/L involved and provided guarantees. Accordingly, the notary 
authority requested French shipping not to deliver the goods contained in 
the B/L to a third party until the ownership of the B/L was withdrawn and 
the ownership of the stolen B/L was confirmed. The Certificate was 
delivered to French shipping on March 13th,2019. 
In December 2019, a Spanish lawyer issued legal opinion stating that 
the applicable law of the Certificate under Spanish law was Navigation 
Regulations, and the specific provisions would not be repeated. 
【Judgement】 
Qingdao Maritime Court held that the Certificate was an effective 
document made in accordance with Spanish law. According to the 
Certificate, French Shipping as the carrier must deliver the goods to the 
consignee after goods arriving at the port of destination. And French 
Shipping actually received the Certificate before arriving at the port of 
destination to deliver the goods, which complied with the exemptions 
provided in Article 51 of the Maritime Law of the People’s Republic of 
China and should not be liable for compensation. Therefore, the court 
dismissed Qingdao Industry 's claims. 
 
【Significant】 
This case is a typical case about dispute over contract for the 
carriage of goods by sea in which the carrier delivers the goods without 
the original B/L. From the perspective of strict literal interpretation, the 
carrier delivers goods to consignee in accordance with the requirements 


 
-28- 
 
of the effective legal document issued by notary office at the port of 
destination. This is neither an act of government or competent authority, 
nor a judicial seizure, nor does it belong to the act of delivering to the 
customs or port in accordance with laws and regulations of the location of 
the unloading port. It does not comply with Article 51, Paragraph 1, Item 
5 of the Maritime Law (“Item 5”) or Article 7 of the Provisions of the 
Supreme People’s Court on Several Issues Concerning the Application of 
Law in the Trial of Cases of Delivery of Goods Without Original Bill of 
Lading. However, Item 5 is formulated with reference to the provisions of 
Article 4, Paragraph 2(g) of the Hague Rules, which stipulates “the 
detention or detention of the monarch, authority or the people” “control or 
seizure according to law” is not limited to the government or competent 
authorities, but covers various State agencies with corresponding 
administrative and judicial powers. From the perspective of the original 
legislative intent, this clause should be understood that as long as it is not 
caused by the carrier, and the carrier cannot reasonably prevent and avoid 
it, then the carrier is exempted from liability for the loss or damage of the 
goods. The significance of the case lies in the “acts of the government or 
competent authorities” stipulated in Item 5 shall be reasonably explained 
in accordance with the legislative intent. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 
-29- 
 
 
 
Case Four: Dispute on voyage charter between a 
logistics company in Qingdao and a shipping company in 
Tianjin 
 
【Basic Facts】 
On September 2, 2017, the plaintiff and the defendant signed the 
Voyage Charter Contact, which agreed that the plaintiff chartered the 
“Hua shun 9” ship owned by the defendant to transport coil steel, with a 
minimum of 4980 tons. The port of departure is “Lianyungang Honghai 
Port, Qingdao Dawan Port”, and the port of arrival is Jiujiang Xingtan, 
Ding'an (optional port). The loading period is one day plus or minus 
September 3, 2017, the freight rate is 72 yuan/ton, the duration of loading 
port and unloading port is 72 hours, and the two ports are used together. 
After signing the contract, one shall pay the other party a penalty of 30% 
of the total freight if it fails to perform the contract. 
On September 4, the “Hua shun 9” was ready for loading at the port 
of departure. The plaintiff contacted the defendant many times and told 
him that the goods had been prepared, but it was not convenient to load 
due to the weather. The plaintiff was willing to bear the demurrage due to 
its own reasons, and can pay the demurrage in advance. On September 5, 
the defendant withdrew the ship from the port of departure without the 
consent of the plaintiff. 
The plaintiff filed a motion with the court, requesting the defendant 
to pay liquidated damages in accordance with the contract. 


 
-30- 
 
 
【Judgement】 
Qingdao Maritime Court held that this case was a dispute over 
voyage charter contract between ports of the people's Republic of China. 
According to the claims of the plaintiff and the defendant, the focus of 
dispute in this case are as follows: 
1. Whether the plaintiff's claim has exceeded the limitation of action; 
2. Whether the defendant should be liable for breach of contract. 
Issue 1: whether the plaintiff’s claim has exceeded the limitation of 
action. The plaintiff claimed that the limitation of action in this case shall 
apply to the second paragraph of Article 257 of the Maritime Code, “the 
limitation period of claim for voyage charter party is two years, counting 
from the date when he knows or should know that the right has been 
infringed.”; the defendant held that the provisions of the Reply of the 
Supreme People's Court on How to Determine the Limitation Period of 
Claims for Compensation in Coastal and Inland Waterway Transportation 
shall be applied. That provision provides that “the limitation period of the 
shipper’s and the consignee’s right to claim compensation from the carrier 
in respect of the contract of carriage of goods by coastal or inland 
waterways, or the carrier’s right to claim compensation from the shipper 
or the consignee in respect of the carriage of goods by coastal or inland 
waterways, is one year, counting from the date on which the carrier 
delivered or should have delivered the goods.” Qingdao Maritime Court 
held that from the perspective of the establishment system of the maritime 
law, Article 2(2) of the Maritime Code mandates that the provisions of 
Chapter IV of this Law concerning contracts for the carriage of goods by 


 
-31- 
 
sea shall not apply to the carriage of goods by sea between the ports of the 
people’s Republic of China. Article 257 provides that “the limitation 
period for claims against the carrier in respect of the carriage of goods by 
sea shall be one year, counting from the date on which the carrier delivers 
or ought to deliver the goods... The limitation period for claims in respect 
of voyage charter party shall be two years, counting from the date on 
which the carrier knows or ought to know that the rights have been 
infringed.” The first paragraph of Article 257 mandates the limitation of 
claim for ocean liner transportation, and the second paragraph mandates 
the limitation of claim for ocean voyage charter party, that is, the 
provisions of Article 257 shall not apply to the carriage of goods by sea 
between the ports of the People’s Republic of China. Therefore, the 
limitation of action in the maritime law is not applicable in this case; The 
application scope of the Reply of the Supreme People’s Court on How to 
Determine the Limitation Period of Claims for Compensation in Coastal 
and Inland Waterway Transportation only covers claims for compensation 
in coastal and inland waterway transportation, and does not include 
coastal voyage charter party. Therefore, the Reply does not apply to this 
case. Article 188 of the general provisions of the Civil Code of PRC is 
applicable to the time effect of action in this case. “The limitation period 
of action for applying to the people's court for protection of civil rights is 
three years... The limitation period of action shall be calculated from the 
date when the obligee knows or should know that the right has been 
damaged and the obligor”. 
On September 5, 2017, the defendant withdrew the ship from the 
port of departure, and the plaintiff failed to ask the defendant to continue 


 
-32- 
 
the performance of Voyage Charter Contract. This is the time when the 
plaintiff knew or should have known that his rights were infringed. The 
time of action effect is calculated from September 5, 2017. The time for 
the plaintiff to file the lawsuit is August 14, 2019, which does not exceed 
the limitation period. 
Issue 2: whether the defendant should bear the responsibility for 
breach of contract. The defendant withdrew the ship without the consent 
of the plaintiff, which violated the contract and constituted a breach of 
contract. According to the contract, “if one party fails to perform the 
contract, it shall pay the other party a penalty of 30% of the total freight”. 
According to the above agreement, the defendant shall pay the plaintiff a 
penalty of 30% of the total freight. 
After appeal, the case was confirmed in the second trial. 
 
【Significance】 
In the practice of maritime trial, there is a great controversy on the 
application of the law of limitation of action in the disputes of Voyage 
Charter Contract between ports of the People’s Republic of China. The 
typical significance of this case lies in: in the case that the legal 
provisions are not clear enough, the issue has been properly interpreted, 
which can play a role of demonstration and reference for the trial of 
similar issues. 
In this case, the claims of both the plaintiff and the defendant for the 
limitation of action in this case represent the views of the disputing party 
in practice. In practice, those who hold the plaintiff's view hold that the 
second paragraph of Article 2 of CMC means that the contents of other 


 
-33- 
 
chapters of CMC should be applicable to the coastal transportation of 
goods. Therefore, the limitation system of voyage charter party in 
maritime law is applicable to the disputes of coastal Voyage Charter 
Contract. 
This is the fragmented understanding of the maritime law and the 
result of the isolation and separation of the provisions of the maritime law. 
This case interprets the reason why CMC is not applicable to this case 
from the perspective of the establishment system of CMC. In the absence 
of special law, the general law shall be applied. The legal facts of this case 
occurred before the implementation of the Civil Code. Therefore, the 
relevant provisions on limitation of action of the Civil Code of PRC shall 
be applied in this case. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Case Five: Lebang Holding Group Co., Ltd. v. 
Qingdao Port Dongjiakou Ore Co., Ltd. (Case about 
disputes over Port cargo storage contract) 
 
【Basic Facts】 
On August 30, 2017, the third party, Tianjin Port Storage Logistics 


 
-34- 
 
Co., Ltd (“Port Storage”) as the lessee, signed a “Venue Lease 
Agreement” with the defendant, the Qingdao Port Dongjiakou Ore 
Terminal Co.as the lessor, Ltd (“Dong Ore”). Dong Ore agreed to lease 
200,000 square meters of Dongjiakou Port area of in Qingdao to Port 
storage for bulk cargo storage. The two parties signed the “Venue 
Handover Confirmation Letter” and the “Venue Handover Confirmation 
Supplementary Agreement”. Then, the outer party Baowo Company 
(“Baowo”) and Dong Ore signed “Venue Lease Agreement”, “Venue 
Handover 
Confirmation”, 
and 
“Venue 
Handover 
Confirmation 
Supplementary Agreement”. On May 31, 2019, Baowo and the Lebang 
Holding Group Co., Ltd. (“Lebang Holding”) signed the “Venue Transfer 
Agreement”. On April 24, 2018, Lebang Holding, as the demander, signed 
the “Coke Purchase and Sale Contract” with the supplier Hongjin 
Company (“Hongjin”). Later, on June 29, Hongjin issued a “Certificate of 
Transfer of Title” to Dong Ore. Then Lebang Holding and Hongjin signed 
the “Coke Purchase and Sale Contract” once again on October 11. 
Hongjin then issued the “Certificate of Transfer of Title” to Dong Ore, 
which stated that Hongjin transferred the cargo rights of 8,000 tons of 
coke in the 7102 warehouses to Lebang Holding, subject to the actual 
weighing measurement at the port. According to the contract, Lebang 
Holding requested Dong Ore to deliver the coke involved in the case. For 
the total of 27,359.02 tons (328.26 tons in 8,104 warehouses, 13649.68 
tons in 7202, 4381.08 tons in 7204, and 9000 tons in 7208) that Lebang 
Holding claimed to require Dong Ore to deliver, Lebang Holding did not 
provide a third-party inspection agency report as agreed in the contract, 
deposit payment vouchers, special VAT invoices. Both Dong Ore and Port 


 
-35- 
 
Storage refused to deliver the above coke to Lebang Holding. 
 
【Judgement】 
Qingdao Maritime Court held that the issues in this case are: 1. 
whether there was a Port Cargo Storage Contract between Lebang 
Holding and Dong Ore; 2. whether Lebang Holding had obtained the 
ownership of the cargo it claims; 3. whether Dong Ore have the obligation 
to deliver the goods to Lebang Holding. If Dong Ore shall have delivered 
but cannot delivered, what kind of compensation liability should it bear to 
Lebang Company. 
Since Lebang Holding and Dong Ore have neither signed a written 
storage contract, nor have they delivered coke or paid storage fees. The 
contents of “Certificate of Transfer of title”, “Notice of Transfer of 
Goods”, and “Notice of Transfer of Cargo Delivery Right” neither 
complied with the statutory items in the warehouse receipt, nor did they 
prove that it can be used as a custody certificate for the goods. It was only 
a notice issued by Hongjin and Taihe Company to Lebang Holding to 
fulfill the obligation of delivery of goods, which cannot determine that 
Lebang Holding and Dong Ore have formed a port cargo storage contract 
relationship. Lebang Holding knew that the cargo it claimed were kept by 
Port Storage. Lebang Holding also claimed ownership of the goods, 
however, the “purchase and sales contracts” with the outer party Hongjin 
and Taihe, bank transfer receipts, “Notice of Transfer of Goods”, 
“Certificate of Transfer of Title”, “Notice of Transfer of Delivery Right”, 
“Inspection Report” etc. submitted by Lebang Holding were insufficient 
to prove that the “Notice of Transfer of Goods”, “Certificate of Transfer 


 
-36- 
 
of Cargo Rights”, and “Notice of Transfer of Delivery Right” were 
formed in the process of entering into the Coke Purchase and Sale 
Contract. These were also not enough to prove that it had obtained the 
ownership of the goods. Therefore, whether based on the port cargo 
storage contract or on the basis of ownership, Dong Ore was not obligated 
to deliver the goods involved in the case to Lebang Holding, the judgment 
rejected all the claims of Lebang Holding. 
After the first trial, Lebang Holding appealed to the Shandong 
Higher People’s Court. The Shandong Higher People’s Court upheld the 
original judgment. 
 
【Significance】 
The case is a typical case on the dispute over Port Cargo Storage 
Contract. The case includes a series of complex legal issues such as 
whether the consignor of imported goods shall claim rights based on the 
port cargo custody contractual or ownership relationship, the dilemma 
that the right holder claims to release the cargo to the port operator or the 
custodian and warehousing person of the cargo and the dilemma of port 
operator's choice of delivery object. The case provides a typical reference 
for the judicial review and determination of the legal validity of the 
import cargo custody contract, as well as the judicial review and 
determination of the owner of the imported goods in maritime judicial 
practice. Furthermore, the case provides guidance for disputes over the 
type of imported goods delivered by the port, which contributes to the 
standardized and orderly development of shipping and international trade, 
boost and optimize the business environment for foreign trade, helps the 


 
-37- 
 
development of national marine economy, and provides the most powerful 
maritime judicial guarantee for the continuous and in-depth development 
of the “Belt and Road” initiative. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Case Six: Liang etc. v. Shouguang Shipping Co., Ltd. 
etc(Case about dispute over shipbuilding contract) 
 
【Basic Facts】 
On August 1, 2008, the plaintiff Liang xx, Liang x and Fang signed 
an Investment Shipbuilding Agreement, agreeing to utilize the third party, 
Jiangsu Shipping Co., Ltd.’s (“Jiangsu Shipping”) slipway jointly to 
construct a 27,000-ton bulk carrier. On February 8,2010, Jiangsu 
Shipping, as the builder, a shipping company in Shouguang (“Shouguang 
Shipping”), the defendant, as the buyer, and, Fu, also the defendant, as 
the guarantor of Shouguang Shipping signed the Shipbuilding Contract, 
which agreed that the ship price was 95.5 million yuan with installment 
payment and the place of delivery was the dock or a nearby safe 
anchorage of the Jiangsu Shipping. Jiangsu Shipping issued a written 


 
-38- 
 
authorization to empower Liang xx to sign the above contract. The ship 
construction was completed on January 21, 2011. Later, on January 22, 
2011, Jiangsu Shipping signed a “Ship Handover Letter” with Shouguang 
Shipping, agreeing to deliver the ship at the dock of Jiangsu Shipping and 
the certificate of ownership was delivered at the same time. On June 2, 
2011, because Shouguang Shipping owed money for construction, 
Jiangsu Shipping, the third party Shouguang Shipping, Fu, Shouguang 
ocean shipping company (“Shouguang Ocean”) and Guo, the four 
defendants, signed a Supplementary Agreement, Liang xx as the 
authorized representative of Jiangsu Shipping to sign the agreement. The 
parties confirmed that the amount owed for the ship construction was 
35.5 million yuan and agreed on the payment and the guarantee method. 
From July 4, 2011 to June 22, 2020, Shouguang Shipping paid to Liang 
33.46 million yuan totally. 
 
【Judgement】 
Qingdao Maritime Court held that the Shipbuilding Contract and 
Supplementary Agreement were both signed by Liang xx on behalf of 
Liang xx, Liang x and Fang. Construction funds were paid directly by 
Shouguang Shipping to Liang xx and relevant written materials signed by 
Jiangsu Shipping were only for getting the ship certification. Liang xx, 
Liang x, Fang and Shouguang Shipping established a ship construction 
contract relationship. Liang xx, Liang x and Fang didn’t have ship 
construction qualifications. They borrowed the name of Jiangsu Shipping, 
constituting using legal form to cover up illegal purposes. The 
Shipbuilding Contract and Supplementary Agreement shall be deemed 


 
-39- 
 
invalid. In view of the fact that the ship under the invalid contract has 
already been built and delivered to operation, there was no need to return 
it, but Shouguang Shipping shall give reasonable compensation.  
The court ruled that: 1. Shouguang Shipping shall pay RMB 2.04 
million to Liang x, Fang and Liang xx within 10 days from the effective 
date of this judgment and the interest calculated on the basis of the quoted 
interest rate on the loan market announced by the National Interbank 
Borrowing Center from August 14th, 2020 to the date of actual payment; 2. 
Dismissed other claims of Liang x, Fang, Liang xx against Shouguang 
Shipping; 3. Dismissed the claims of Liang x, Fang, Liang xx against Fu, 
Guo and Shouguang Ocean; 4. Jiangsu Shipping, the third party, was not 
liable in this case. 
After the judgment was made, both the plaintiff and the defendants 
accepted the result and did not appeal, and the judgment has been legally 
effective.  
  
【Significance】 
This case is a typical case about shipbuilding contract of personally 
subordinating to a company. The typicality of this case lies in the 
behavior of individuals signing shipbuilding contracts in the name of 
companies, which belongs to the situation of “covering up illegal 
purposes in legal form” stipulated in Article 52, paragraph 3 of the 
Contract Law of the people’s Republic of China, so the contract should be 
regarded as invalid. 
The Interpretation and Practical Guide to the Contract Law of the 
People’s Republic of China interprets “covering up illegal purposes in 


 
-40- 
 
legal form” as evading the mandatory provisions of laws or administrative 
regulations in a roundabout way to achieve illegal purposes. But this case 
breaks through the scope of “mandatory provisions of laws or 
administrative regulations” and extends to the scope of industry norms. 
The main considerations are: 1. The current laws or administrative 
regulations do not provide for the statutory qualifications for shipbuilding, 
but the construction of new domestic ships should be undertaken by 
shipbuilding enterprises approved by the ship inspection agency. After the 
completion of construction, the ship inspection agency will issue a 
corresponding ship technology certificate. It is a fact known to the 
shipping and shipbuilding industries that the ordering party shall apply to 
the Maritime Safety Administration for registration of ship ownership by 
presenting the inspection certificate. Second, in the subordinating 
relationship, individuals have limited strength to use the name of the 
company to declare shipbuilding, capital and technique, the management 
is not standardized and the safety supervision cannot be put into practice. 
It is difficult to ensure the quality of ship effectively. 
Ship is a large means of transportation. The quality of the ship is 
related to the safety of life and property. This case interpreted "covering 
up the illegal purpose in a legal form" reasonably, in order to play a 
leading role in the demonstration of the judgment documents, warning 
ship construction parties to guard against risks. 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 
-41- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Case Seven: National Bank of Greece v. the Republic 
of Liberia Blue Laura Shipping Co., Ltd. (Case about 
disputes over mortgage of ships contracts)  
 
【Basic Facts】 
Dispute over Ship Mortgage Contract between the Plaintiff National 
Bank of Greece and the Defendant Blue Laura Marine Limited of the 
Republic of Liberia. The plaintiff and the defendant concluded a loan 
contract on September 6, 2007, under which the plaintiff lended a secured 
loan of 75,463,000 dollars to the defendant, and the defendant and the 
Blue Harbor Shipping Co., Ltd. of the Republic of Liberia undertake joint 
liability for repayment. On January 26, 2015, the plaintiff and the 
defendant concluded a Ship Mortgage Contract, which provided for the 
establishment of a first priority mortgage in favor of the Plaintiff National 
Bank of Greece as mortgagee on the Liberian-owned vessel "Blue 
Marlin" owned by the Defendant in the amount of 40,468,972.76 U.S. 
dollars, together with the corresponding interest and the costs, 
commissions and expenses of performing the mortgage contract. On the 
same day, the mortgage was registered with the Maritime Authority of the 
Republic of Liberia, the registry of “Blue Marlin”, in accordance with the 
laws of the Republic of Liberia. After the ship mortgage was established, 
the defendant failed to repay the mortgaged loan to the plaintiff in 


 
-42- 
 
accordance with the agreement. On May 29, 2019, the plaintiff, the 
National Bank of Greece, filed an application to Qingdao Maritime Court 
for maritime claims before bringing a lawsuit, applying for arresting the 
“Blue Marlin” ship belonging to the defendant Blue Laura Shipping Co., 
Ltd. to exercise the right of ship mortgage. Qingdao Maritime Court 
issued a civil property reservation verdict to granting the applicant’s 
application, arresting the ship at the Weihai Port of the People's Republic 
of China, and exercising jurisdiction over the case in accordance with the 
law. 
 
【Judgement】 
Qingdao Maritime Court held that the Revised Loan Contract signed 
by the plaintiff, the National Bank of Greece and the defendants, Blue 
Laura Shipping Co., Ltd. of the Republic of Liberia and the Blue Port 
Shipping Co., Ltd. of the Republic of Liberia, and the Supplementary 
Agreements revised for several times were clear and valid. It was agreed 
that the outstanding principal of the 75,463,000 U.S. dollars (original 
amount) loaned by the plaintiff was 40,468,972.76 U.S. dollars and it was 
confirmed by the Mortgage Contract signed by the two parties. There was 
no evidence that the defendant had repaid the money after signing the 
contract. Accordingly, the Court confirmed the plaintiff’s unpaid principal 
claim of 40,468,972.76 U.S. dollars under the Loan Contract. The 
plaintiff was entitled to dispose his own substantive right, so the claim 
shall be supported that the plaintiff only claimed the creditor’s rights of 
15.3 million U.S. dollars in this case  
The ship mortgage right established by the Mortgage Contract 


 
-43- 
 
signed by the both parties on January 26, 2015, and was registered at the 
Maritime Safety Administration of the Republic of Liberia on the same 
day. According to Article 271 of the Maritime Law of the People's 
Republic of China, the law of the flag State of the ship shall apply to the 
mortgage of the ship. The Code of the Republic of Liberia, Chapter 21, 
Maritime Law of Liberia, Article 101(1) and Article 107 mandate the 
plaintiff’s mortgage on the “Blue Marlin” came into effect on January 26, 
2015. The plaintiff was entitled to exercise the mortgage on the ship by 
auction, thus gaining the outstanding debts since June 19, 2019 from the 
proceeds of the auction sale. In accordance with the relevant provisions of 
the Special Maritime Procedure Law of the People's Republic of China, 
the plaintiff applied to this court for the arrest of “Blue Marlin” on May 
29, 2019, and then applied for auction of the vessel on June 19, 2019. 
These claims were proper exercise of the ship mortgage rights and the 
plaintiff enjoyed the right of preferred compensation of the ship from the 
proceeds of the auction shall be supported. 
 
【Significance】 
The case is a typical case in which Qingdao Maritime Court 
implements the boutique maritime trial strategy and provides a Chinese 
solution for the resolution of maritime disputes for the “Belt and Road” 
countries. The case is about the dispute over a maritime claim 
preservation between the National Bank of Greece and the ship owner of 
the “Blue Marlin”. After receiving the application, Qingdao Maritime 
Court examined the relevant materials and arrested the “Blue Marlin” on 
the same day in accordance with the law. Both parties in the case are 


 
-44- 
 
enterprise legal person registered in foreign countries. The mortgaged 
ship “Blue Marlin” was registered at the Republic of Liberia. Qingdao 
Maritime Court exercise the jurisdiction by arresting the ship involved in 
accordance with the law. In this case, the parties involved are the “Belt 
and Road” countries, the amount of subject is 15.3 million U.S. dollars, 
and the litigation request is equivalent to nearly RMB 100 million. The 
fair trial of this case effectively protected the legitimate rights and 
interests of foreign-related parties and established a fair image of China’s 
maritime justice. It is conducive to promoting more “Belt and Road” 
countries to apply Chinese solutions to resolve related civil and 
commercial disputes, and it has a great reference value for the services 
and guarantees to the construction of the “Belt and Road” initiative. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Case Eight: Feng v. A Chinese Property Insurance 
Company Limited, Weihai Rongcheng Branch (Case about 
disputes over contract of maritime insurance)  
 
【Basic Facts】 


 
-45- 
 
On April 9, 2018, the plaintiff, Feng, took out an all-risk of coastal 
and river fishing vessel insurance for her “Lu Rong Yu 52097” fishing 
vessel with the defendant, a Chinese Property Insurance Co., Ltd, Weihai 
Rongcheng Branch. The last column of the policy stated that 
“Policyholder Declaration: the insurer has clearly explained to me the 
terms and conditions of the coastal and river fishing vessel insurance 
(including the exclusions) and I have fully understood”. The plaintiff 
signed the insurance policy, but claimed that the defendant had not issued 
the coastal and river fishing vessel insurance clause to her, nor did the 
defendant explain the content of the insurance clause to her. After the 
investigation, it was found that the coastal and river fishing vessel 
insurance clause was printed separately by the defendant, and the relevant 
exclusion clauses were not set out in the insurance policy. On the same 
day, the defendant collected the insurance premium and issued the 
insurance policy. 
On September 1, 2018, “Lu Rong Yu 52097” fishing vessel went 
fishing from HongYun Fishing Port. The ship is equipped with 6 crews, 
within whom only the captain, Yan (the husband of the plaintiff) held a 
certificate of chief engineer Ⅲ, and the rest of the crews didn't hold the 
crew certificate. 
On September 6, 2018, Yan's brother reported to the police that “Lu 
Rong Yu 52097” was collided by an unidentified ship at sea and 6 crews 
got lost. Marine and Fisheries Enforcement Brigade of Rongcheng 
organized multiple forces to search and rescue and identified that fishing 
vessel sank and lost at about 160 nautical miles east of Sheyang, Jiangsu 
Province with 1 person died and 5 others were lost. The direct cause of 


 
-46- 
 
the sinking accident is the collision of unidentified ships. 
On October 14, 2019, the defendant rejected the plaintiff's claim 
application on the grounds that the plaintiff violated the exclusive liability 
clause stipulated in the coastal and river fishing vessel insurance clause. 
The plaintiff then filed a lawsuit to this court, asking the defendant to pay 
the plaintiff 1.12 million yuan in insurance compensation. 
 
【Judgment】 
After hearing the case, Qingdao Maritime Court held that whether 
the defendant had the right to be exempted from the liability according to 
the agreed or statutory exclusions and how to determine the proportion of 
insurance liability were the focal points of the dispute in this case. The 
defendant was sentenced to pay insurance compensation of 630,000 yuan 
to plaintiff, Feng and other claims of the plaintiff were dismissed. 
In the process of reviewing whether the agreed exclusions were in 
effect, the defendant refused to pay compensation on the grounds that the 
act of the plaintiff or her representative (including the captain) had been 
excluded as stipulated in Article 4, Article 8 and Article 21 of the coastal 
and river fishing vessel insurance clause. Obviously，it is insufficient that 
the record in the policyholder’s declaration column and the plaintiff’s 
signature on the application form are insufficient to show that the insurer 
has fulfilled the obligations stipulated in Article 17 of the Insurance Law 
of the People’s Republic of China. First of all, compared with other 
contents of insurance application, in this section, only few words as 
“policyholder’s declaration” were bold, and there was only 1 column for 
policyholder to sign in. Therefore, the signature of the plaintiff cannot 


 
-47- 
 
prove his or her recognition of main content of insurance contract, such as 
the type of insurance, the period of insurance, insurance amount and 
others, or just the recognition of “policyholder’s statement”. In one word, 
it makes a situation that once the plaintiff signed in the column, then a 
policyholder’s statement was made. Secondly, the coastal and river 
fishing vessel insurance clause involved in this case was not included in 
the insurance policy, but independently printed, and it cannot be 
determined whether the defendant has issued a complete article to the 
policyholder in the process of insurance and has given a warning and 
explicit explanation to the exclusion clause exempting the insurer's 
liability; An applicant’s declaration, which is neither general nor 
prominent enough, cannot be used to prove that he or she has fulfilled the 
obligation of making a warning and explicit representation in respect of 
the exclusion clause. According to the second paragraph of Article 17 of 
the Insurance Law of the People's Republic of China, the corresponding 
clauses in the coastal and river fishing vessel insurance clause 
exonerating the insurer's liability was invalid for the plaintiff, and the 
defendant cannot invoke the above-mentioned clauses to exonerate his 
liability to compensate. 
In addition, it was necessary to examine whether there were 
circumstances for the application of statutory exclusions in the case. In 
this case, When “Lu Rong Yu 52097” set sail from Hongyun Fishing Port, 
only the captain held a certificate of chief engineer Ⅲ, while the other 
crews didn't hold the crew certificate. Obviously, the other crews were 
unworthy for duties, which constituted unseaworthiness without properly 
manning the crew. According to Article 244 of the Maritime Law of the 


 
-48- 
 
People's Republic of China, the insurer could be exempted from the 
liability for compensation. Whether the defendant can be exempted from 
all liability for compensation depends on whether the unseaworthiness of 
the ship caused by the unfitness of the crew is the only cause of the loss 
of the Vessel. According to the investigation by Marine and Fishery 
Enforcement Brigade of Rongcheng, the collision of the unidentified 
vessel was the direct cause of the sinking, and therefore the unidentified 
vessel should take liability of negligence for the sinking of the fishing 
boat involved. At the same time, the fishing boat involved, with respect to 
its own unseaworthiness, also should be responsible for the collision 
accident. The proportion of the degree of negligence between the two 
cannot be determined on the evidence available. According to Paragraph 1 
of Article 169 of the Maritime Law of the People's Republic of China, in 
the case that the proportion of the degree of negligence between the two 
vessels cannot be determined, the plaintiff shall bear 50% of the liability 
for the unseaworthiness of the fishing vessel involved. The defendant may 
also be exempted from liability for 50% of the total loss of the vessel due 
to the collision and sinking, but is still liable for the remaining 50% of the 
total loss of the vessel. 
 
 
【Significance】 
This case is typical involving the application of the agreed and 
statutory exclusion clauses in the contract of marine insurance. The core 
issue in the trial of the dispute cases concerning the contract of marine 
insurance is whether the insurer should bear the insurance liability for a 
specific accident and the proportion of the insurance liability. To this, 


 
-49- 
 
review should be carried on from three progressive levels: first, analyzing 
the reason of accident and the coverage, determining whether all or part 
of the accident belongs to the coverage; Secondly, examining whether the 
exclusion clause agreed in the insurance contract are effective or not, 
whether there are statutory exclusions to apply, and then determining 
whether the insurer has the right to refuse to pay according to the agreed 
or statutory exclusions. Finally, the proportion of insurance indemnity 
liability that the insurer should undertake is determined according to the 
degree of influence of insurance underwriting risk in the involved 
accident (causality constitution). The issue of this case is whether the 
exclusion clause stipulated in the insurance contract is effective and 
whether the insurer can invoke it to be exempted from compensation 
liability. If the insurer only prints the exclusion clause in the form of a 
separate clause, and does not show it in an attractive form to get the 
attention of the policyholder, then the insurer cannot prove that he has 
fulfilled the obligation of making a warning and explicit explanation in 
respect of the exclusions by means of a “policyholder’s declaration”, 
which is general in content and not prominent in form. In addition, when 
examining the existence of exclusion, one should not be limited to the 
dispute between the parties as to whether the agreed exclusion is in force, 
but also examine whether the dispute in question involves the use of 
statutory exclusion, and the ultimate proportion of indemnity liability of 
insurer should be determined by the proportion of the causal force in the 
insurance accident. 
 
 
 
 


 
-50- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Case Nine: The Bank in Rongcheng, Shandong 
Province v. The Company in Marshall Island (Case about 
the dispute over subrogation)  
 
【Basic Facts】 
The plaintiff, the bank in Rongcheng, Shandong Provence claimed 
the defendant, the company in Marshall Islands, and the third-party Tian, 
Yuan and the fishery company in Rongcheng, for subrogation disputes. 
The fishery company is a one-person limited liability company, Tian is 
the sole shareholder and the legal representative of the company, Tian and 
Yuan are couple. The fishery company provided mortgage guarantee for 
Tian's loan to the bank in Rongcheng, Shandong Province, and the 
mortgaged property was the vessel "Lu Rong Yu 58912", which has been 
registered for mortgage. The mortgage contract agreed that the effect of 
the mortgage right shall be applied to the subordinates of the mortgaged 
property, the rights, appurtenances, additions, natural and legal fruits, the 
subrogates of the mortgaged property, and the insurance, compensation, 


 
-51- 
 
and indemnity due to the damage, loss, demolition, infringement or 
expropriation of the mortgaged property. In 2017, the vessel “Lu Rong Yu 
58912” and “DANNY BOY”, a Bahamian bulk owned by a company in 
Marshall Islands, was involved in a collision. After the collision, the 
vessel "Lu Rong Yu 58912" returned to the port for repair. Due to Tian’s 
delay in repayment, the bank in Rongcheng filed a lawsuit against Tian, 
Yuan and the fishery company of vissel mortgage. In 2018, according to 
the application of the bank in Rongcheng, the court auctioned off the 
vessel "Lu Rong fishery 58912", the proceeds of which amounted to 
RMB 675,1616, and the bank was actually paid RMB 497,5751. On May 
27, 2019, the court issued a judgment on the above-mentioned contract of 
vessel mortgage lawsuit, ordering Tian and Yuan to repay the loan 
principal of $759,5814.94 and the interest jointly and severally to the 
bank in Rongcheng. The court also ruled that the bank enjoy the mortgage 
right on “Lu Rong Yu 58912”, and was entitle to priority payment of the 
proceeds from the auction and sale of the vessel in priority according to 
law. Because of the fishery company’s negligence in exercising its due 
claim, the bank in Rongcheng filed a subrogation lawsuit against the 
company in the Marshall Islands, requiring that this company bear the 
liability for the liability of collision damages and listing Tian, Yuan and 
the fishery company as third parties. 
  
 【Judgment】 
Qingdao Maritime Court held that, in accordance with the effective 
judgment of the contract of the vessel mortgage lawsuit, Tian and Yuan 
were identified as the debtors of the bank in Rongcheng. The bank in 


 
-52- 
 
Rongcheng only enjoyed the mortgage right to “LuRongYu 58912” 
owned by the fishery company, and the fishery company was not the 
debtor of the bank. Therefore, whether the bank in Rongchen, Shandong 
was entitled to filed a claim against the company in the Marshall Islands 
dor the legal relationship of vessel collision depended on whether the 
effect of vessel mortgage can be applied to the compensation that the 
fishing company may receive because of the collision. 
Article 174 of the Property Law of the People’s Republic of China is 
the provision of the Physical subrogation of the real right for security. In 
this case, the agreement on the scope of effectiveness of mortgage in the 
mortgage contract also aimed at ensuring that in case of damage, loss, 
demolition, tort or expropriation of the mortgaged vessel. Accordingly, 
the mortgagee can still enjoy the priority to be reimbursed for the 
substitute of the vessel to realize the creditor's right secured. In other 
words, if during the mortgage period, the vessel has been damaged, but 
the value of the mortgaged vessel does not decrease when the mortgagee 
realizes the right of mortgage, the mortgage right to the vessel shall be 
limited to the value of the vessel itself. “Lu Rong Yu 58912” was 
damaged by the collision, and its value was indeed reduced due to the 
collision, but the vessel did not suffer a total loss. The fishing company 
had finished repairing the vessel before the court detained it, and there 
was no evidence in this case showing that the value of the vessel was 
reduced due to the collision at the time of the arrest and auction. 
Therefore, the mortgage right of the bank in Rongcheng was not damaged 
by the collision, and “Lu Rong Yu 58912” has been auctioned in 
accordance with the law, and the bank in Rongcheng has also received 


 
-53- 
 
priority repayment for the auction price. Pursuant to Article 177 of the 
Property Law, when the real right for security has been realized, the real 
right for security may be eliminated, and the bank in Rongcheng has no 
right to enjoy mortgage for the compensation that the vessel may receive 
due to the collision. Although the auction price of the vessel was not 
enough to pay off debts, the insufficient part should be borne by the 
debtor, Tian and Yuan, pursuant to the article 198 of the Property Law. 
Therefore, the debtor of the bank in Rongcheng was still Tian and Yuan, 
rather the mortgagor, the fishery company. The company in Marshall 
Islands was not the subordinate debator of the bank in Rongcheng, and 
the bank was not entitled to claim the compensation that the fishery 
company might have received for damage caused by the collision damage 
happened to “Lu Rong Yu 58912”. The Qingdao Maritime Court issued a 
civil ruling, dismissing the suit filed by the bank in Rongcheng, Shandong 
Province. 
 
【Significance】 
This case is a typical case involving the subrogation of the real right 
for security set forth in Article 174 of the Property Law, namely Article 
390 of the Civil Code. Mortgage is a right to value for the purpose of 
domination the exchange value of property. Accordingly, when the form 
or nature of the guaranty produces a change, as long as it maintains its 
exchange value, the effect of mortgage also applies to the substitute. 
Article 174 of the Property Law (that is, Article 390 of the Civil Code) 
stipulates that in case the property for security is damaged, lost or 
expropriated during the term of security, the holder of the real rights for 


 
-54- 
 
security may seek preferred compensations from the insurance money, 
damages or indemnities, etc. incurred there from, or may submit such 
insurance money, damages or indemnities, etc. to a competent authority if 
the term for performing the obligee's rights as secured has not expired. 
The system was established to protect the interests of the mortgagee 
against the loss of the mortgage if the value of the mortgaged property is 
impaired during the mortgage period, either objectively or by third parties, 
therefore, the mortgage is granted the right to be compensated for the 
substitute of mortgage property. However, it should also be noted that, if 
during the period of the mortgage, the mortgaged property has been 
damaged, but its value has been restored by means of repair, and the value 
of the mortgaged property has not been reduced when the mortgagee 
realizes the mortgage, the mortgagee’s right shall be limited to the value 
of the mortgage itself. When applying the provisions of the Property Law 
or the Civil Code on subrogation, care should be taken to examine this 
point and it should not be assumed that the mortgagee is still entitled to 
the subrogated value of the mortgaged property. 
The case also clarifies the remedies for the mortgagee when the 
value of the mortgaged property decreases. The mortgagee may require 
the mortgagor to restore the value of the mortgaged property, use the 
compensation to pay off the debts under the principal contract, and 
deposit the compensation into the designated account of the mortgagee. In 
addition, Article 193 of the Property Law and Article 408 of the Civil 
Code also stipulate that the mortgagee has the right to require the 
mortgagor to provide security corresponding to the reduced value. 
However, only one of these remedies may be pursued. The typical 


 
-55- 
 
significance of this case is to guide creditors and mortgagees to recognize 
their rights and risks correctly, to predict risks, to make reasonable 
decisions, and to remind them that they are not entitled to claim 
compensation for the substitute of the mortgaged property under all 
circumstances. 
 
 
 
Case Ten: The Marine Biotechnology Co., Ltd. in 
Shandong Province v. Oil Tanker Transportation Co., Ltd. 
at Changdao (Case about disputes over the liability for 
damage to mariculture) 
 
【Basic Facts】 
On November 14, 2016, the plaintiff, a marine biotechnology Co., 
Ltd. in Shandong Province obtained a sea area use certificate for 198.67 
hectares of open aquaculture marine ranch. On November 6, 2019, 
Changdao Natural Resources Bureau issued a certificate to certify that 
due to the impact of Marine Planning and other factors, the issuance of 
aquaculture certificates at the beginning of 2019 suspended. 
On August 20, 2019, the plaintiff reported that its farming raft and 
appurtenances in aquaculture marine ranch was damaged by a ship sailing 
into the area. After receiving the report, the Maritime Department of 
Changdao organized a maritime investigation in accordance with law and 
found that the defendant- the tanker transport company in Changdao is the 
owner of “the No. 12 oil tanker” which shipped into the plaintiff’s 
farming area and caused the damage. 


 
-56- 
 
In October 2019, a maritime judicial appraisal institute appointed by 
the plaintiff in Shandong conducted a judicial appraisal on the 
aforementioned farming damage accident and concluded that the accident 
caused an economic loss of 4,060,386.30 yuan in total. 
On April 10, 2020, the defendant made an application to the Notary 
Office of Changdao County for the preservation of evidence on the act of 
surveying the relevant sea area. A notary from Notary Office issued a 
notarized certificate based on the scene. On May 28, a judicial appraisal 
institute in Shandong was appointed by the defendant and appraised the 
loss of breeding caused by the accident in this case and concluded that the 
total loss was RMB 1,515,721. 
The plaintiff filed a lawsuit to the Qingdao Maritime Court, 
requesting the court to rule that: 1. to order the defendant to compensate 
the plaintiff for the breeding losses of RMB 4,060,386.30 and its interest; 
2. to confirm the plaintiff has the right of maritime priority over the 
defendant's vessel "No. 12 oil tanker". 
 
【Judgment】 
The Qingdao Maritime Court held in the first trial that the Marine 
Department has the legal authority to carry out administrative acts. In this 
case, the administrative actions taken by the Maritime Department 
followed statutory steps and procedures. And the accident report was 
based on clear facts, sufficient evidence, lawful and appropriate content. 
The accident was caused by the defendant's “No.12 oil tanker” which 
sailed into the aquaculture marine ranch without permission, and the 
defendant was fully liable for the accident.  


 
-57- 
 
The farming acts conducted by plaintiff on the damaged area was 
legal. The plaintiff had obtained the use certificate of the damaged 
farming area and had the right to use the sea area according to the 
authority granted by the certificate. The plaintiff’s farming conducts 
should not be considered as illegal based on not having the farming 
aquaculture certificate considering the following reasons: 1. From the 
certificate of Changdao Natural Resources Bureau, that the plaintiff did 
not get the aquaculture certificate was due to the special concerns of 
Fishery Authority. 2. The issuing authority of sea area use certificate and 
aquaculture certificate is the same one Local County Government, 
therefore the farming acts by plaintiff were not unauthorized. 
The plaintiff’s claim for economic loss of RMB 4,060,386.30 was 
based on the “expert’s opinion” which was not supported by the court 
because of lack of basis. The plaintiff's “expert’s opinion” had following 
problems: 1. The number of samples taken on site was too small, which 
was contrary to the technical specifications. 2. The samples taken were far 
from the damaged farming area, and was not relevant to the case. 3. The 
data quoted in the report was not from the expert who accessed the loss. 4. 
The basis for assessing the economic value was insufficient. 5.The 
pollution standard applying to calculate the farming loss was wrong. 
The location inspected by notaries and other attendants was not 
within the range of survey site and damaged farming area determined by 
the Marine Department, which was not relevant to this case. However, the 
“maritime opinion” commissioned by the experts of defendant constitutes 
the defendant’s self-admission of liability for touch damage. 
In summary, the Court ordered the defendant to compensate the 


 
-58- 
 
plaintiff for losses of RMB 1,515,721 and interest. 
The plaintiff appealed against the first-instance judgment to the 
Shandong High People’s Court. The Court in second trial held that: the 
appeal was rejected and the original judgment was affirmed. 
 
【Significance】 
The case is a dispute over maritime farming damage, and such cases 
constitute difficult maritime cases because the scene is not easily 
preserved and difficult to obtain evidence. In these cases, three aspects of 
facts need to be ascertained: Firstly, the legality of the farming conducts. 
Secondly, the fact of the ship collision infringement. And thirdly, the 
approval of the farming damage. There are three main sources of evidence: 
firstly, proof provided by the marine fisheries department. Secondly, proof 
of the accident by the marine department. And thirdly, assessment of the 
damage provided by the accreditation body. In this case, the court made 
special judgement of the fact on the first and third aspects, which is also a 
reference to other similar cases. 
Firstly, the legality of farming. According to the provisions of the 
Sea Area Use Management Law and the Rules for the Implementation of 
the Fisheries Law, units and individuals using the sea area and engaging 
in farming production shall apply for and receive a sea area use right 
certificate and an aquaculture certificate, and obtain the corresponding 
using right from the time they obtain the certificate. Therefore, whether 
the two certificates are held is direct evidence to determine the legality of 
the farmer’s farming. However, in this case, the failure to hold the 
certificate was not caused by the farmer, and the objective factor that 


 
-59- 
 
constituted an obstacle in this case was the issuing authority. Therefore, 
the court decided that the farmer was still legal to farm based on the 
certificate of the authority that was entitled to issue. 
Secondly, the assessment of farming damage. When encounter 
damages in a maritime accident, a farmer may unilaterally commission a 
correspondingly qualified institution to conduct a damage assessment. 
However, the unilateral commissioning of an expert to make an “expert’s 
opinion” is only the opinion of a person with specialized knowledge on 
professional issues, which does not belong to the statutory identification 
of the Civil Procedure Law, but is “expert opinion”. The “expert’s 
opinion” shall be examined as a statement by the parties. The “expert’s 
opinion” shall comply with the principles of objectivity, impartiality and 
honesty, and the court may conduct a comprehensive review of the 
materials, principles, methods and processes on which it is based and the 
conclusions it draws. 
The judge conducted a comprehensive review, not only to correctly 
apply the law, but also to accurately quote the technical specifications of 
farming, yield acceptance methods, economic loss calculation methods 
and other national and industry standards. In this case, the judge clearly 
pointed out that the plaintiff unilaterally commissioned expert 
identification conclusions in relevance, objectivity, legality of the defects, 
and ultimately rejected the “expert’s opinion”. As the “expert’s opinion” 
contrary to the basic principles of identification was not adopted by the 
court, the plaintiff unilaterally commissioned the agency to identify the 
need, the corresponding identification expenses should also be based on 
the principle of “who claims, who bears” and bear by the plaintiff itself.