1
2020 JD.com Environmental, Social and Governance Report


Contents
Overview
Special Topic: Combating COVID-19
Corporate Governance
Environmental Protection
Working Environment
Product Responsibility
Community Responsibility
Appendix
About JD.com
01
Report Profile
Letter from the Chairman
Statement from the Board
ESG Governance System
Strategic Position, Mission, Vision, and Values
Corporate Social Responsibility Strategic 
Framework
Materiality Assessment and Stakeholder 
Engagement
02
03
05
05
06
07
09
Emergency Assistance
Science and Technology
Protecting Public Health
Comprehensive Assistance to Recovery
Internal Control and Compliance 
Management
Information Security
Anti-corruption
11
11
12
12
14
15
17
Green Operation
Low-carbon and Green Supply Chain
Green Lifestyle Advocacy
19
20
23
Human Resource Compliance Management
Ensuring High-quality Employment
Supplier Admittance and Compliance 
Management
Supplier Environmental and Social Risk 
Identification Management
Supplier Digital Management 
Platform Management
Quality Management
Intellectual Property Protection
Content Governance
Customer Service
Organizations and Corporate Clients Growth
36
36
37
38
39
40
Appendix 1: Key Performance
Appendix 2: Content Index
Appendix 3: GRI Standards Content Index
Appendix 4: External Verification Certificate
47
49
51
53
Corporate Philanthropy and Social 
Responsibility
Focus Areas and Practices
44
45
27
28
33
33
34
Supplier Management


01
2020 JD.com Environmental, Social and Governance Report
About JD.com 
JD.com is a leading technology driven e-commerce company transforming to become the leading supply chain-based technology and 
service provider. The company’s cutting-edge retail infrastructure seeks to enable consumers to buy whatever they want, whenever and 
wherever they want it. The company has opened its technology and infrastructure to partners, brands and other sectors, as part of its 
Retail as a Service oﬀering to help drive productivity and innovation across a range of industries. JD.com is the largest retailer in China, 
a member of the NASDAQ100 and a Fortune Global 500 company.


02
2020 JD.com Environmental, Social and Governance Report
Overview
Report Proﬁle
Release Form of the Report
Reference and Principles
Reporting Scope
Source of Information 
Currency
Referential Description
Contact Us
This Environmental, Social and Governance (hereinafter referred to as “ESG”) report is distributed electronically in Chinese and English.
This report references the United Nations Sustainable Development Goals (UN SDGs), the GRI Standards issued by the Global 
Sustainability Standards Board (GSSB), the ESG Reporting Guide from the Nasdaq Stock Market, industrial standards prepared by the 
Sustainability Accounting Standards Board (SASB), and the ESG Reporting Guide from the Hong Kong Stock Exchange (HKEX). The 
report also considers the four disclosure principles of Materiality, Quantitative, Balance, and Consistency.
The report aims to provide information on the ESG-related performance of the Group from January 1 to December 31 of 2020, and on 
material issues and boundaries identiﬁed by materiality analysis.
The information and data in this report are mainly from the Group’s database, internal statistical reports, and public information， 
including prospectuses, annual reports, and media releases.
Unless speciﬁed, the monetary amounts shown in this report are all presented in RMB.
For ease of presentation, “JD,” “the Group,” and “we” all refer to “JD.com.”
We value your feedback and opinions, and appreciate you emailing us at ir@jd.com, or mailing a letter to JD.com, No. 18 Kechuang 11 
Street, Building A, Floor 20, Beijing Economic-Technological Development Area, Beijing, 100176, People’s Republic of China.
For more information, please visit our oﬃcial website at https://ir.jd.com/.


03
2020 JD.com Environmental, Social and Governance Report
Powered by Technology for a More Productive and Sustainable World
Letter from the Chairman
2020 was an extraordinary year for 
JD and the world. We witnessed the 
systematic inﬂuence of public health 
risks applied to the global economy, 
environment, and society. According 
to the “Global Risks Report 2021” issued 
by the World Economic Forum, the 
pandemic has exacerbated the global 
economic recession, social inequalities, 
and societal divisiveness, while 
introducing increased uncertainty for 
the world’s development prospects.
In terms of risk likelihood and impact 
for the next decade, extreme weather, 
climate action failure, human-led 
environmental damage, public health 
crises, and biodiversity loss constitute 
the ﬁve most signiﬁcant risks globally. 
Actively seeking solutions to these risks 
will bring new growth opportunities to 
the post-pandemic world.
More people recognize the importance 
of building a community with a shared 
future for humankind and promoting 
sustainable development. Currently, 
more than 20 countries and regions 
around the world—including China—
have committed to “zero-carbon” 
ambitions, and major economies have 
devoted themselves to a green recovery. 
ESG investment that incorporates 
environmental and social factors 
into the overall risk assessment of 
enterprises, and pays more attention to 
long-term value creation, is becoming a 
mainstream trend of the global capital 
markets. In this context, the world’s 
leading companies have updated 
their sustainable development goals 
and strengthened their mission and 
commitment to the future. JD is one 
of these leading companies—in 2020, 
we released a new group mission—
Powered by Technology for a More 
Productive and Sustainable World.
Digital and intelligent technologies have 
become drivers for JD to accelerate 
innovation during this pandemic. At 
diﬀerent stages of the crisis, by relying 
on the Digitally Intelligent Social Supply 
Chain, JD has created social value in 
ﬁghting COVID-19, through protecting 
people’s livelihoods, supporting the 
economy, and stabilizing employment 
with a strong social responsibility 
mission and technological means. 
With technology, we respond to 
urgent anti-epidemic needs, stabilize 
prices, and ensure supplies. With 
“new infrastructure,” we support the 
full recovery of China’s economy 
and all eﬀorts to decisively eliminate 
poverty, and safeguard everyone’s 
health. This has also allowed us to gain 
widespread social recognition and 
trust from consumers. Encountering 
the downward pressure of the global 
economy, JD has shown strong 


04
2020 JD.com Environmental, Social and Governance Report
resilience. In 2020, JD achieved a total net revenue of RMB 745.8 
billion yuan, a year-on-year increase of 29.3%; at the same time, 
our annual net number of active customer accounts increased by 
nearly 110 million. More importantly, with employment a priority 
for individuals and families, JD functioned as an “employment 
stabilizer.” In 2020, the number of full-time employees in JD’s 
system reached 314,000, a year-on-year increase of 38.3%.
Digital intelligent transformation is becoming a key driving force 
for the global post-pandemic economic recovery. According to 
the latest “Future of Jobs Report 2020” released by the World 
Economic Forum, digital transformation will create nearly 100 
million new job opportunities worldwide by 2025. In China’s 
Outline of the 14th Five-Year Plan (2021-2025) for National 
Economic and Social Development and the Long-Range 
Objectives Through the Year 2035, “accelerating digitalization 
and constructing Digital China” is brought up as a key strategy. 
In 2020, JD announced its new position as a “supply chain-based 
technology and service provider.” Through artiﬁcial intelligence 
(AI), big data, cloud computing, the Internet of things (IoT), 
blockchain, and other digital intelligence technologies, JD 
provides new development momentum for the whole society. 
We established the Customer-to-Manufacturer (C2M) initiative to 
help over 1,000 brand enterprises achieve “smart” manufacturing 
upgrades. We launched integrated supply chain and logistics 
technology solutions to reduce the overall cost and increase 
eﬃciency of the logistics industry. We provided over 20,000 
service companies with an online trade fair that lasts 365 days. 
We help small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs) embrace 
the era of digital intelligence and gain motivation for new 
development. We actively participate in constructing digital cities 
and villages. JD’s new position has generated social value while 
gaining substantial growth momentum. In the fourth quarter of 
2020, JD’s net service revenue has reached RMB 32.1 billion yuan, 
a year-on-year increase of 53.2%, and its share of net revenue 
reached a record 14.3%. 
Our health and sustainable development are closely related to 
the health of the entire planet, which is gradually threatened by 
climate change and environmental degradation. Studies have 
shown that by the middle of this century, climate change may 
cause direct losses of US$7.9 trillion to the world economy. China 
is playing an increasingly important role in global climate and 
environmental governance, and recently announced national 
targets for peaking carbon emissions by 2030 and achieving 
carbon neutrality by 2060. JD is accelerating its own low-
carbon development through technological means, promoting 
the green transformation of the industry, and leading society 
toward green consumption. Our annual average power usage 
eﬀectiveness (PUE) of our green data centers has been declining 
year by year and is currently below 1.3. JD Logistics (JDL) has 
become the ﬁrst logistics company in China to join the Science 
Based Targets initiative (SBTi) and announce its greenhouse 
gas (GHG) emissions reduction goal. Furthermore, the types of 
green products on our retail platform have exceeded 100 million. 
We hope to seize the historical opportunities of this new round 
of technological revolution and industrial transformation, 
exert the ecosystem inﬂuence through our Digitally Intelligent 
Social Supply Chain, and provide more innovative solutions for 
the global response to climate and environmental risks with 
innovative technology. At present, JD’s AI technology has shown 
great advantages in terms of energy savings and emissions 
reduction for thermal power generation companies. 
It is our ﬁrst time issuing an ESG report. We hope to fully respond 
to investors’ concerns. We will continue improving our ESG 
governance structure and system, enhancing regulatory and 
legal compliance, information security, and operational safety, 
therefore responding better to external stakeholder expectations 
while realizing internal growth. As we gradually improve our 
ESG governance, we will manage social and environmental 
risks more systematically. In the new era, we will continue 
enhancing our resilience and ability to develop sustainably. 
Looking forward, we will explore and share the social beneﬁts of 
the Digitally Intelligent Social Supply Chain with our employees, 
business and ecosystem partners, and consumers. We believe it 
is our responsibility to create shared value, and view technology 
as the means to jointly create a more productive and sustainable 
world!
Richard Qiangdong Liu  
Chairman of the Board, JD.com


05
2020 JD.com Environmental, Social and Governance Report
Statement from the Board
ESG Governance System
The company’s Board of Directors 
continues to pay close attention to 
ESG. In 2020, the Board of Directors 
participated in the supervision of ESG 
reporting, carefully reviewed the results 
of the Group’s important ESG issues, 
and provided references for corporate 
governance and risk management.
The ESG governance system of JD.com 
covers the principles of ESG, and 
lays a solid foundation for ESG plan 
formulation, regular assessment, and 
management of related risks. JD’s 
ESG governance system can help the 
Decision-making
Implementation
Resources
ESG Governance Structure
As a “supply chain-based technology 
and service provider,” JD will continue 
to devote more eﬀorts to building a 
more sustainable world with its supply 
chain capabilities. In the future, the 
Group will continue promoting the 
integration of ESG into the company’s 
company establish an eﬀective risk 
management system, maintain a good 
relationship with stakeholders, and 
enhance corporate governance. After 
implementing an ESG governance 
strategy and a sustainable development 
business operations and long-term 
strategic development, fulﬁlling its 
corporate mission of being “Powered 
by Technology for a More Productive 
and Sustainable World,” and striving to 
become the most trusted enterprise in 
the world.
management system, the Group will 
achieve the sustainable development 
of its own robust operations and 
contribute to building a more 
productive and sustainable world.
Collaborates
General Office
Working Group 
Members
Information 
Collection 
Network Group
Supports
Empowers
Coordinates
Board of Directors
Strategy Execution Committee (SEC)
ESG Working Expert 
Group
JD Foundation
Collaborative 
Partners
ESG Leadership 
Group
Supervises
Reports to


06
2020 JD.com Environmental, Social and Governance Report
The SEC is responsible for making decisions on the strategic 
goals, directions, and key scope of work in the core areas of 
the Group’s sustainable development, in addition to clarifying 
the internal organizational structure of ESG management, and 
supervising and guiding the overall implementation of work. 
SEC reports ESG-related ﬁndings to the Board of Directors to 
ensure that ESG governance is integrated into the company’s 
overall strategic development.
The ESG Working Group is composed of the General Oﬃce, 
Working Group Members, and the Information Collection 
Network Group. The ESG Working Group is responsible for 
formulating ESG work strategies, identifying ESG risks and 
opportunities, disclosing the progress of ESG work, and regularly 
reporting ESG-related work to the SEC. The ESG Working Group 
also promotes and follows up with the implementation of Group-
level goals in various business units and functional systems 
through the ESG data management system, and gradually 
normalizes ESG governance.
Composed of high-level external experts, and the ESG Working 
Expert Group aims at providing professional advice to the SEC 
and supporting committee participation and decision-making. 
The ESG Working Expert Group provides professional capacity 
building and training, and regularly shares global ESG best 
practices and trends.
The ESG Working Group cooperates with JD Foundation to work 
with JD’s ecosystem partners and leverages more internal and 
external resources to support the implementation of JD’s ESG 
work, and ultimately provides value to society.
Strategic Position, Mission, Vision, and Values
Strategic Position
Supply Chain-based 
Technology and 
Service Provider
Mission
Powered by Technology 
for a More Productive 
and Sustainable World
Vision
Become the Most 
Trusted Company 
in the World
Values
Customer First
Integrity
Collaboration
Gratitude
All in
Ownership
Strategy Execution Committee (SEC)
ESG Working Expert Group
Resources
ESG Working Group


07
2020 JD.com Environmental, Social and Governance Report
Corporate Social Responsibility Strategic Framework
“Powered by Technology for a More 
Productive and Sustainable World” is 
our corporate mission and core social 
responsibility strategy. Based on JD’s 
Digitally Intelligent Social Supply Chain as 
a technological driver and organizational 
drivers enabled by eﬃcient corporate 
governance as well as the full engagement 
JD’s Digitally 
Intelligent Social 
Supply Chain
JD’s Digitally Intelligent Social Supply Chain
With the advancement of technology 
and digital intelligence, social 
development has reached a new form of 
integrated development of information, 
knowledge, science, and technology. 
As a new generation of infrastructure, 
JD’s Digitally Intelligent Social Supply 
Chain will help connect and optimize all 
aspects of social production, circulation, 
of employees and business partners, 
we continue to create value for 
economic development,  environmental 
friendliness, and a harmonious society. 
We help establish a more productive 
and sustainable future in terms of 
promoting employment, enhancing 
rural revitalization, improving 
social eﬃciency, driving high-quality 
consumption, facilitating the digitalization 
of the real economy, and supporting 
supply-side structural reforms, thereby 
proactively being accountable for social 
responsibility. 
and service, thus reducing social costs 
and improving social eﬃciency. In early 
2020, the Group’s strategic positioning 
was oﬃcially upgraded to a “supply 
chain-based technology and service 
provider.” In the next decade, JD will 
establish Digital Intelligent Social 
Supply Chain infrastructure, and fully 
utilize the value of the Digital Intelligent 
Social Supply Chain to continuously 
promote three long-term goals: 
boosting the real economy; improving 
social eﬃciency; and enhancing 
environmental friendliness, to create 
greater social value and work towards 
an eﬃcient, fair, and harmonious social 
environment.
Organizational 
Driver
Technological 
Driver
Corporate 
Governance
Employees and 
business partners
Powered by 
Technology 
for a More 
Productive and 
Sustainable 
World 
B
o
o
s
t
i
n
g
 t
h
e
 
R
e
a
l 
E
c
o
n
o
m
y
 
I
m
p
r
o
v
i
n
g
 
S
o
c
i
a
l 
E
f
fi
c
i
e
n
c
y
 
E
n
h
a
n
c
i
n
g 
E
n
vi
ro
n
m
e
n
t
a
l 
Fr
ie
n
dl
in
es
s 


08
2020 JD.com Environmental, Social and Governance Report
JD and SDGs
SDGs
Our Actions
The UN SDGs describe a much-
anticipated bright future that can only be 
realized by joint eﬀorts of all mankind. 
In September 2016, China pledged at the 
G20 summit to fully implement the 2030 
Agenda for Sustainable Development 
and promote inclusive development. 
Through e-commerce, ﬁnance, corporate philanthropy, and other platforms, we provide 
education and employment opportunities, business resources and channels for poorer 
regions, utilizing our own strength and value in eliminating absolute poverty and 
facilitating rural revitalization.
Responding to the COVID-19 pandemic, we devoted ourselves to ﬁghting the virus as 
soon as possible by donating resources and providing technology solutions. We utilize 
the JD Health (JDH) platform and supply chain to ensure the provision of medical 
resources and daily necessities to safeguard public health, thus to better respond to 
emergency public health crises. In addition, we ensure the physical and mental health of 
our employees through health, welfare, and social security policies.
We provide employees with an equal, safe, and decent work environment, and 
support them to obtain a fair income, a better workplace, better welfare guarantees, 
and a promising career path. Moreover, our platform enables SMEs to obtain fairer 
development opportunities, helps disadvantaged and vulnerable groups gain more 
employment opportunities, and promotes the development of the real economy.
Through the construction of Digitally Intelligent Social Supply Chain infrastructure, we 
oﬀer innovative solutions for the digitalization of various industries, help these sectors 
reduce costs, increase eﬃciency, and achieve low-carbon transformation with an 
eﬃcient model.
We use big data, AI, cloud computing and other technologies to provide intelligent 
solutions for urban planning, transportation, environment, energy, commercial, and 
security issues.
With the business operations, supply chain management, and platform eﬀect, we strive 
to achieve a more environmentally friendly and low-carbon business model, promote 
sustainable and responsible consumption, and advocate the importance of biodiversity.
We value the opinions of stakeholders and maintain regular dialogue with them. By 
oﬀering technology solutions, we assist business partners and suppliers to achieve 
sustainable production and operations.
Subsequently, the Chinese government 
launched China’s National Plan on 
Implementation of the 2030 Agenda for 
Sustainable Development. The realization 
of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable 
Development and the 17 SDGs requires 
collective actions from the public sector, 
business enterprises, and civil society. 
As a supply chain-based technology 
and service provider, JD leverages its 
advantages in Digitally Intelligent Social 
Supply Chain and its platform impact 
to exert its commercial inﬂuence and 
actively implement the SDGs.


09
2020 JD.com Environmental, Social and Governance Report
Materiality Assessment and Stakeholder Engagement
Through benchmarking analysis and stakeholder surveys, the Group has identiﬁed 28 strategic issues that facilitate the creation of 
shared values, and has created a materiality matrix. Among them, the high and moderate priority material issues are regarded as the 
most important topics to disclose in this report. The scope and boundary of the report are determined by data availability. 
Benchmarking 
analysis
Stakeholder 
survey
Materiality 
matrix
Identification 
of issues 
creating a 
shared value
High priority material 
issues 
Moderate priority material 
issues
Low priority material 
issues
Signiﬁcance to economic, 
environmental, and 
social impact
Signiﬁcance to 
stakeholders
Signiﬁcance to JD
Questionnaire/survey
Interviews
Macro-economic policies, 
industry policies, and 
regulatory requirements 
International standards, 
ESG rating agencies and 
HKEX requirements
Peers’ best practices, and 
JD business positioning 
and strategy
Materiality Matrix 
Materiality Assessment Flow
Importance to JD
High
High
Impact of JD 
Establishment 
of corporate 
governance system
Inclusive workplace 
culture
Green investment and 
responsible investment
The Board’s support and participation 
in sustainable development
Anti-corruption
Talent development
Energy savings, emissions reductions, 
and green operations
Business leadership 
and partner 
ecosystem
Rural revitalization and rural development
Create a fair business 
environment
Sustainable revenue and growth
Anti-epidemic practices
Promoting “dual circulation” 
with high quality domestic 
demand growth
Win-win cooperation with partners
High quality 
development of the 
real economy
Sustainable consumption 
and circular economy
Digitalization and 
intelligentization of industry
Data safety and user privacy
Consumer rights and interests
Integrity of operations
High quality products 
and services
Efficient 
and 
intelligent 
supply 
chain
Risk and compliance 
management
Technological innovation
Employment and 
entrepreneurship
Occupational health 
and welfare
Moderate
JD Foundation’s support for 
disadvantaged and vulnerable 
groups and communities
Inclusive digital 
technology


10
2020 JD.com Environmental, Social and Governance Report
The Group fully considers the impact of its own operations on stakeholders, and maintains regular communication and diversiﬁed 
relationships with six types of stakeholders, including consumers, employees, shareholders and investors, governments and regulatory 
agencies, partners on the value chain, and communities and the environment. The expectations of various stakeholders provide a key 
reference for the Group to identify important sustainable development issues, enhance related work, and carry out relevant information 
disclosure.
Stakeholder Engagement 
Stakeholders
Material Issues
Communication
Governments and 
Regulatory Agencies
Employees
Partners on the 
Value Chain
Consumers
Communities and 
Environment
Eﬃcient and intelligent supply chain
Digitalization and intelligentization of industry
Win-win cooperation with partners
Business leadership and partner ecosystem
Create a fair business environment
Green investment and responsible investment
Consumer rights and interests
Integrity of operations
High quality products and services
Data safety and user privacy
Talent development
Occupational health and welfare
Inclusive workplace culture
Risk and compliance management
Sustainable revenue and growth
Anti-corruption
The Board’s support and participation in 
sustainable development
Establishment of corporate governance system
Daily procurement, training, and evaluation
Industry forums
Supplier Conferences
High quality development of the real 
economy
Promoting “dual circulation” with high 
quality domestic demand growth
Technological innovation
Sustainable consumption and circular economy
Anti-epidemic practices
Energy savings, emissions reductions, and 
green operations
Employment and entrepreneurship
Rural revitalization and rural development
Inclusive digital technology
JD Foundation’s support for disadvantaged and 
vulnerable groups and communities
Long-term public welfare projects
Daily media communication
Social media communication
Charity industry forums and activities
Volunteer activities 
Phone calls, meetings, and company visits
Corporate annual reports, quarterly reports, and announcements
Roadshow
Daily reports and communication on sustainable development and 
ESG related issues 
Continuous online and oﬄine 
communication (apps/
websites/stores)
24/7 customer service hotline
Daily media communication
Social media communication
Consumer research 
All-staﬀ emails, communication 
meetings, forums, the staﬀ 
and workers’ representative 
congress, training activities and 
feedback mechanisms
Online and oﬄine research activities
Email address for employee 
complaints 
“Voice of Logistics Employees” 
platform 
Daily reports and 
communication, and issuing 
policy recommendations
Industry forums and 
conferences
Field investigation
Sign cooperation 
agreements and establish 
strategic cooperation
Responding to inquiries 
for listed companies from 
regulatory agencies
Shareholders and 
Investors


11
2020 JD.com Environmental, Social and Governance Report
Special Topic: Combating COVID-19
Since the outbreak of the COVID-19 pandemic, JD has spared no eﬀort in ﬁghting the virus. JD leverages its leading advantages in 
supply chain and logistics through a series of eﬃcient, reliable, and innovative anti-epidemic measures to meet social needs with 
medical resources and daily necessities. JD helps solve challenges generated by COVID-19, promote economic recovery with “new 
infrastructure,” and protect public health and safety with care and love.
After the outbreak, JD responded quickly and set up a steering committee to make critical decisions and overall deployment. JD also 
immediately established a special team for epidemic prevention and control. The emergency working groups of each sub-group and 
department implement speciﬁc tasks to ensure a quick response mechanism that is live 24/7. JD continues delivering social value in 
anti-epidemic measures, boosting the economy, ensuring people’s livelihoods, and stabilizing employment. The Group has invested 
more than RMB 1 billion yuan in donating of protective and medical supplies, guaranteeing the transportation capacity of special lines 
in Hubei and people’s livelihoods in key areas, and empowering the platform partners’ businesses.
JD donated 1.08 million facial masks and tens of thousands of medical supplies to Hubei Charity 
Federation and Wuhan Hospital at the start of the pandemic. From January 21 to March 31, JDL 
transported more than 70 million medical emergency supplies for free, with a total weight of more than 
30,000 tons, and delivered more than 10,000 tons of medical emergency supplies and daily necessities 
from all over the world to Hubei Province. In addition, JDL sent nearly 30,000 pieces of luggage from the 
medical assistance teams in Hubei to more than 30 provinces across the country for free.
JD Technology (JDT) has launched epidemic inquiry robots to provide the public with emergency 
services such as online consultation, epidemic knowledge sharing, epidemic monitoring, and 
medicine delivery. JDT developed a platform releasing emergency resource information that can 
conduct intelligent searches and match supply-and-demand from governments, enterprises, and 
philanthropic organizations. In addition, JD has built an “outbreak situation awareness system for high-
risk populations” to provide technical support for epidemic prevention and control. JDT independently 
researches and develops AI robots for indoor delivery of medical supplies during the pandemic. 
Moreover, JDL has launched a “no-contact” delivery model for smart vehicles in multiple cities to 
reduce pandemic exposure risks in the express transportation industry.
Emergency 
Assistance
Science and 
Technology


12
2020 JD.com Environmental, Social and Governance Report
JDL provides a healthy environment for front-line service personnel and has provided more than 
10 million facial masks and other anti-epidemic materials and insurance to front-line employees to 
ensure a safe working environment to the greatest extent. JDT provides free “COVID-19” insurance 
for front-line medical personnel, JD’s front-line employees and their families in the ﬁght against the 
pandemic. The insurance value is RMB 300,000 yuan per person, and a maximum of RMB 1 million 
yuan for family members who pass away or become disabled due to the COVID-19. So far, 105,000 
eligible employees have received insurance for free. In addition, JDH provides free online services for 
medical consultation and psychological counseling. During the period from January 26 to April 30, 
2020, the platform served more than 11 million users. Moreover, JDH launched “Patients with Chronic 
Diseases Medicine Help Platform,” which assists patients with chronic diseases.
On February 2, JD launched multiple subsidy projects for platform merchants, which include fee 
reductions, ﬁnancial and logistics support, traﬃc support, technical support, and health coverage, 
and more. On February 8, JD announced an additional RMB 100 million yuan subsidy for merchants 
using JDL warehouses. On March 4, JD announced that it would provide RMB 1.5 billion yuan 
resources to launch the Spring Rain Plan, which integrates all platform marketing capabilities to 
support key categories’ promotion. The Plan provides desired traﬃc to brands and merchants, 
and facilitates the oﬄine stores to resume their businesses through JD’s omni-channel coverage. 
Furthermore, the special policies that lower the entry requirements for merchants to operate on JD 
platforms restarted stagnant industry chain. Through multiple policies, JD provides more low price 
and high quality products to consumers, fully satisfying explosive post-pandemic demand, thereby 
boosting consumer conﬁdence, and helping the entire industry chain return to the fast lane.
Protecting 
Public Health
Comprehensive 
Assistance to 
Recovery


13
2020 JD.com Environmental, Social and Governance Report
Corporate Governance
01
Internal Control and Compliance Management
Information Security
Anti-corruption


14
2020 JD.com Environmental, Social and Governance Report
Internal Control and Compliance Management
Guided by the concept of “achieving 
success the right way,” the Group 
complies with laws and regulations, 
builds a culture of honesty and anti-
Based on the three “defensive lines,” 
the compliance system consists of ﬁve 
perspectives to fully guarantee internal 
control and compliance, including 
laws and regulations compliance, anti-
corruption compliance, information 
security compliance, auditing 
compliance, and transaction risk 
control. The ﬁrst perspective is laws 
and regulations compliance: JD strictly 
abides by relevant laws, regulations, 
and rules; the second perspective is 
anti-corruption compliance: JD always 
has zero tolerance for corruption; 
the third perspective is information 
security compliance: JD is committed 
to ensuring the security of personal and 
customer information and ensuring the 
conﬁdentiality of JD’s information and 
data; the fourth perspective is auditing 
compliance: JD’s independent audit 
and supervisory teams establish and 
 All employees
Risk management teams
Independent audit and 
supervisory teams
The ﬁrst 
defensive 
line
The second 
defensive 
line
 The third 
defensive 
line
Transaction 
risk control
Auditing 
compliance
 Information 
security 
compliance
Anti-
corruption 
compliance
Laws and 
regulations 
compliance
corruption, realizes technology and data-
driven compliance management, and 
establishes a forward-looking, ﬂexible, 
and eﬃcient compliance system. All 
employees, risk management teams, 
and independent audit and supervisory 
teams constitute the “defensive lines” of 
the compliance system.
implement internal control systems 
for the Group and its subsidiaries, and 
conduct supervision and evaluation; 
the ﬁfth perspective is transaction 
risk control: each JD business unit 
accurately identiﬁes and intelligently 
confronts business transaction risk 
behaviors. Through employee training, 
accountability mechanisms, and 
incentives, the Group ensures the 
eﬀectiveness of the overall compliance 
system.
Externally, the Group is supervised by 
the Public Security Organ, the Ministry 
of Industry and Information Technology 
of the People’s Republic of China, the 
Cyberspace Administration of China, 
the State Administration for Market 
Regulation of the People’s Republic 
of China, consumer associations, the 
State Post Bureau of the People’s 
Republic of China, and more. The 
Group has been rigorously complying 
with a series of Chinese laws and 
regulations, including E-commerce 
Law, Cybersecurity Law, the Provisions 
on Ecological Governance of Network 
Information Content, Advertising Law, 
Product Quality Law, Food Safety Law, 
Law of the People’s Republic of China 
on the Protection of the Rights and 
Interests of Consumers, Postal Law, and 
Interim Regulation on Express Delivery, 
and more. At the same time, in the 
development of international business, 
the Group strictly adheres to local laws 
and regulations in the countries in 
which it operates, establishes a legal 
compliance system for international 
business, and gradually improves 
the system with the development of 
international business.


15
2020 JD.com Environmental, Social and Governance Report
Information Security
The Group attaches great importance to information security. In 2020, the Group established its 
Safety and Risk Control Committee, which is in charge of overall planning and decision-making 
related to data safety and user privacy. The Information Security Department, established 
for the Group’s cybersecurity, is responsible for executing decisions from the Safety and Risk 
Control Committee and defending the Group’s network and system through data encryption 
and decryption, data leakage prevention, and other technical control methods. Moreover, 
the Information Security Department conducts comprehensive monitoring and protection of 
system security and guards against external attacks. Information security training courses are 
required for new employee enrollment with 100% participation.
JD obtained the ISO27001 information security management system certiﬁcation in 2018, and 
the ISO27701 privacy information management system certiﬁcation in 2020. With reference 
to ISO27001 and ISO27701, JD has established a complete and mature information security 
and privacy security management system, which constitutes 63 safety management system 
requirements covering all related departments and suppliers, including “JD.com Data Security 
Management Speciﬁcation,” “JD.com Supplier Security Management Practice,” “JD.com User 
Personal Information and Important Data Security Regulation,” and more.
JD has set up a data monitoring and auditing mechanism to implement comprehensive data 
security control. JD strictly abides by a series of laws and regulations such as the E-Commerce 
Law of the People’s Republic of China and Network Security Law of the People’s Republic of 
China, and actively responds to domestic and international policy requirements. According to 
Article 37 of the Cybersecurity Law of the People’s Republic of China, JD has formulated the “JD.
com Data Cross-border Protection Security Management Standard,” which clariﬁes the cross-
border data evaluation process and controls the security of data exiting the country.
In terms of data ecosystem security, JD has formulated the “Basic Security Requirements and 
Guidelines for JD’s Business and Data Openness,” which requires the security team to evaluate 
the data security capabilities of businesses and partners involved in data openness. At the 
same time, the “Regulations for the Security Development of Third-Party Services,” “Access 
Rules and Security Speciﬁcation,” and other policies and regulations set safety requirements 
on partners in terms of account numbers, databases, and permissions.
Data Safety
new employment participation 
in information security training 
courses
100%


16
2020 JD.com Environmental, Social and Governance Report
JD attaches great importance to user privacy and security. JD has obtained the Level 
Three Trusted Cloud Services (TRUCS) Certiﬁcation issued by the Data Center Alliance and 
China Academy of Information and Communications Technology (CAICT), the Ministry of 
Industry and Information Technology (MIIT) of the People’s Republic of China, and Security 
Information System Security Protection Level Three accreditation issued by the Ministry 
of Public Security of the People’s Republic of China. In 2020, JD has obtained the ISO27701 
privacy information security management system certiﬁcation.
JD has established and improved its privacy and security management system with 
reference to the Cybersecurity Law of the People’s Republic of China, Personal Information 
Protection Law (Draft) of the People’s Republic of China, GB/T 35273 Information Security 
Technology Personal Information Security Speciﬁcation of the People’s Republic of China, 
the European Union’s General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR), ISO27701 and other 
domestic and international standards.
JD’s privacy and security management system includes 12 system requirements, such as the 
“JD.com Information Security and Privacy Policy” and “JD.com Privacy Impact Assessment.” 
JD has established a conﬁdentiality agreement for information disclosure, a privacy 
compliance system for customer service work, customer information veriﬁcation standards, 
and other procedures and systems, which require that employees must not copy, leak, 
embezzle or misappropriate any customer information. To promote the implementation of 
privacy and security requirements, the Group organized 4 enterprise-wide trainings in 2020.
JD also respects and values the privacy protection of international users, and has 
established a compliance mechanism to protect users’ privacy rights in accordance with 
the requirements of local laws. For instance, in response to the EU’s GDPR requirements, 
JD International (JDI) has carried out compliance risk assessment and rectiﬁcation work 
on related businesses. In addition, JD has established the “JD.com User Subject Rights 
Response Process” to identify 10 privacy rights of users in accordance with EU’s GDPR 
requirements, clarify the speciﬁc procedures for user rights exercise, and ensure that users 
can successfully complete complaints and applications for privacy rights.
User Privacy
enterprise-wide privacy security 
trainings organized by the Group 
in 2020
4


17
2020 JD.com Environmental, Social and Governance Report
Anti-corruption
JD strictly adheres to Chinese laws and regulations and other applicable normative 
documents. At the same time, as an overseas listed and internationally operated 
company, JD also strictly abides by local national anti-corruption and anti-bribery laws 
and other relevant regulations in other countries. JD has always upheld a “zero tolerance” 
attitude towards corruption and has continuously improved the construction of its anti-
corruption system. The anti-corruption system and regulations include the “JD.com 
Business Conduct and Ethics Code,” “JD.com Anti-Corruption Regulations,” “JD.com 
Whistleblower Protection and Reward System,” “JD.com Integrity Reward Policy (for 
Trial Implementation),” “JD.com Active Filing Reward Policy (for Trial Implementation),” 
“JD.com Gifts Management Regulations,” “Vendor Paid Travel and Business Dinner 
Regulations,” “Anti-Commercial Bribery Agreement,” and more.
For internal anti-corruption management, JD has set up a corruption reporting center 
to comprehensively collect various types of corruption information in various ﬁelds. 
JD will keep all information providers and all materials provided strictly conﬁdential. 
Reporters can contact JD via phone and email (Tel: 400-601-3618; Email: jiancha@jd.com). 
Moreover, to improve the integrity and self-discipline of employees and create a positive 
work environment, the Group releases internal anti-corruption announcements through 
the company’s intranet, and collectively announces multiple ongoing corruption 
investigations and the names of employees who have engaged in misconduct. JD 
conducts anti-corruption trainings across the entire Group, covering 225,071 employees, 
which accounts for 96.19% of full-time employees. New employees must complete 
the online anti-corruption training course and assessment in order to complete their 
probation period. Everyone working in the Group receives anti-corruption trainings and 
conducts an assessment every year. Management personnel above the director level 
need to receive special anti-corruption trainings. In addition, JD analyzes and categorizes 
business risks through case review, establishes an early warning and communication 
mechanism for corruption risks, and helps business departments take the initiative in 
prevention and internal control. Furthermore, JD’s application of big data and cloud 
computing in anti-corruption work has achieved good results in case management, data 
anomaly monitoring systems, and corruption case investigation.
As for industrywide joint anti-corruption eﬀorts, JD continues to build the Sunshine 
Integrity Alliance® (hereinafter referred to as “the Alliance”) 
1, which initially started with 
13 member organizations but has now exceeded 500. The Alliance initiated “Sunshine 
Academy” on its oﬃcial website to share resources such as anti-corruption resources, 
training courses and policies. The Alliance and the Criminal Law Research Center of 
Renmin University of China jointly established the “Corruption Control Training Center 
for Enterprises,” which provides free corruption control trainings to member companies. 
The “Corruption Control Training Camp” organized by the Alliance attracted more than 40 
representatives from 30 companies to participate.
In terms of international anti-corruption, JD is establishing a compliance system with the 
Foreign Corruption Practices Act (FCPA), which includes relevant systems and trainings. 
The trainings will cover all international business staﬀ and group management personnel. 
1 In 2017, JD initiated and established the Alliance with 13 industry leaders and the Criminal Law Research Center of Renmin University of China to jointly create a sunny and 
transparent business environment.
full-time employees participated 
in anti-corruption trainings
new employees completed online 
anti-corruption training and 
assessment in order to complete 
probation
96.19%
100%


18
2020 JD.com Environmental, Social and Governance Report
Environmental Protection
02
Green Operation
Low-carbon and Green Supply Chain
Green Lifestyle Advocacy


19
2020 JD.com Environmental, Social and Governance Report
Based on its operating and business advantages, JD builds a green and low-carbon business model covering three dimensions: 
Corporate Operations, Supply Chain, and Sustainable Consumption, to achieve green economic development and jointly build a green 
community.
In September 2020, China announced its goal of peaking carbon emissions in 2030 and achieving carbon neutrality in 2060. Responding 
to China’s climate goal is JD’s responsibility and where its future opportunities lie. We will work hard to build a greener supply chain 
with a lower carbon footprint, strive to become a leading carbon-neutral corporation, and use our inﬂuence in the supply chain to 
radiate participation by wider range of business partners in promoting China’s goal of achieving carbon neutrality.
Green Operation
JD aims to lead by example through the company’s own green operations with a lower carbon footprint and greening our business 
world.
Through low-carbon design, green 
procurement, energy management, 
eﬃcient resources use and waste 
management, as well as daily green 
operations, JD has achieved greener 
data center practices with a lower carbon 
footprint. The data centers’ annual 
average PUE is decreasing each year, 
reaching below 1.3 by utilizing energy-
saving technologies such as frequency 
conversion and indirect evaporative 
cooling, as well as reﬁned operations and 
maintenance management. In the future, 
the data centers will use new technology 
that recycles residual heat derived from 
data center operations, to provide a 
green and clean heat source for urban 
integrated heat supply networks. 
Green and Low-carbon 
Data Center
Green and Low-carbon Targets
JD’s Environmental Protection Strategy
Upholding China’s 2060 Carbon Neutrality Target
Corporate Operations
Sustainable Consumption
Supply Chain
Green Low-carbon 
Data Center
Green 
Procurement
Zero Waste 
City
Low-carbon 
Storage
Sustainable 
Lifestyle
Trend Insights and
 Research
Low-carbon 
Logistics
Green Office
Circular Packaging
Green Travel
Eco-partners
JD actively implements the concept of 
green procurement, comprehensively 
considering the energy-saving and 
environmental protection beneﬁts 
of product design, procurement, 
production, packaging, logistics, sales, 
service, recycling, and reuse. The Group 
prioritizes the procurement of raw 
materials, products and services which 
are environmentally friendly, energy 
eﬀective, and can be fully utilized. We 
ensure the eﬀective implementation of 
the green procurement system through 
the “Green Procurement Management 
Regulations” and the negative list 
system.
Our administrative department also 
values environmental protection and 
energy conservation. We remind our 
employees to save electricity, make 
good use of paper and resources, and 
reduce waste. We promote paperless 
oﬃces within the company to reduce 
paper consumption. Some of our oﬃce 
areas have installed inductive lighting 
to achieve smart energy conservation. 
We take environmental factors into 
consideration when purchasing daily 
oﬃce supplies. For example, we 
prioritize sourcing toilet paper products 
from Forest Stewardship Council (FSC)-
certiﬁed suppliers to reduce the Group’s 
environmental impact.
Green Procurement
Green Oﬃce


20
2020 JD.com Environmental, Social and Governance Report
We have strategically cooperated with DiDi and reduced our employees’ 
carbon footprint through carpooling. Since 2016, there have been 196,131 
electric vehicle rides and an accumulative mileage of 3,437,911 km from 
employees’ daily commute according to DiDi, reducing our carbon 
emissions by 275,032.88 kg carbon dioxide equivalent (kgCO2e).
Green Commute
Low-carbon and Green Supply 
Chain
As a supply chain-based technology and service provider, JD contributes 
to China’s carbon neutrality goal and global climate action by building a 
cleaner supply chain system with a lower carbon footprint.
In October 2019, JDL announced that it would join the Science Based 
Targets initiative (SBTi), becoming the ﬁrst Chinese logistics company 
to commit to a science-based emissions reduction target. JDL commits 
to reduce GHG emissions 50% by 2030 compared with 2019. On July 6, 
2020, JDL’s Green Stream Initiative
2 launched the ﬁrst Environmental 
Protection Day in the logistics industry, further promoting and 
implementing the concept of the entire green supply chain. As of 
December 2020, the Green Stream Initiative has inﬂuenced more than 
200,000 merchants and hundreds of millions of consumers.
Climate Goals
JD replaces traditional fuel-combustion trucks with new energy vehicles, 
leading to the development of green transportation. From 2017 to 2020, 
JDL launched new energy vehicles in more than 50 cities in seven regions 
across China, reducing at least 120,000 tons of CO2 emissions per year. In 
addition, JD has built and introduced more than 1,600 charging stations 
nationwide to better support the new energy vehicles. We use big data to 
carry out real-time optimal route planning and storage network planning 
to reduce the number of vehicles in transit, increase the full load rate of 
return vehicles, and optimize the eﬃciency of logistics transportation.
Transportation
Speciﬁc Measures
2 The Green Stream Initiative was launched on June 5, 2017. JDL joined hands with upstream 
and downstream partners in the supply chain (including brand owners to retailers, and retailers 
to users)  to promote the greening of the end-to-end supply chain. On May 25, 2018, the Green 
Stream Initiative was comprehensively upgraded, from focusing on the ﬁeld of green logistics and 
ecological environment to the sustainable development strategy of the entire Group that includes 
comprehensive content regarding “Environment,” “Society,” and “Economy.”


21
2020 JD.com Environmental, Social and Governance Report
We realized the application of warehouse 
rooftop solar photovoltaic (PV) systems 
through installation in Shanghai “Asia 
No.1” Intelligent Logistics Park, and have 
explored more low-carbon innovative 
solutions for warehousing. Since 2020, to 
promote renewable and clean energy, we 
have worked with our new energy business 
partners to promote the construction of 
solar PV power plants in smart industrial 
parks nationwide.
In 2017, JDL took the lead in deploying 
a rooftop distributed solar PV system in 
Shanghai “Asia No.1” Intelligent Logistics 
Park, and it was oﬃcially connected to 
the grid in 2018. At present, solar power 
generation has covered the energy 
demands of the park including warehouse 
lighting, automatic sorting, packaging, 
Storage
picking and other multi-scenario 
operations. In 2020, the power generation 
has reached 2.538 million kWh, equivalent to 
approximately 2,000 tons of CO2 emissions 
reductions and saving approximately 800 
tons of standard coal.
In addition, JD’s automatic warehouses 
and industrial parks nationwide are 
expected to install a total of more than 200 
megawatts of solar PV power plants by the 
end of 2021, to achieve an annual power 
generation of more than 160 million kWh 
after completion. With JD’s Xi’an “Asia No.1” 
Intelligent Logistics Park as a pilot site, JD 
plans to create a rooftop solar PV power 
generation area of more than 1.5 million 
m
2 in Tianjin, Hefei, and other places in the 
future.
As the ﬁrst logistics company in China 
to fully implement green packaging, 
JDL has always committed to green and 
sustainable principles in package design 
and use, striving to promote innovation 
in the packaging, transportation, 
Packaging
and storage processes, and using 
our inﬂuence to drive upstream and 
downstream partners and consumers to 
jointly promote the achievement of the 
UN SDG 12‒Sustainable Production and 
Consumption.
We realized that the express and 
delivery industry uses signiﬁcant natural 
and social resources. Therefore, we 
introduced multiple measures to make 
JD’s logistics more circular and less 
carbon-intensive: 
 We use reusable delivery boxes to reduce the volume of 
disposable cardboard and tape
For fresh products, we use foldable thermal insulation 
boxes, which reduce the amount of single-use ice bags whilst 
replacing disposable foam boxes
We replace disposable woven bags with reusable transfer 
bags, and replace stretch wrap with recycled winding nets to 
reduce the use of plastic products
We provide circular and shared logistics solutions for the 
industry
Based on big data and collaboration with brand enterprises, 
we explore new green models at the source to solve the 
problems of disposable packaging waste by reducing 
commodity packaging, using minimal packaging, shipping 
in original packaging, and implementing B2B circular 
packaging, and paperless operations
01
02
03
04
05
kWh of solar power generated by solar 
PV systems in JD’s Shanghai “Asia No.1” 
 
Intelligent Logistics Park in 2020
tons of CO2 emissions reduced by 
applying solar PV systems in JD’s 
Shanghai “Asia No.1” Intelligent 
Logistics Park in 2020
2.538 million 
2,000


22
2020 JD.com Environmental, Social and Governance Report
A total reduction of
180 million 
disposable foam boxes
4 
and 600 million 
disposable ice packs
4
The average utilization rate of reusable 
transfer bags has exceeded
98%
which saves nearly 80 million
 disposable plastic woven bags annually
5
As of the end of 2020
3 The time scope of the data: From December 2017 to December 31, 2020.
4 The time scope of the data: From 2015 to December 31, 2020.
5 According to the data retrieved on December 31, 2020.
6 The time scope of the data: From 2014 to December 31, 2020.
7 The time scope of the data: From January 1, 2020 to December 31, 2020.
Industry Empowerment
accumulated uses of 
reusable boxes
3
16 million
fewer pieces of disposable 
packaging used industry-wide
6
10 billion
 fewer meters of tape used per 
year by promoting thinner tape 
and reusable boxes
7
400 million
fewer tons of paper consumed 
per year due to electronic 
express sheet usage
7
13,219
Industry Empowerment
To make electricity greener, JDT researched and developed an AI-based optimized control system for thermal power 
plants based on deep reinforcement learning technology. The system can dynamically optimize multiple core variables, 
including dampers and valve control for coal feeding and steam systems. This system has solved the worldwide challenge 
of optimizing the complex systems that continuously control high-dimensional variables. Moreover, the project has been 
approved by many domestic power plants and authoritative institutions in the cities of Nanning and Langfang, creating a 
precedent in the application of AI deep reinforcement learning technology in the ﬁeld of power station boilers.
In December 2019, the AI-based Thermal Power Generation project was selected as an outstanding case in China Business 
Climate Action, released during the 25th United Nations Climate Change Conference, also known as COP 25.
In June 2020, JDT launched a smart vision network based on AI, 5G, big data, and cloud computing, which plays an 
important role in wildﬁre identiﬁcation as well as agricultural and forest ﬁre prevention. At present, the straw burning 
monitoring system based on the smart vision network has been piloted in the Jinan Prior Zone for Replacing Old 
Growth Drivers with New Ones. The system oﬀers straw burning real-time monitoring, which can help prevent ﬁres. By 
implementing 24-hour monitoring, the phenomenon of burning straw has declined in the Prior Zone.
AI + Thermal Power Generation
Straw Burning Cloud Monitoring System


23
2020 JD.com Environmental, Social and Governance Report
Green Lifestyle Advocacy
Consumer preferences for more sustainable lifestyles and 
consumption are leading to changes in market demand. This is 
driving industries to transition towards greener development 
models, which can lead sustainable lifestyles, and to participate in 
and promote sustainable development. In 2019, JD joined hands with 
the World Wide Fund for Nature (WWF) to launch the Giant Panda-
Friendly Enterprise Alliance. With the help of JD’s platform, we drive 
upstream business partners to develop sustainable products with 
agricultural products from panda habitats, while using trustworthy 
products. The Internet platform provides consumers with rich, high-
quality, and responsible consumption choices.
As an industry leader in this new era of consumption, we strive 
to provide more sustainable options through our own supply 
chain, ecosystem, and brand inﬂuence, by promoting sustainable 
consumption and a lifestyle that recycles resources, thus facilitating 
the transition to a green and high-quality value chain. 
JD has held more than 100 green promotional and education events, calling on hundreds of millions of consumers to participate in 
environmental protection and public welfare. Activities include Earth Hour, Azure Earth Sustainability Week, Green Packaging Design 
Competition, Green Packaging Forum, Waste Classiﬁcation Awareness Campaign, and the use of recycled packaging during marathons.
Through JD Giving Platform, JD Foundation has cooperated with JDL to implement the Pre-loved Objects Donation Plan. With the 
Green Stream Initiative and a nationwide logistics network, JDL has worked with partners to collect 10 million boxes in more than 100 
cities. We reduced 17,500 tons of carbon emissions through box recycling. At the same time, 4 million pre-loved objects (including 
clothes, toys, and books) are reused through JD Foundation’s Collecting Objects with Love platform.
Consumer Advocacy
Sustainable Consumption
Pre-loved Objects Donation Plan
used boxes collected in total
10 million
pre-loved objects (including 
clothes, toys, and books)
4 million
tons of carbon emissions reductions 
through box recycling
17,500


24
2020 JD.com Environmental, Social and Governance Report
JDL launched its box recycling project in 2016, and extended the package recycling to all categories, which includes plastic bags, plastic 
tapes and bubble wrap, as well as boxes. In 2019 and 2020, JDL jointly initiated plastic packaging recycling with brand enterprises like 
P&G and Coca-Cola.  
To protect wildlife, JD has helped assert stronger regulatory pressure to eliminate the traﬃcking of endangered wildlife. With the scale 
of our platform, JD takes actions such as regular checking, shelf cleaning, intercepting sensitive words in transit, and search blocking 
to cut oﬀ illegal transactions of wildlife on the platform. In 2020, JD set up a task force to regulate wildlife trade and established a list 
of more than 100 types of wildlife-related commodities. In addition, JD has produced posters to protect endangered ﬂora and fauna, 
raising consumer awareness of wildlife protection.
Zero Waste City
Safeguarding Biodiversity through Sustainable Consumption
Community Resource Recycling
8 The time scope of the data: From 2014 to December 31, 2020.
9 The time scope of the data: From 2019 to December 31, 2020.
boxes have been recycled by post-
delivery recycling since 2016
 new boxes were saved by 
cooperating with brand enterprises 
to recycle and reuse box resources
8
plastic bottles from brand enterprises 
were recycled
9
10 million
2 billion
100,000


25
2020 JD.com Environmental, Social and Governance Report
In April 2019, the Ronghua Subdistrict Oﬃce of Beijing Economic-Technological Development Area, in cooperation with JD’s household 
waste classiﬁcation station, launched an innovative waste classiﬁcation pilot project.
Achievements:
Innovative Models for Waste Classiﬁcation
Leveraging the scale of the platform and our industry inﬂuence, JD has cooperated with tens of thousands of enterprises to establish 
various green stream ecological alliances, jointly exploring the green packaging ecosystem and promoting sustainable consumption.
Green Alliance
New Energy Industry 
Symbiotic Alliance
JD Cloud Box Global Alliance
Green Packaging Alliance
China E-commerce Logistics Industry 
Packaging Standards Alliance
E-commerce Logistics Joint Packaging 
Innovation Center
households set up green credit accounts 
in the area
17,414
participation rate in 19 residential 
complexes
94%
cases of credits exchange
13,804
of food waste sorted and ﬁltered out
26%
self-service recycling stations
16


26
2020 JD.com Environmental, Social and Governance Report
Working Environment
03
Human Resource Compliance Management
Ensuring High-quality Employment


27
2020 JD.com Environmental, Social and Governance Report
JD has always been committed to providing a favorable environment for talent development. JD not only provides employees 
with decent work while ensuring their health, rights, wages and welfare, but also creates an equal, inclusive, and diverse working 
environment with a broader range of opportunities, thus ensuring that all JD people can work decently and happily, as well as helping 
them achieve more fulﬁlling lives.
Human Resource Compliance Management
Employee Proﬁle
Employment and Labor Standards
In 2020, JD actively played its role as an “employment stabilizer.” According to JD’s 
Fourth Quarter and Full Year 2020 Results, there are over 360,000 employees in both 
listed and non-listed companies under the JD system, and the number of employees 
(excluding part-time and interns) in the listed companies is approximately 310,000. 
In 2020, JD hired nearly 100 thousand new employees. In addition, JD has indirectly 
created job opportunities for 18 million people. Currently, JD’s diversiﬁed business 
sectors have incubated more than 2,000 positions, including the front-line staﬀ that 
provide superior services to customers, industrial elites in research and development 
(R&D), experts in supply chain management, and procurement and salespersons 
delivering essential supplies to the public. JD’s staﬀ structure is diversiﬁed, covering 
employees with diﬀerent ﬁelds of expertise. 
JD embodies the principles of fairness, impartiality, openness and selection of the best. 
The “JD.com Employee Handbook” has clearly stipulated that JD does not treat people 
diﬀerently under the protection of laws and regulations, regardless of ethnicity, race, 
color, age, gender, nationality, marital status, association, as well as religion, sexual 
orientation, sexual identity and expression, disabilities, pregnancy and political stance. 
In our talent recruitment and retention process, we strive to encourage employees to 
make the best use of their talents.
JD strives to introduce people with disabilities into its overall workforce, with a 
minimum threshold of 1.5%. The customer service center in JD Retail set up a “Sunshine 
Angel and General Department,” speciﬁcally to recruit employees with disabilities. In 
2020, the number of people with disabilities employed in the cities of Suqian, Chengdu 
and Yangzhou, was 108.
To prohibit the use of child labor and forced labor, the “JD.com Employee Handbook” 
has strict employee admission regulations that prohibits the hiring of individuals under 
16 years old. JD respects and safeguards the legitimate rights and interests of every 
employee, and the “JD.com Employee Handbook” has clearly regulated the reporting 
process and employee treatment during vacations and paid leave.
JD organizes regular employee satisfaction surveys. The 2020 employee satisfaction 
survey for employees in the Beijing headquarters and each subsidiary shows that 
the employee satisfaction has reached 4.08 out of 5. The survey was mainly based on 
questionnaires and supplemented by interviews. The main focus is feedback on related 
services provided to employees in the workplace, such as canteen and catering, shuttle 
buses, supporting amenities (supermarkets, gyms, etc.), security, basic facilities (air 
conditioners, elevators, lighting), oﬃce hardware (desks and chairs), and functional 
areas (meeting rooms, lounges, maternity rooms, etc.).
employees in both listed and non-listed 
companies under the JD system
 job opportunities were indirectly 
created by JD
of JD’s workforce consists of 
people with disabilities
employees with disabilities in 
the cities of Suqian, Yangzhou, 
and Chengdu
360,000+
18 million
1.5%
108


28
2020 JD.com Environmental, Social and Governance Report
Training and Development
JD emphasizes the importance of nurturing diversiﬁed talents, and has established systematic training programs for employees, 
providing a variety of talent development plans and resources.
JD keeps improving its talent training 
and management mechanism, which 
now includes the “Employee Training 
and Management System,” “Internal 
Trainer Management System,” “Course 
Management System,” “Training 
Suppliers Management System,” among 
others.
JD established an internal exclusive 
Software as a Service (SaaS) online 
learning platform, which was put into 
use from April 2019. Its training programs 
have cumulatively been viewed more 
than 27 million times. From 2019 to 2020, 
JD organized more than 22,000 training 
sessions for JD’s supporting systems 
and business units.
JD values the recruitment and nurturing 
of diversiﬁed talents, providing 
internship and management trainee 
programs, international management 
trainee programs for overseas senior 
MBA candidates and holders, high-
potential talent programs for the 
core management groups, and senior 
executive study tour plans. JD also 
provides continuing education programs 
for employees to pursue bachelor’s and 
master’s degrees, including MBA degrees. 
Furthermore, JD oﬀers ample learning 
resources, including a systematic training 
curriculum on management, leadership 
and professional competence. 
Employees can also participate in 
training programs across industries, and 
experience job rotation mechanisms and 
benchmark studies.
Training Programs
Training Platforms
Training Plans and Resources
Ensuring High-quality Employment
Occupational Health and Safety
JD creates a safe working environment 
for all employees and ensures 
employees’ occupational health and 
safety. At JDL, relevant management 
regulations and monitoring systems 
include “Quality, Environment, 
Occupational Health and Safety 
Monitoring and Measurement Control 
To create a convenient and eﬀective 
communication platform, JD has set 
up multiple ways to receive feedback 
from employees, including a hotline, 
forums, email box, and oﬃcial mobile 
app. Employees can help supervise 
the Group’s business operations and 
management procedures through 
10 Signiﬁcant investment agreements: JD holds 50% or more majority control.
feedback, reports, complaints, etc., with 
related issues being delivered to people 
in charge to handle. A closed loop 
is formed by timely linking received 
feedback to solutions, which helps us 
hear employee concerns. As such, we 
can protect their rights and beneﬁts, 
and improve their satisfaction.
At the same time, JD pays close 
attention to human rights protection 
within the companies that it has invested 
in. 100% of JD’s signiﬁcant investment 
agreements
10 include human rights 
clauses or underwent human rights 
screening.
System,” “Environment, Occupational 
Health and Safety Operational Control 
System,” etc. In addition, JD received 
the Occupational Health and Safety 
Management System certiﬁcation issued 
by the China National Accreditation Service 
(CNAS). 
cumulative uses of JD’s online 
learning platform
27 million


29
2020 JD.com Environmental, Social and Governance Report
JD has set up a comprehensive remuneration and welfare management system, including “JD.com Salary Management Regulations,” 
“JD.com Daily Salary Increase and Employee Stock Options Management Regulations,” “JD.com Salary Adjustment Management 
Regulations,” “JD.com Domestic and Overseas Relocation Management System,” “JD.com Attendance and Leave Management 
System,” “JD.com Bonus Pool Management System,” “JD.com Subsidy Management Regulations,” “JD.com Retreat Fee Management 
Regulations,” “JD.com Love Relief Fund Management System,” “JD.com Settlement Plan,” and more.
JD respects and rewards every employee’s contributions, providing employees with a competitive remuneration system within the 
industry and guaranteeing decent salaries. In addition to a monthly base salary, employees’ remuneration consists of performance 
bonuses, year-end bonuses, welfare subsidies, long-term incentives, and more. JD signs labor contracts with oﬃcial employees and 
pays ﬁve social insurance funds
11 and one housing fund for employees in accordance with laws and regulations. In 2020, the ﬁve types 
of social insurance and one housing fund paid by JD exceeded RMB 5 billion yuan.
JD provides open opportunities for employees. 
Employees can openly switch to other positions 
within the organization by application. They can 
also be recommended to try new opportunities. 
JD promotes and appoints employees with good values 
who meet 70% of qualiﬁcation requirements, especially 
for young employees. When management positions are 
available, the company aims to ﬁll 80% of them through 
internal nomination of qualiﬁed employees, which 
provides more platforms, opportunities, and resources 
to cultivate the core management team.
Managers attach great importance to nurturing 
their backups from the perspectives of values, 
competency, and potential; and inspiring employees 
to explore their full potential. 
For front-line employees working in sectors like 
warehouses, express delivery and customer services, 
JD has established a comprehensive training and 
development system that includes the “mentor and 
mentee” program, helping new employees to quickly ﬁt 
in and grow.
JD has set the principle goals of openness, and providing abundant talent programs to enable employees to accelerate career 
development.
Management System
Remuneration System
Open Opportunities
“70% and 80%” Principle
“Backup” Principle
“Mentor and Mentee” Mechanism
Talent Development Plan
Employee Welfare
JD believes that happiness and enthusiasm for work are the driving forces of a great company. JD provides competitive remuneration, 
and establishes a rich, demand-responsive and experience-ﬁrst welfare system, striving to create a decent living and working 
environment while improving employees’ well-being at work.
11 A pension contribution plan; a medical insurance plan; an unemployment insurance plan; a work-related injury insurance plan, and a maternity insurance plan.


30
2020 JD.com Environmental, Social and Governance Report
Through the comprehensive basic welfare guarantee system, Love Relief Fund and multiple health services, JD weaves a “Safety Net” 
for all employees, eﬀectively helping them cope with the risk of diseases, emergencies and more.
In addition to the ﬁve types of social insurance and one housing fund, JD provides delivery personnel 
with accidental injury commercial insurance, special environmental subsidies, and abundant holiday and 
bereavement leave. During the pandemic, JD purchased COVID-19 insurance for all front-line employees.
JD provides regular medical check-ups and examination services for employees working in diﬀerent positions.
JD set up the Love Relief Fund in 2010, and since then has provided ﬁnancial aid for thousands of employees 
and their families in need. The scope of the aid covers employees or their family members suﬀering from 
serious diseases, employees’ death or disability, educational expenses of their children, and employee 
property protection insurance and more. From 2018 to 2020, JD provided 955 aid payments worth RMB 38.4 
million yuan in total.
In 2017, JD launched the Medical Insurance Fund for long-time employees of over 5 years. If existing social and 
commercial insurance is not suﬃcient to cover medical expenses, employees can apply to receive payments, 
and obtain unlimited reimbursement of medical expenses in public hospitals, and up to one year of sick leave 
beneﬁts. 
Since 2019, JD has launched EAP. Through onsite visiting, calling, crisis intervention and other methods, 
medical professionals under strict privacy protocols can diagnose and provide advice and counselling for 
employees suﬀering from mental health issues. This helps employees take care of themselves, release stress, 
and live and work in a non-stressful and joyful environment.
Disease and Accidental Risk Prevention
Front-line 
Employee 
Protection
Medical 
Insurance 
Fund
Employee 
Assistance 
Program 
(EAP)
Love Relief 
Fund
Medical 
Check-ups


31
2020 JD.com Environmental, Social and Governance Report
JD has set up health counselling rooms, gyms, restaurants, coﬀee shops, and convenience stores in its 
headquarters, and has continuously improved the quality of these businesses to provide employees with high-
quality health protection, catering and living support services. The headquarters arranged nearly 200 shuttle 
buses to provide services for almost 100 commuting routes for more than 30,000 employees, and cooperates with 
online ride-hailing companies to provide employees with free taxi services for after-hours commuting. At the same 
time, JD continues to reach out to establish contracts with more nearby merchants so that employees can obtain 
beneﬁts in catering, car purchases, and other daily consumption activities. This welfare program at the Group’s 
headquarters’ is gradually being replicated at its facilities across the country.
To ensure employees’ physical and mental health, JD creates a comfortable oﬃce environment for employees, and provides workplace 
beneﬁts and care projects.
Workplace Welfare
Settlement 
Plan
Education 
Support
Extended 
Maternity 
Leave
Workplace 
Beneﬁts
Full Sports 
Season
Employee 
Care 
Program
JD Children’s 
Education
The Settlement Plan is a welfare plan for all employees. According to the policy, when employees who fulﬁll the 
working age requirement intend to purchase their ﬁrst apartment in the city where they work, they are eligible 
to apply for an interest-free or low-interest loan of up to RMB 1.5 million yuan without a mortgage or guarantee. 
Currently there is a fund pool of RMB 1 billion yuan. From 2018 to 2020, the Group has issued interest-free or low-
interest loans totaling up to RMB 880 million yuan, which beneﬁtted around 1,500 staﬀ to purchase homes. In 
addition, JD has provided 2,417 welfare apartments for employees since 2016. According to JD’s full annual tax 
payment condition, JD’s employees are qualiﬁed to apply and purchase joint-ownership apartments in the region 
in which they work and have successfully purchased hundreds of joint-ownership apartments.
By the end of 2019, JD launched the Love Relief Fund to support the education of employees’ children. If employees 
unexpectedly lose their working capability or pass away due to diseases or accidental events, their children can 
apply to receive aid for education to support themselves ﬁnishing their study from kindergarten to college. Two 
families beneﬁted from this fund in 2020.
JD launched the welfare project of Extended Maternity Leave in 2015, providing 30 days extra maternity leave 
for staﬀ that meet speciﬁc age and time-served requirements. Hundreds of JD mothers have enjoyed Extended 
Maternity Leave each year.
The Group organizes the annual Full Sports Season for employees, holding diﬀerent types of competitive activities 
including football, basketball, badminton, and e-sports competitions, to attract employees with diﬀerent interests 
and from diﬀerent age groups to take part in cross-team recreation, creating an easy and non-stressful working 
environment.
During Chinese traditional festivals such as the Spring Festival, JD gives gifts to employees.  From 2018 to 2020, JD 
has produced and delivered more than 500,000 festival gift boxes per year, with all JD employees covered.
From 2017, JD cooperated with the authoritative educational institution Oriental Cambridge Education Group to 
set up childcare centers at JD’s headquarters to alleviate the stress on employees who have just become new 
parents. In 2018, JD and the high-end kindergarten Etonkids jointly created the kindergarten project, which up to 
270 children have now joined.
Through projects such as the Settlement Plan, Educational Support for Employees’ Children, Extended Maternity Leave, Kindergarten, 
and others, JD safeguards the health and wellbeing of employees’ families.  
Family and Life Care 


32
2020 JD.com Environmental, Social and Governance Report
Supplier Management
04
Supplier Admittance and Compliance Management
Supplier Environmental and Social Risk Identiﬁcation Management
Supplier Digital Management


33
2020 JD.com Environmental, Social and Governance Report
Supplier Admittance and Compliance 
Management
Supplier Environmental and Social Risk Identiﬁcation 
Management
The main product categories under management within JD’s procurement and 
department of cost and expense include engineering, administrative, IT operations, and 
material operations. JD has established a supplier management system for the whole 
process, and actively cultivates and maintains a strategic partnership with suppliers. 
Primarily, JD has established a full set of supplier management plans, including supplier 
sourcing, warehousing, performance, incentives and elimination, resource library 
management and renewal evaluation, covering all the aspects of supplier management 
of “selection, adoption, cultivation and elimination.” In terms of anti-corruption, 
intellectual property rights, outsourcing control, change control and other aspects, 
suppliers will be notiﬁed in written form with a list of outstanding requirements.
Based on its own product supply and logistics supply chain, JD has constructed world class supply chain infrastructure, creating a 
cooperative value chain ecosystem with mutual beneﬁts. Through a holistic supply chain management system and digital management 
platform, JD strives to improve the ESG performance of its supply chain partners. 
JD implements the concept of green and low-carbon procurement, and fully considers corporate social responsibility and 
environmental impact by prioritizing the procurement of raw materials, products and services that are environmentally friendly, energy 
eﬃcient, and can easily achieve comprehensive resource utilization.
 “Business Management Rules”
 “Supplier Performance Appraisal 
Procedure”
 “Supplier Agreement Honoring 
Feedback and Handling Process” 
“Supplier Quality Exception Handling 
Process”
  “Green Procurement Management 
Regulation” 
JD keeps improving its standards and systems on green procurement, including “Green Procurement Management 
Regulation” and “The Maximum Allowable Values of Energy Performance and Energy Eﬃciency Grades of Commercial 
Refrigerating Appliances—Part 1：Refrigerated Display Cabinets with Remote Condensing Unit.” While comprehensively 
considering energy-saving and environmental protection factors of product design, procurement, production, packaging, 
logistics, sales, service, recycling, and reuse, JD works with its upstream and downstream partner companies, and creates 
a green supply chain by jointly practicing corporate social responsibility in environmental protection, energy saving, and 
emissions reduction.
In terms of speciﬁc procedures, supplier sourcing and admittance are conducted according to the speciﬁc conditions of 
projects submitted by the business demand department. In the process of supplier admittance, the department of cost and 
expense needs to fully consider environmental requirements, and qualiﬁed suppliers must meet the requirements of green 
advocacy and China’s laws and regulations.
As for the logistics and consumables category (boxes, waterproof bags, logistic tags, courier envelopes, and buﬀer packages), 
each discharged pollutants (wastewater, waste oil, and waste gas) will be strictly controlled to meet the environmental 
standards and regulations in the process of manufacturing, transportation, and delivery. Additionally, production and 
processing enterprises are required to employ full-time waste disposal personnel who take charge of regular collection and 
treatment of wastewater, waste gas, and solid waste at ﬁxed sites in the factories. The suppliers are also required to have 
comprehensive environmental documentation and raw material controlling systems, prohibiting the procurement and the 
use of poisonous and hazardous substances, as well as recycled materials that have potential health risks to people.
For the green procurement categories, candidate suppliers must strictly follow JDL’s technical standards in the process of 
bid calling, price inquiry, and bidding. JD’s suppliers are required to provide qualiﬁed green products and services. Suppliers 
who fail to reach the technical standards are not qualiﬁed to participate in the procurement of packaging consumables. 
Environmentally Friendly Supplier Auditing Standards and Systems
Documents on the supplier 
management system


34
2020 JD.com Environmental, Social and Governance Report
Instructions on Bidding, Price Inquiry and Comparison Management for Green Procurement Category
Projects Calling for Bids
During the bidding, suppliers must mention their 
environmental capability and contributions when 
elaborating on the proposals. Their contributions in 
the environmental ﬁeld can serve as a bonus in how 
they are scored. This criterion is included in their 
technical assessment.
For suppliers who did not win the bid, if proof of 
outstanding contributions to environmental protection 
can be provided, procurement department employees 
can submit a written application (regarding environmental 
factors) to the department head for approval. At the 
same time, this document will also be submitted to the 
CEO of the related business unit for approval, driving the 
development of green procurement.
Price Inquiry, Comparison and Bidding Projects 
The negative list system is applied in the supplier management of logistics consumables. The system sets thresholds in 
terms of evaluated environmental credit levels, environmental violation records, environmental information disclosure 
levels, emissions and energy consumption, and clean production auditing. JD’s “Green Procurement Management 
Regulation” requires the green procurement category to implement the negative list system. For suppliers shortlisted in the 
green procurement library, JD will suspend or terminate the procurement contracts if any circumstance in the negative list 
or other environmental problems have taken place. If the Group incurred any loss because suppliers deliberately concealed 
their violation of environmental laws and regulations, JD has the right to protect its beneﬁts in accordance with laws and 
regulations. 
JD conducts audits of its suppliers’ environmental and social certiﬁcations qualiﬁcations. During the admittance of suppliers in the 
server category, required auditing standards include the ISO9001 Quality Management System Certiﬁcation, ISO14001 Environmental 
Management System Certiﬁcation, ISO50001 Energy Management System Certiﬁcation, and OHSAS18001 International Health and 
Safety Management Standard Certiﬁcation. In addition, when selecting and certifying suppliers and conducting on-site inspections, we 
carefully review whether they have environmental assessment qualiﬁcations, environmental system certiﬁcations, and occupational 
health system certiﬁcations.
Green Procurement Negative List System
Environmental and Social Management Certiﬁcation Audit
Supplier Digital Management
JD manages suppliers through a centralized digital system called the “JD.com Supplier Collaboration Platform on Recruitment and 
Procurement,” promoting electronic and paperless processes. On the platform, JD posts procurement information, bid winning 
announcements and news updates, and seamlessly synchronizes information among suppliers.
JD adheres to the business philosophies of “Customers First” and “Integrity” by establishing close cooperative relationships with 
suppliers and other partners, to jointly create a healthy win-win e-commerce ecosystem. JD also states its anti-corruption policy on 
the platform, a standard to which all stakeholders must adhere. Moreover, to encourage suppliers, other partners, and employees to 
participate in JD’s monitoring system for integrity of operations, JD released the “JD.com Whistleblower Protection and Rewarding 
Scheme” to protect whistleblowers.


35
2020 JD.com Environmental, Social and Governance Report
Product Responsibility
05
Platform Management
Quality Management
Intellectual Property Protection
Content Governance
Customer Service
Organizations and Corporate Clients Growth


36
2020 JD.com Environmental, Social and Governance Report
Platform Management
Quality Management
To better guarantee the rights and 
interests of consumers, JD manages 
suppliers and merchants with strict 
standards, principles, and procedures in 
terms of entry qualiﬁcation review and 
contract performance. All merchants must 
provide required qualiﬁcations through an 
online system and can only start business 
activities after being approved by the 
professional qualiﬁcation review team.
In terms of merchant management, JD has 
established a complete set of merchant 
evaluation and management mechanisms, 
including the “Regulations for the 
Management of Prohibited Products 
and Information on JD.com Open 
Platform” and the “Regulations on Score 
JD is committed to building “2C+2B” 
two-tier supply chain capabilities to 
create value for individual consumers, 
institutions, and corporate customers. 
Starting from multiple dimensions 
of platform management, quality 
JD has established a product quality 
management system based on AI and 
big data technology, which conducts 
risk assessments and screenings of 
products on sale. JD takes the initiative 
to investigate potential quality risks 
and conducts real-time public opinion 
monitoring. A designated team conducts 
hotspot checks on the products on sale 
according to the quality risk model. As 
part of this work, the team simulates 
ordinary consumers placing orders on 
JD’s platforms, and entrusts a third-party 
testing agency to conduct testing and 
identiﬁcation. If any problems are found, 
JD will immediately remove the products 
and penalize the responsible merchant.
JD highly values the quality monitoring 
and control of key commodities such 
as fresh food. In addition to monitoring 
online reviews of the products, JD 
cooperates with professional testing 
agencies to conduct in-depth on-
management, intellectual property, content 
governance, and customer service, JD 
ensures product integrity and responsibility, 
and provides individual consumers with 
a superior experience. Additionally, JD 
is constantly sharing infrastructure and 
technology platforms to institutions 
and corporate customers, providing 
comprehensive services and technology 
solutions, and continuously optimizing 
the cost, eﬃciency, and experience of 
the entire industry.
Management for Merchants on the JD.com 
Open Platform.” Once a merchant is found to 
have sold or suspected of selling counterfeit 
goods, or publishing prohibited information, 
unqualiﬁed products, false transactions, 
improper proﬁt making, false propaganda 
and other violating documents, the 
merchant will be penalized in accordance 
with platform rules and agreements. If the 
circumstances are severe, JD will forcibly 
close the store and remove it from the 
platform, placing the merchant on a quality 
control blacklist. JD uses smart technology 
to block companies that attempt to re-enter 
the platform after being banned for selling 
counterfeit products. In 2020, a total of 514 
companies were blocked.
site audits. JD maintains a laboratory 
information management system, uploads 
laboratory testing information in real time, 
and actively accesses the databases of 
government regulatory agencies to help 
conduct dynamic data monitoring of JD’s 
platform. JD’s fresh food department 
initiates Inspection of Every Item of Fresh 
Food by conducting COVID-19 tests on all 
imported fresh foods. JD conducts weekly 
COVID-19 tests for employees working in 
cold chain warehouses and other areas, 
and requires them to have negative test 
results to work. The premises are sanitized 
regularly using protocols that strictly adhere 
to the government’s policies on cold chain 
warehousing to ensure food safety.
To better protect the rights and interests 
of consumers, JD initiated the 3420 Plan, 
which is to establish 3 major strategies of 
full-process supervision, openness and 
co-construction, and capacity sharing, 
4 management control procedures of 
qualiﬁcations, daily supervision, big data-
driven prevention and control, and reward 
and punishment mechanisms, 2 major 
actions of quality ecology and quality 
transparency, as well as the ultimate goal 
of achieving 0 quality safety incidents. After 
the implementation of the plan, the rate of 
consumer quality complaints in 2020 was 
28% lower than that of 2018.
In terms of actions for raising its 
environmental standards, JD has voluntarily 
applied for and received green, organic, 
and energy-saving certiﬁcations, such as 
the Marine Stewardship Council (MSC). 
JD also cooperates with various experts to 
establish a quality alliance to label high-
quality products with Quality Certiﬁcation 
that meet requirements and provide 
marketing resource support. JD not only 
fulﬁlls personalized needs of customers but 
also leads the development of the industry 
and promotes sustainable consumption.
companies blocked from 
using JD’s platform in 2020 
due to selling counterfeit 
products
514


37
2020 JD.com Environmental, Social and Governance Report
Intellectual Property Protection
JD attaches great importance to 
intellectual property-related work and 
strictly adheres to a series of laws and 
regulations such as the Patent Law of the 
People’s Republic of China and Trademark 
Law of the People’s Republic of China. 
We are committed to ensuring authentic 
and licensed products, ensuring a quality 
platform environment, and safeguarding 
the legitimate rights and interests of 
intellectual property rights holders 
through pre, during and post multi-
stage measures. As a technology-driven 
company, JD values the improvement and 
accumulation of its own technological 
capabilities and has formulated an 
intellectual property strategy that ﬁts the 
development of the Group, implementing 
the strategy both in China and overseas.
The Intellectual Property Department of 
JD has a series of intellectual property 
management systems such as the “JD.
com Patent Management Measures,” 
“Trademark Management Measures,” and 
“Copyright Management Measures” to 
ensure that intellectual property work 
is rationale-based, evidence-based, 
and well-organized. JD’s Intellectual 
Property Department is fully responsible 
for the intellectual property work of the 
Group, including patents, trademarks, 
copyrights, domain names, infringement 
complaints, rights protection and anti-
counterfeiting work.
As of the end of 2020, the Group had 
applied for more than 16,000 domestic 
and foreign patents, and trademark 
applications have covered more than 60 
countries and regions. JD continuously 
provides training programs related 
to patent strategy and infringement 
judgments for core R&D and 
management personnel. In 2020, more 
than 4,000 employees were trained. 
As of the end of 2020
domestic and foreign patent 
applications
16,000
countries and regions were 
covered by trademark 
applications
60
employees trained in patent 
strategy and infringement 
judgments in 2020
4,000+


38
2020 JD.com Environmental, Social and Governance Report
Advertising Content Governance
Content Governance
JD greatly values the safety control of 
advertising content, strengthens the 
management of the content review 
team, and continuously improves 
the systematic multi-level review 
mechanism to ensure that content 
complies with the public order and 
customs procedures for goods. 
In terms of platform advertising 
governance, JD complies with the 
Advertising Law of the People ‘s 
Republic of China, Interim Provisions 
on the Administration of Advertising 
Language and Text, Administrative 
To establish a comprehensive network 
governance system, JD has established 
a content governance committee and 
an executive committee to handle 
illegal and harmful information more 
eﬃciently and accurately.
JD strictly abides by the Provisions 
on Ecological Governance of Network 
Information Content and other laws 
and regulations, and has established 
strict regulations for the management 
of prohibited goods and information 
with a total of 12 categories and 103 sub-
categories, and escalates penalties for 
diﬀerent violation scenarios. Relying on 
information compliance analytics and 
AI technology models, JD blocks illegal 
and undesirable videos and pictures. At 
the same time, a manual management 
team was formed to continue to 
strengthen the control of prohibited 
Content Governance
JD attaches great importance to network information content governance, and creates a clear, healthy, and trustworthy network space 
for consumers, while working with business partners to build a good platform environment. 
Measures on Internet Information 
Services, Regulations on the 
Administration of Advertising Publication 
Registration, and Interim Measures 
for the Administration of Internet 
Advertising Laws and regulations. A 
series of rules and regulations have 
been formulated such as “JD.com 
Brand Management Standards” and 
“JD.com Platform Advertising Review 
Speciﬁcations” to strictly control 
the security risks of advertisements 
posted on the platform. JD.com checks 
all ongoing materials through the 
content review mechanism of supplier 
cooperation projects to ensure that 
advertising content placed on the 
platform complies with relevant laws 
and regulations and is aligned with JD’s 
values. JD requires suppliers to assign 
“content review oﬃcers” who strengthen 
cooperation with JD to strictly review 
the advertising content on the platform. 
JD.com has also set up a “Jing Zhun 
Tong” online learning platform to help 
employees and vendors understand 
advertising review speciﬁcations.
goods and information through 
front-end keyword inspections, shop 
inspections, and back-end inspections. 
From 2018 to the end of 2020, a total of 
12 million products were checked, and 
a total of 350,000  products that violated 
the regulations were removed from the 
platform.
JD has taken the initiative to carry out 
a clean-up action to centrally control 
harmful information, and remove any 
soft pornographic content of minors to 
ensure a quality platform environment. 
In order to further protect minors from 
e-cigarettes, JD actively responded 
to the national call and removed 
e-cigarette products from all platforms. 
JD also completely bans the sale of 
water bullet gun-related products to 
ensure the safety of consumers.
products inspected from 2018 
to 2020
 products that violated the regulations 
were removed from JD’s platform
12 million
350,000


39
2020 JD.com Environmental, Social and Governance Report
Customer Service
JD has always pursued a “people-centered” service culture, adhered to the original intention of “Customer First,” and provided 
consumers with high-quality services covering the entire value chain of shopping, after-sales, and delivery.
Consumer Experience
Responding to Complaints and Problems 
JD starts from three aspects—products, 
prices, and services—to create a superior 
user experience. In terms of products, 
JD provides a full range of product 
selections, guarantees authentic 
and licensed products, and provides 
consumers with smart and personalized 
product recommendations. As for prices, 
beneﬁting from economies of scale 
and operational eﬃciency, JD provides 
consumers with extremely competitive 
prices. Moreover, JD provides consumers 
with fast and reliable logistics services, 
highly responsive and considerate 
customer service, and friendly return and 
exchange policies.
From JD’s apps, home appliance stores, 
and convenience stores, to the logistics 
network spreading across thousands 
of counties and towns, JD applies its 
strong supply chain, data, technology, 
and marketing capabilities to provide 
Starting from the perspectives of 
intelligent technology, upgrading 
solutions, risk prevention and control, 
and training, JD has improved its internal 
capabilities and provided consumers with 
a high-quality customer experience. JD 
uses self-service intelligent AI technology 
to realize self-service response and precise 
assistance. JD established a service 
management and control mechanism 
with orders as the main context, and 
solves potential customer complaints and 
problems more eﬃciently through order 
management and control.
customers with desired products and 
services in the right time and place. JD 
ensures that consumers are provided 
with fast, accurate, stable, and good 
services.
In the face of various uncertainties 
caused by COVID-19, JD ensures high-
quality customer service experience 
for users. As of the end of 2020, JD had 
invested more than RMB 15 billion 
yuan in customer service over the past 
decade, and will continue to increase 
future investment. JD’s endless pursuit 
of superior customer service has won 
the trust of more customers. 
In responding to complaints, JD fully 
plays the role of “green channel” 
through “front-end management and 
control” to ensure timely response 
and eﬃcient handling of complaints. 
In the “front-end management and 
control” stage, preliminary research and 
judgment of potential risks are carried 
out to prevent risks from occurring. 
In the “green channel” stage, while 
increasing resource investment, JD 
strengthens trainings for customer 
service personnel to improve problem 
solving eﬃciency. The customer 
complaint response rate is 100%.
Responding to problems, JD has 
established a 24/7 service team to 
address account and order problems at 
all hours of the day. JD provides user-
friendly and reliable services to improve 
the customer experience and brand 
credibility. JD’s after-sales satisfaction 
rate has reached 95.2%.
JD’s active customer accounts in the past 12 months reached 
471.9 million, a net increase of nearly 110  million 
active customer accounts throughout the year
As of December 31, 2020


40
2020 JD.com Environmental, Social and Governance Report
Industrial Digital Transformation
As a supply chain-based technology 
and service provider, JD continuously 
optimizes the cost, eﬃciency, and 
experience of the industry, bringing new 
growth momentum to various sectors.
For the retail and manufacturing industry, 
JD initiated the C2M model for a large 
number of brand enterprises and 
manufacturers to ﬁll the information gap 
between them and their consumers. JD 
also shares abundant capabilities and 
resources with its partners, boosting 
the digital transformation of China’s 
manufacturing industry. Meanwhile, 
Jingxi promotes the factory direct 
supply model through Jingxi Industrial 
Belt Factory Direct Selling Premium 
Products Program and boosts the full-
scale transformation from “production” 
to “production and sale” by building an 
eﬃcient and full retailing system, which 
removed intermediate circulation. As a 
result, nearly 10,000 enterprises from both 
the supplier and consumer side have 
beneﬁtted.
For the logistics industry, JD promotes the 
smart logistics system formulated by 5G, 
IoT, big data, cloud computing and AI, by 
providing integrated supply chain services 
and logistics technology solutions 
for clients, which lowers the cost and 
increases the eﬃciency for the logistics 
Organizations and 
Corporate Clients 
Growth
JD has opened up its infrastructure and technology 
platform to diﬀerent organizations and corporate clients, 
by providing them comprehensive services and technology 
solutions. Facing the era of industrial digital intelligence, 
JD will take full advantage of its Digitally Intelligent Social 
Supply Chain ability to deeply integrate digital technology 
into the real economy, continuously boosting the 
development of the real economy, supporting the industrial 
digitalization, and growing together with the organizations 
and corporate clients we serve.
industry overall. To increase eﬃciency, JD 
launched a series of products including 
drones, smart vehicles and unmanned 
warehouses focusing on diﬀerent points 
of the logistics delivery and distribution 
process. At the same time, to actively 
utilize the warehouse resources at 
diﬀerent sites and empower the logistics 
enterprises and merchants, JD cloud 
warehouse brought out the warehouse 
management system and standards, 
fully opened the training system, and 
provided scientiﬁc planning schemes, to 
improve the cloud warehouse partners’ 
logistics management and operational 
capabilities.
For the medical health industry, JD is 
supporting the digital transformation 
of the medical industry, enhancing the 
basic health service level by adopting 
the “Internet+” model. JDH cooperates 
with hospitals in diﬀerent cities, uses 
patient-centered medical care provision 
technology throughout the whole 
medical process, and created solutions 
for online and oﬄine integrated smart 
hospitals. Relying on the resources from 
local governments and its technology and 
robust ecosystem, JDH is collaborating 
with local authorities to build a digital 
“Healthy City,” accelerating the digital 
transformation in the health industry. 
Based on its digital technology, JDH 
utilizes the one-stop solutions to assist the 
county-level and sinking market partners 
for channel construction, marketing, and 
operation, by continuously escalating the 
level of community health service.
For the ﬁnance industry, JDT is providing 
its mature, agile IT architecture capabilities, 
data middle platform capabilities, 
intelligent risk control capabilities, and 
smart marketing and operation capabilities 
to ﬁnancial institutions to help them 
complete their digital transformation. At the 
same time, it assists ﬁnancial institutions 
to create an open ecosystem through 
digital capabilities and links ﬁnancial 
service scenarios, ﬁnancial customers, 
and ﬁnancial businesses created by JDT 
to ﬁnancial institutions’ service systems, 
helping them establish another growth 
scenario.
In addition, JD continues to increase R&D 
investment and enhance the connection 
between the Digitally Intelligent Supply 
Chain and the real economy. Facing 
diversiﬁed scenarios such as smart traﬃc, 
medical care, business service, etc., JD has 
launched diﬀerent innovative solutions 
to help more industries enhance overall 
quality and eﬃciency.


41
2020 JD.com Environmental, Social and Governance Report
Safeguarding Corporate Security
Urban Governance Modernization
JD established an intelligent risk 
control system to safeguard corporate 
security, which helps consumers 
enjoy secure ﬁnancial and insurance 
services, assists ﬁnancial institutions to 
eﬀectively identify potential insurance 
fraud behaviors, and decrease overall 
operational costs and risks. 
JDT is applying AI technology to the 
ﬁnancial risk management ﬁeld, and it 
has established a comprehensive risk 
management system covering statistics, 
To align with the trend of urban 
governance modernization, JDT created 
an urban governance modernization 
platform with a base of smart city 
operating systems and brought out 
the “One Core and Two Wings” system. 
models, strategy, systems, etc., and 
completed credit risk evaluation for 700 
million users. It has also accumulated 
more than 100,000 risk strategies and 
more than 1,000 diﬀerent types of risk 
analysis models, and helped retain the 
fraud loss rate of no more than one per 
million for JD’s subordinate ﬁnancial 
businesses. In the online insurance ﬁeld, 
Allianz JD has adopted the anti-fraud 
model to manage and control the risks, 
identiﬁed mutiple fraudulent activities 
and related characteristics, established 
risk account warning mechanisms, 
and used community discovery for 
pre, during and post risk scanning, 
therefore eﬀectively supporting the 
claims veriﬁcation process and lowering 
the cost of invalid claims. At the end 
of 2020, a total of 82,800 risk cases were 
screened, including 6,492 personnel and 
77,300 JD accounts. A total of 4 cases—
worth 2.789 million RMB and involving 
30 people—related to fraudulent return 
and exchange were detected and 
reported to the police.
For urban governance, this system can 
connect multiple departments, rebuild 
overall decision-making mechanisms, 
and enhance social governance 
capabilities. As part of China’s ﬁrst batch 
of pilot cities for modernizing urban 
governance, Nantong city, Jiangsu 
province, has built the ﬁrst national 
modernized command center for urban 
governance, based on JDT’s Smart City 
Operation System.
A total of 4 cases—worth RMB 2.789 million yuan and 
involving 30 people—related to fraudulent return and exchange were detected 
and reported to the police
risk cases were screened
82,800
personnel were covered
6,492
JD accounts were included
77,300


42
2020 JD.com Environmental, Social and Governance Report
Empowering SMEs
JD is actively opening up its technology and service capability to SMEs, and is helping them lower costs and increase overall eﬃciency.
Under the shock of the 2020 pandemic, JD launched the Dual Engine Program to speciﬁcally 
support SMEs, and has already served an accumulated total of 760,000 enterprises. JD 
also upgraded corporate membership beneﬁts and established the long-term supporting 
mechanism for marketization through its Corporate Member Day. JD joined hands with 
partners, launched the Mantanxing Project with China Centre for Promotion of SME 
Development, held smart procurement competitions in cooperation with Maker in China, and 
provided full industrial value chain support for SMEs.
To optimize the operation and business environment for SMEs, JDT has taken measures in digital technology ﬁelds such as blockchain 
and IoT by launching the Inclusive Cloud Sign Plan to support SMEs, providing free blockchain digital agreement signing service to all 
domestic SMEs. Through the use of the blockchain credit exchange platform, JD helps SMEs gain more convenient ﬁnancial services, 
alleviating the ﬁnancial pressure post-pandemic. JD and CMST Development jointly created the Huoduibao platform and a commodity 
supply chain collaboration platform, which helped the commodity industry achieve a blend of “industrial digitalization” and “ﬁnancial 
digitalization.”
Contributing to recovery and development of the real economy
Operation and business environment optimization for SMEs
Connecting Global Markets
As one of the largest e-commerce platforms in China, JD is leveraging its 
technology and resource advantages, by driving more domestic brand 
enterprises to better utilize domestic and global markets and resources 
and participate in globalization. 
In the domestic market, during the pandemic, JD’s corporate business 
department launched the Domestic Brand Uniting Plan in cooperation with 
Lenovo and other well-known brand enterprises, providing customized 
supporting measures according to the size of domestic enterprises. 
Moreover, Jingxi launched its Supporting Policy for Foreign Trade 
Merchants, Domestic Sales Action and invested resources worth more 
than RMB 2 billion yuan. The actions opened 100,000 entry windows for 
foreign trade enterprises with preferential policies and helped foreign trade 
merchants on the platform increase their monthly sales by a thousand fold. 
At the same time, JDI provides one-stop cross-border services through 
the “self-operated + platform” model to help SMEs that are going global, 
driving the global economy to move towards open, inclusive, and win-
win development. JD’s Southeast Asian e-commerce platform provides 
high-quality B2C products and services to users in Thailand, Indonesia, 
and other regions. In terms of logistics, JD is building a global network to 
provide integrated supply chain services and solutions for key industry 
customers. In terms of business ﬂow, JD is expanding overseas distribution 
channels based on its independent commodity supply chain, by building a 
cross-border shipping service platform.
enterprises were served and 
empowered by JD
760,000


43
2020 JD.com Environmental, Social and Governance Report
Community Responsibility
06
Corporate Philanthropy and Social Responsibility
Focus Areas and Practices


44
2020 JD.com Environmental, Social and Governance Report
Corporate Philanthropy and Social Responsibility
JD coordinates the Group’s charitable activities through JD Foundation, and advocates “Philanthropy for Everyone” based on internet 
charity fundraising information platforms, such as Collecting Objects with Love, and Nuandong Philanthropy. Meanwhile, each 
business unit also actively practices the public welfare philosophy of the Group, conducting diversiﬁed philanthropic activities based 
on their own business characteristics, and thus promoting the development of China’s philanthropy.
In 2020, JD Foundation donated around RMB 200 million yuan. JD Giving Platform raised RMB 19.77 million yuan and more than 
850,000 charitable items. 
Adhering to the original aspiration of “achieving success the right way,” JD has always insisted on using the power of science, 
technology, and humane care to help diﬀerent society groups in need. At the same time, JD is connecting those with resources and a 
desire to help with people in need, radiating warmth to every corner of the society.
JD’s Corporate Philanthropy Governance Structure
Top Layer
JD Foundation
JD Giving Platform
Corporate Donation
Philanthropic Business 
Empowerment
Education, Poverty Alleviation, Anti-epidemic, Disaster Relief, Environmental 
Protection and Social Innovation
Implementation
Layer
Key 
Directions
The Foundation was established on September 24, 2014 with the mission of advocating corporate responsibility for a higher quality of 
life, and supporting public welfare. Led by the ideas of social innovation and entrepreneurship, JD Foundation organizes charitable 
activities in the ﬁelds of poverty alleviation, education, and environmental protection.
This platform is the ﬁrst Internet fundraising information platform recognized by the Ministry of Civil Aﬀairs of People’s Republic of 
China. The platform creates social value and drives everyone to participate in philanthropy through three main sectors: Collecting 
Objects with Love supplies donation system; Nuandong Philanthropy fundraising system; and the public welfare cultivation project.
Collecting Objects with Love 
supplies donation system
Nuandong Philanthropy 
fundraising system
Public welfare cultivation project
Collecting Objects with Love is a one-
click direct donation model that enables 
customers to donate objects, with direct 
supplies delivery to recipients. Until 
now, the number of objects collected 
has exceeded 3.56 million pieces, and 
the public had been encouraged to 
recycle around 4 million pieces of pre-
loved objects.
This system provides a reliable 
fundraising platform for philanthropic 
organizations, creating a public, 
transparent, authentic, and sustainable 
philanthropy ecosystem model.
To spread the spirit of giving, and 
optimize the public welfare experience. JD 
developed diﬀerent mini games to embed 
in its core business scenarios, making 
it more fun and easier to participate. 
This resulted in a warmer philanthropy-
cultivating action plan.
JD Foundation
JD Giving Platform


45
2020 JD.com Environmental, Social and Governance Report
Focus Areas and Practices
JD actively practices social responsibility in areas of targeted poverty alleviation, environmental protection, public health beneﬁts, 
support for disadvantaged groups, and disaster relief, by launching abundant public welfare projects.
JD’s corporate philanthropy covers poverty alleviation in industries, employment, 
entrepreneurship, ﬁnance, health, public welfare, etc. By September 30, 2020, JD 
had helped impoverished regions put more than 3 million commodities online, 
and achieved RMB 100 billion yuan in sales, which has directly driven more than 1 
million impoverished households to increase income. JD helped 400 impoverished 
counties in Yunnan, Shanxi, Henan, and other provinces to launch more than 1,200 
crowdfunding projects, and raised more than RMB 56 million yuan in a designated 
fund. In October 2020, JD initiated and announced the Prosperity and Growth Plan 
which will drive trillions of RMB in the next three years in sales for villages, cultivate 
1 million talents for agriculture-themed livestreams on its e-commerce platforms, 
jointly establish a total of 100,000 agriculture-themed livestream bases, and initiate 
a series of farmer support measures, such as the Five Acceleration Plans, thus 
enhancing real sustainable development. 
Targeted Poverty Alleviation
JD supports the formulation of the green and low-carbon circular economy system, advocates consumers to donate their clothes and 
belongings, and promotes the reuse and recycling of second-hand products.  
From 2019 to 2020, JD Foundation launched the Exchange Old Clothes for Love clothes donation project in cooperation with 
China Charity Federation. Through customer orders placed on the platform and the free home collection service of JD’s 
express service, the project successfully recycled more than 473,000 pieces of clothes in 90 cities in China, including Beijing, 
Shanghai, Shenzhen, Chongqing, and Shenyang. While nurturing community awareness of public welfare, it is also a lively 
practice of promoting low-carbon lifestyles, emissions reductions, and waste classiﬁcation.
Environmental Protection
 Exchange Old Clothes for Love Clothes Donation Project
Online Volunteering Consultation, Remote Health Support 
JD actively promotes the development of public health, advocates healthy lifestyles, and drives medical improvements.
In March 2020, JDH and the psychiatry branch of the Chinese Medical Doctor Association jointly established a Psychological 
Assistance Platform, providing free online psychological counselling and assistance. The Global Free Health Counselling 
Platform was subsequently launched, providing free online inquiry and psychological counselling services to 60 million 
compatriots living overseas. More than 2,000 doctors participated in answering inquiries on JDH’s online platform, including 
full-time doctors working for JDH.
In June 2020, JDH and southwest regional media including Sichuan Daily, Guizhou Metropolis Daily, Yunnan Information 
Daily and others went to impoverished counties including Rongjiang, Guangnan, and Jinyang to conduct one-to-one 
live video volunteering medical consultations from JDH’s full-time doctors, as well as the distribution of knowledge on 
common diseases such as high blood pressure and diabetes through broadcasting.
Public Health
JD’s Prosperity and Growth Plan boosts rural 
revitalization by Five Acceleration Plans
Rural 
Distribution 
Accleration 
Plan
Fresh Produce 
Upstreaming 
Acceleration 
Plan
Circulation 
Middle Platform 
Acceleration 
Plan
Agricuturial 
Industry Belt 
Acclecration 
Plan
Rural 
Omni-channel 
Acceleration 
Plan


46
2020 JD.com Environmental, Social and Governance Report
Caring for disadvantaged groups not only beneﬁts their livelihoods and development, but also that of the entire society. JD carried out 
special actions to support vulnerable groups such as the visually impaired or elders with empty nests.
During the international White Cane Safety Day on October 15, 2020, the JD app’s main site implemented full-link barrier-
free shopping, and JD Foundation and the China Social Relief Foundation jointly launched the “Where there’s love, 
there’s light” public welfare project, in the form of H5 audio and video stories. These called on the public to care for the 
visually impaired and collected computers for a school that taught students with visual impairment in Gansu province. 
During the event, the JD app’s main website eﬀectively drove 11 million people’s attention and participation through the 
launch of screen pictures and the “Love” featured page. The barrier-free service covered more than 6,000 visually impaired 
people, and the school received more than 60 computers for the visually impaired.
Supporting Disadvantaged Groups
Light Up the World for the Visually Impaired
 Against the Flood Public Welfare Plan
JD actively responds to important major social events, participating in disaster rescue and relief.
In May 2020, Nuandong Philanthropy launched the Against the Flood public welfare plan, focusing on ﬂooding in 
southern regions of China together with philanthropic organization partners, including China Social Relief Foundation 
and Chinese Relief and Development Foundation.
On August 13, Xichong county, Nanchong city, and Sichuan province suﬀered from heavy rainfall, resulting in 
extensive damage to crops and severe damage to roads. Our philanthropic organization partners immediately 
rushed to the scene to investigate. After evaluation, 87 disaster relief boxes supported by kind netizens from JD 
platforms were distributed to victims in Xichong County, which eﬀectively alleviated the villagers’ post-disaster 
diﬃculties and delivered warmth with practical actions.
On August 18, Leshan city, Sichuan province encountered severe ﬂooding at levels that hadn’t been seen in 50 years. 
The Chinese Relief and Development Foundation immediately initiated the emergency response, and actively 
cooperated with Nuandong Philanthropy to raise funds, sending out 50 sets of grain and oil packs (1,250 kg of 
rice, 250 kg of noodles, 500 liters of oil) to Shuangyan Village, Gaofeng Town, Jingyan County, and Leshan City on 
September 14, to assist villagers with their post-disaster resettlement.
Disaster Rescue and Relief
 people were engaged
11 million
individuals with visual impairment 
were served by the barrier-free service
6,000
computers sent to schools for 
the visually impaired
60


47
2020 JD.com Environmental, Social and Governance Report
Appendix 1: Key Performance
Note: Unless speciﬁed, the key performance indicators cover the time range from January 1, 2020 to December 31, 2020. 
Table 1: 2020 Environmental Key Performance 
Categories
Indicators
Data
Emissions of Air 
Pollutants
Nitrogen oxide (g)
1,265,202,794.93
Sulphur oxide (g)
875,016.55
Particulate matter (g)
97,626,071.52
GHG Emissions
Direct (Scope 1) GHG emissions (tCO2e)
355,585.45
Energy indirect (Scope 2) GHG emissions (tCO2e)
646,827.08
Other indirect (Scope 3) GHG emissions (tCO2e)
1,273,523.16
Waste Produced
Total waste (tons)
25,768.96
Total hazardous waste (tons)
70.00 
Total non-hazardous waste (tons)
25,698.96
Use of Resources
Natural gas consumption (cubic meters)
279,462.00
Diesel fuel consumption (liters)
53,857,297.57
Gasoline consumption (liters)
605,533.23
Electricity use (kWh)
332,138,151.94
Water consumption (tons)
2,090,092.94
Total packaging that used non-renewable material (tons)
10,279.44
Total packaging that used renewable material (tons)
107,712.13  
Packaging materials used per product (g)
30.00
Note:
1. Emissions data of air pollutants are from the JD-operated vehicles’ data system.
2. GHG emissions statistics include administrative oﬃces, logistics and transportation, warehousing in both mainland China and overseas (including Hong Kong and the United 
States), and data centers. Due to data availability, we only collected other indirect GHG emissions (Scope 3) data from JDL.
3. Non-hazardous waste includes renewable and non-renewable materials, among which renewable materials include paper consumables, and non-renewable materials include 
plastic consumables. Hazardous waste is categorized into the “HW08 Waste Mineral Oil and Waste Containing Mineral Oil” in National Hazardous Waste List.
4. The non-renewable packaging used for ﬁnished products includes plastic materials, and the renewable packaging used for ﬁnished products includes paper-based materials.
Categories
Indicators
Data
Employment
Total number of employees
314,906
Percentage of male employees (%)
77.1
Percentage of female employees (%)
22.9
Percentage of male employees (excluding front-line workers) (%)
60.0
Percentage of female employees (excluding front-line employees) (%)
40.0
Percentage of employees under 30 (%)
42.6
Percentage of employees between 30-50 (%)
56.8
Percentage of employees above 50 (%)
0.6
Table 2: 2020 Social Key Performance


48
2020 JD.com Environmental, Social and Governance Report
Note:
1. The source of employment data is the statistical data of JD’s human resources system as of December 31, 2020, which is for all JD employees except part-time employees and 
interns. Unless otherwise speciﬁed, all percentage statistics are based on the number of employees at the end of the year as the denominator.
2. The statistical scope for ﬁling and investigating corruption cases are fraud arbitrage, acceptance of bribes, and occupation of oﬃce.
3. The anti-corruption training data is based on the online sign-in data of full-time employees. Oﬄine trainings are not included.
Categories
Indicators
Data
Supplier Management
Number of suppliers
3,273
Number of operations and suppliers using young workers for hazardous 
work
0
Number of operations and suppliers using child labor
0
Percentage of new suppliers screened by environmental criteria (%)
85
Number of suppliers conducting environmental impact assessment
201
Number of suppliers identiﬁed as having signiﬁcant negative environmental 
impact
0
Percentage of new suppliers that were screened using social criteria (%)
85
Number of suppliers assessed for social impact
201
Number of suppliers identiﬁed as having signiﬁcant negative social impact
0
Table 3: 2020 Supplier Management Key Performance 
Note:
1. The statistical scope of “the total number of suppliers” refers to suppliers who received pre-winning bids in the procurement business of the Procurement and Cost Department.
2. The “percentage of new suppliers screened by environmental criteria” and “number of suppliers conducting environmental impact assessments” are calculated based on the 
current situation of logistics consumables suppliers.
3. The deﬁnition of “having signiﬁcant negative environmental impact” and “having signiﬁcant negative social impact” is deﬁned as violations or major incidents announced and/or 
reported by relevant government departments and/or the media.
4. “Social criteria” include laws and regulations related to human rights protection and labor standards.
Categories
Indicators
Data
Health and Safety
Number of work-related fatalities occurred in the past three years
0
Rate of work-related fatalities occurred in the past three years (%)
0
Development and 
Training
Percentage of employees trained (%)
92.78
Total training time for all employees (hours)
3,878,427.44
Total training time for all male employees (hours)
2,681,840.22
Total training time for all female employees (hours)
1,196,587.22
Average training time completed per male employee (hours)
10.99
Average training hours completed per female employee (hours)
16.44
Average training hours completed per full-time employee (hours)
12.20
Average training hours completed per non full-time employee (hours)
5.07
Percentage of employees that attended the anti-corruption training (%)
96.19
Anti-corruption
Number of public lawsuits against company or employee for corruption
0
Filed and investigated corruption cases
7
Number of incidents in which employees were ﬁred or punished due to corruption
77
Community Investment
Charity cash donation (RMB)
200,000,000


49
2020 JD.com Environmental, Social and Governance Report
Appendix 2: Content Index
ESG Indicator
Reporting Section
Introduction
Report Proﬁle
Statement from the Board
Statement from the Board
ESG governance system
ESG Governance System
Corporate social responsibility strategy
Corporate Social Responsibility Strategic Framework
Materiality assessment and stakeholder engagement
Materiality Assessment and Stakeholder Engagement
Environment
General disclosure of emissions
Table 1: 2020 Environmental Key Performance
Types of emissions and respective emissions data
Table 1: 2020 Environmental Key Performance
Direct (Scope 1) and “energy indirect” (Scope 2) GHG emissions
Table 1: 2020 Environmental Key Performance
Total hazardous waste produced 
Table 1: 2020 Environmental Key Performance
Total non-hazardous waste produced
Table 1: 2020 Environmental Key Performance
Description of emission target(s) set, and steps taken to achieve them
Climate Goals
General disclosure of resources used
Table 1: 2020 Environmental Key Performance
Direct and/or indirect energy consumption by type (e.g. electricity, gas 
or oil) in total
Table 1: 2020 Environmental Key Performance
Water consumption in total
Table 1: 2020 Environmental Key Performance
Total packaging material used for ﬁnished products (in tons) and, if 
applicable, with reference to per unit produced
Table 1: 2020 Environmental Key Performance
Employment and Training
General disclosure of employment
Human Resource Compliance Management
Total workforce by gender and age group
Table 2: 2020 Social Key Performance
Disclosure of health and safety
Table 2: 2020 Social Key Performance
Number and rate of work-related fatalities that occurred in each of the 
past three years (including the reporting year)
Table 2: 2020 Social Key Performance
Description of occupational health and safety measures adopted, and 
how they are implemented and monitored
Occupational Health and Safety
General disclosure of development and training
Training and Development
The percentage of employees trained
Table 2: 2020 Social Key Performance
The average training hours completed per employee by gender and 
employee category
Table 2: 2020 Social Key Performance
General disclosure of labor standards
Employment and Labor Standards
Description of measures to review employment practices to avoid 
child and forced labor
Employment and Labor Standards
Supplier Management
General disclosure of supply chain management
Supplier Admittance and Compliance Management
Number of suppliers
Table 3: 2020 Supplier Management Key Performance
Description of practices relating to engaging suppliers, and how they 
are implemented and monitored
Supplier Admittance and Compliance Management
Description of practices used to identify environmental and social 
risks along the supply chain, and how they are implemented and 
monitored
Supplier Environmental and Social Risk Identiﬁcation Management
Description of practices to promote green consumption and advocate 
green products
Sustainable Consumption


50
2020 JD.com Environmental, Social and Governance Report
ESG Indicator
Reporting Section
Product Responsibility
General disclosure of product responsibility
Product Responsibility
Description of practices to respond to complaints and problems
Responding to Complaints and Problems
Description of practices to protect intellectual property
Intellectual Property Protection
Description of quality assurance process
Quality Management
Description of consumer data protection and privacy policies, and 
how they are implemented and monitored
User Privacy
Anti-corruption
General disclosure of anti-corruption 
Anti-corruption
Filed and investigated corruption cases in the reporting period
Table 2: 2020 Social Key Performance
Description of preventive measures and whistle blowing procedures, 
and how they are implemented and monitored
Anti-corruption
Description of anti-corruption training provided to staﬀ
Anti-corruption
Community Investment
General disclosure of community investment
Corporate Philanthropy and Social Responsibility
Focus areas of contribution
Focus Areas and Practices
Resources contributed (e.g. money or time) to the focus area
Table 2: 2020 Social Key Performance


51
2020 JD.com Environmental, Social and Governance Report
Appendix 3: GRI Standards Content Index
Number
Categories
Reporting Section
101
Foundation
Report Proﬁle
102
General Disclosures
Overview
103
Management Approach
ESG Governance System
Materiality Assessment and Stakeholder Engagement
Corporate Governance
201
Economic Performance
Letter from the Chairman
202
Market Presence
Training and Development 
Community Responsibility
203
Indirect Economic Impacts
Special Topic: Combating COVID-19
Organizations and Corporate Clients Growth
204
Procurement Practices
Green Procurement
Supplier Environmental and Social Risk Identiﬁcation Management
Supplier Digital Management 
205
Anti-corruption
Anti-corruption
206
Anti-competitive Behavior
Intellectual Property Protection
301
Materials
Green Procurement
Speciﬁc Measures
302
Energy
Green and Low-carbon Data Center
Speciﬁc Measures
303
Water and Eﬄuents
Table 1: 2020 Environmental Key Performance
304
Biodiversity
JD and SDGs
Sustainable Consumption
305
Emissions
Speciﬁc Measures
Table 1: 2020 Environmental Key Performance
306
Waste
Green Lifestyle Advocacy
Table 1: 2020 Environmental Key Performance
307
Environmental Compliance
Supplier Environmental and Social Risk Identiﬁcation Management
308
Supplier Environmental Assessment
Supplier Environmental and Social Risk Identiﬁcation Management
401
Employment
Employee Proﬁle
Employee Welfare
402
Labor/Management Relations
Employment and Labor Standards 
Employee Welfare
403
Occupational Health and Safety
Occupational Health and Safety
404
Training and Education
Training and Development
405
Diversity and Equal Opportunity
Employment and Labor Standards
Table 2: 2020 Social Key Performance
406
Non-discrimination
Employment and Labor Standards
407
Freedom of Association and Collective 
Bargaining
N/A
408
Child Labor
Employment and Labor Standards
409
Forced or Compulsory Labor
Employment and Labor Standards
410
Security Practices
Special Topic: Combating COVID-19
Employee Welfare
411
Rights of Indigenous Peoples
N/A


52
2020 JD.com Environmental, Social and Governance Report
Number
Categories
Reporting Section
412
Human Rights Assessment
Employment and Labor Standards 
413
Local Communities
Green Lifestyle Advocacy 
Organizations and Corporate Clients Growth
414
Supplier Social Assessment
Supplier Management
415
Public Policy
Materiality Assessment and Stakeholder Engagement 
Data Safety
416
Customer Health and Safety
Platform Management 
Quality Management
417
Marketing and Labeling
Content Governance
418
Customer Privacy
Information Security
419
Socioeconomic Compliance
Corporate Governance


53
2020 JD.com Environmental, Social and Governance Report
Appendix 4: External Veriﬁcation Certiﬁcate
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
SGS-CSTC STANDARDS TECHNICAL SERVICES CO., LTD. SHANGHAI 
BRANCH’S REPORT ON SUSTAINABILITY ACTIVITIES IN THE JD.COM’S 
ENVIRONMENTAL, SOCIAL AND GOVERNMENT (HEREINAFTER REFERRED 
TO AS “ESG”) REPORT 
 
NATURE AND SCOPE OF THE ASSURANCE/VERIFICATION 
SGS-CSTC STANDARDS TECHNICAL SERVICES CO., LTD. SHANGHAI BRANCH S’ (thereafter as “SGS) 
was commissioned by JD.com to conduct independent assurance of the 2020 ESG REPORT. Based on the 
SGS Sustainability Report Assurance methodology, SGS performed the assurance of the management 
methodology and data related to the HKEX requirements contained within this report at JD.com Headquarters, 
No. 18 Kechuang 11 Street, Beijing Yizhuang Economic-Technological Development Area, Beijing, P. R. 
China.; Data and information of other sites were not assured in this assurance scope.  
 
The information in the 2020 ESG REPORT of JD.com and its presentation are the responsibility of the board 
and related functions. SGS has not been involved in the preparation of any of the material included in the 2020 
ESG REPORT. 
 
Our responsibility is to express an opinion on the text, data, graphs and statements within the scope of 
verification with the intention to inform all JD.com’s stakeholders. 
 
The SGS protocols are based upon internationally recognized guidance, including the reporting principles 
contained within the HKEX listing rules appendix 27 《Environmental, Social and Governance Reporting 
Guide》 and the guidance on levels of assurance contained within the AA1000 series of standards and 
guidance for Assurance Providers. 
 
This report has been assured at a moderate level of scrutiny using our protocols for: 
• 
evaluation of content veracity; 
• 
evaluation of the report conformity against the HKEX listing rules appendix 27 《Environmental, 
Social and Governance Reporting Guide》. 
 
The assurance comprised a combination of pre-assurance research, interviews with relevant employees based 
at JD.com Headquarters, No. 18 Kechuang 11 Street, documentation and record review and assurance with 
external bodies and/or stakeholders where relevant. 
 
Financial data drawn directly from independently audited financial accounts has not been checked back to its 
source as part of this assurance process. 
 
STATEMENT OF INDEPENDENCE AND COMPETENCE 
SGS is the world’s leading inspection, verification, testing and certification company. We are recognized as the 
global benchmark for quality and integrity with a network around the world. SGS affirm our independence from 
JD.com being free from bias and conflicts of interest with the organisation, its subsidiaries and stakeholders. 
 
The assurance team was assembled based on their knowledge, experience and qualifications for this 
assignment, and comprised auditors registered with CSR Lead Assuror, CCAA Registered ISO 14001 Auditor, 
ISO 45001 Auditor and SA8000 Auditor.  
 
 
ASSURANCE STATEMENT 


54
2020 JD.com Environmental, Social and Governance Report
 
VERIFICATION/ ASSURANCE OPINION 
On the basis of the methodology described and the verification work performed, we are satisfied that the 
information and data contained within the ESG Report verified is reliable and provides a fair and balanced 
representation of JD.com sustainability activities in 2020.  
 
Some statements and original data within the scope were not assured due to lack of accessible sites and 
records due to lack of authorization for assurance, and these are clearly marked throughout the text.  
 
We believe that JD.com has chosen an appropriate ESG reporting guide, and information contained within the 
Report can be used by its stakeholders. 
 
CONCLUSIONS, FINDINGS AND RECOMMENDATIONS 
 
In our opinion, the ESG Report is presented in accordance with the reporting rules and the KPIs disclosures of 
the HKEX listing rules appendix 27, i.e., 《Environmental, Social and Governance Reporting Guide》. 
 
Reporting Rules 
 
Materiality 
JD.com conducts a third-party survey and internal planning to report the ESG issues of concern by stakeholders 
and performed analysis with materiality. SGS recommended that JD.com could perform the stakeholder survey 
in a timely manner, via usual communication to collect the stakeholders’ needs and expectations, which would 
enhance the ESG issues’ materiality and sufficiency.  
 
Quantitative 
JD.com performs the statistics and analysis for KPIs, plans the management methods and some KPIs, refers to 
the criterions and international general regulations, and reports the disclosures’ impact and purpose. Some 
comparative yearly data could better help stakeholders to evaluate its management system’s effectiveness and 
make decisions; 
 
Balance 
JD.com shows the balance reporting rule in the ESG report and reports environmental, social and governance 
issues accurately. 
 
Consistency 
JD.com plans the disclosure methodologies with consistency for report content and data statistics at all levels in 
the company, in addition, remarks and interpretations were marked in the ESG report to help stakeholder make 
a clear comparison.  
 
Limitations of assurance 
Some data and record within the scope were not assured due to lack of authorization and planning 
methodology in advance, and no further statements for other sites listed in the ESG report. 
 
Signed: 
 
 
 
For and on behalf of SGS-CSTC 
 
 
David XIN     Director 
16/F Century Yuhui Mansion, No. 73, Fucheng Road, Beijing, China 
April 8, 2021 
 
WWW.SGS.COM 


55
2020 JD.com Environmental, Social and Governance Report


Report Proﬁle
1


2021 JD.com Environmental, Social and Governance Report
2
01
Overview
About JD.com 
Message from Chairman of Board of Directors 
Highlights of Responsibility Performance in Key Areas 
Statement from the Board 
ESG Governance Structure 
Sustainable Development Strategic Framework
Materiality Assessment and Stakeholder Engagement
02
03
05
08
08
10
11
High-quality Employment
Human Resource Compliance Management
Human Resources Management
55
56
58
Green Operation
Low-Carbon Supply Chain
JD.com Singles Day Grand Promotion Leads 
Sustainable Consumption
65
69
 
72
Public Welfare Concept and Policy
The Focus Areas of Philanthropic Eﬀorts
75
75
Governance 
Strategy 
Risk Management 
Metrics and Targets 
83
83
91
91
Key Performance
JD’s Progress on the United Nations Global Compact 
United Nations Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) 
Response 
ESG-Related Honors and Social Recognition 
HKEX Content Index
GRI Standards Content Index 
External Veriﬁcation Statement 
95
100
 
101
102
103
105
107
Unleash the Great Growth Potential with JD’s Identity 
as a Real Economy Enterprise
Compliance Governance to Achieve More Sustainable 
and Steady Development and Growth
JD Social Value Proposition Demonstrated as a New 
Type Real Economy Enterprise
 
15
 
16
 
24
Product Responsibility and Content Management
Consumer Rights and Service Management
27
32
Supplier Management
Promoting the Development of the Real Economy
41
43
Contents
Report Proﬁle
Cultivating Talents
Safeguarding the Natural Environment
Promoting Inclusive Development of the 
Society 
Thematic Report on Climate-related Financial 
Information Disclosures
About the Report
Promoting Good Consumption
Promoting High-quality Development
Leading the Sustainable Future as a New Type of 
Economy Enterprise 


Overview
02
2021 JD.com Environmental, Social and Governance Report
01
Report Proﬁle
Release Form of the Report 
Reference and Principles
Source of Information 
Reporting Scope 
Contact Us 
This Environmental, Social and Governance (hereinafter referred to as “ESG”) report is presented in electronic version and available in 
Chinese and English. However, in case of conﬂicts between the two languages, the Chinese version shall take precedence. 
The report is prepared in compliance with the ESG Reporting Guide from the Hong Kong Stock Exchange (HKEX), the ESG Reporting 
Guide from the Nasdaq Stock Market, the United Nations Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), the GRI Standards issued by the 
Global Sustainability Standards Board (GSSB), the Ten Principles of the UN Global Compact, and industry standards issued by the 
Sustainability Accounting Standards Board (SASB). In particular, the relevant contents of dealing with climate change are prepared by 
referring to the HKEX Guidelines on Climate Information Disclosure and the framework suggested by the Task Force on Climate-related 
Financial Disclosures (TCFD). 
The information and data in this report mainly come from the company’s internal data collection system, work reports and public 
information, annual reports, and media releases. Unless speciﬁed, the monetary amounts shown in this report are all presented in 
RMB. For ease of presentation, “JD,” “the Group,” “the company,” and “we” all refer to “JD.com.”
This report covers the period from January 1, 2021, to December 31, 2021, focusing on the ESG performance of JD.com. Some contents 
have been reviewed and extended to maintain the continuity and integrity of information. 
We value your feedback and opinions, and appreciate you emailing us at ir@jd.com, or mailing a letter to JD.com at Floor 20, Building A, 
No. 18 Kechuang 11 Street, Beijing Economic-Technological Development Area, Beijing, 100176, the People’s Republic of China. 
For more information, please visit our oﬃcial website at www.jd.com.
Overview
About JD.com 
JD.com oﬃcially set foot in the ﬁeld of e-commerce in 2004. In 
May 2014, JD.com was listed on the NASDAQ Stock Exchange 
in the United States. In doing so, JD.com became the ﬁrst 
comprehensive e-commerce platform in China to go public 
in the United States. In June 2020, JD.com took a secondary 
listing on the Hong Kong Stock Exchange, aiming to raise funds 
to invest in key technological innovations applied in supply 
chain infrastructure,  enhance user experience further, and 
improve operational eﬃciency. 
JD.com is positioned as “a technology and services 
enterprise with supply chain at its core.” Its businesses cover 
retail, technologies, logistics, health, insurance, property 
development, international business, and other areas. 
JD.com is a new type of real economy enterprise with both 
the genes and advantages of traditional enterprises and 
digital technology capabilities. As such, JD has facilitated the 
development of various real economy businesses and boosted 
high-quality development of the real economy with solid and 
innovative development experience to promote sustainable 
growth. 
JD.com adheres to the values of Customer First, Integrity, 
Collaboration, Gratitude, Dedication and Ownership, fulﬁlling 
its strategic mission of being “Powered by Technology for 
a More Productive and Sustainable World” and striving to 
become the most trusted company in the world. 


2021 JD.com Environmental, Social and Governance Report
Overview
03
04
Message from Chairman of Board of Directors 
In 2021 the COVID-19 pandemic continued. As a result, the 
global economy faced various downward pressures during a 
diﬃcult and slow process toward recovery. We have witnessed  
epidemic’s impact on the world economy, society, and 
environment, and deeply felt the pressure brought by many 
uncertainties. Amid these changes and challenges, we must 
hold ourselves accountable for promoting sustainability and 
undertaking corporate social responsibility. 
In JD.com’s vessel, there ﬂows a sense of mission and 
responsibility. Starting from a three-foot counter in 
Zhongguancun Electronics Market 19 years ago, we have 
always relied on genuine licensed goods, never deviated from 
the concept of “achieving success the right way,” and have 
never forgotten our responsibility to all stakeholders. In 2021, 
based on the corporate mission, “Powered by Technology for a 
More Productive and Sustainable World,” we reﬂected further 
on the scope of our goals. As an enterprise with both the genes 
and attributes of a real economy enterprise and possessing 
digital technologies and capabilities, we commit to leading 
a sustainable future in the role of a new type real economy 
enterprise. 
In the past year, under continual COVID-19 outbreaks, many 
small and medium-sized enterprises have been under pressure. 
In contrast, real economy enterprises need to reduce costs and 
increase eﬃciency as they pursue high-quality development. 
Yet, despite all these complex challenges, we are working 
together with our partners to overcome diﬃculties. 
To support businesses in areas impacted by the pandemic, we 
have voluntarily issued relief policies to help businesses reduce 
costs and increase eﬃciency. More importantly, during the 
epidemic outbreak, by relying on the intelligent supply chain 
and logistics, we have made our contributions to ensuring the 
supply of daily necessities to protect people’s livelihood. As a 
result, we have played a part in stabilizing commodity prices 
and enabling the normal operation of businesses, thus creating 
shared value for society as a whole. 
Leading the Sustainable Future as a 
New Type of Real Economy Enterprise
Empowering Real Economy Businesses 
with Digitally Intelligent Supply Chain 
Solutions
In the past few years, we have ﬁrmly invested in supply chain 
infrastructure construction and digital intelligent technology 
research and development, a path that has at times been 
bitter and challenging but will also deliver the highest value. 
We are glad to see that our persistence has enabled partners 
to achieve high-quality development. We continue to improve 
our intelligent supply chain technology and promote inventory 
turnover optimization. As a result, we have reduced the 
inventory turnover days to 30.3 days as of 2021 and accelerated 
the eﬃciency of the whole industry chain. We’ve long been 
investing in integrated supply chain logistics services, providing 
quick-response supply chain capability empowered by 
high technology and a ﬂexibly conﬁgured logistics service 
portfolio that many enterprises urgently need. Our intelligent 
manufacturing platform helps partners eﬃciently research 
and develop new products, signiﬁcantly shorten the time of 
Driving Green Transformation 
Throughout the Supply Chain 
product pre-market research, and accelerate the cycle of new 
products going on the market, which helps manufacturers save 
costs greatly. 
Our ﬁrst “smart mobile warehouse” was proved successful 
in the project of Hanzhong-Bazhong-Nanchong high-
speed railway construction, a pilot solution for engineering 
supplies’ real-time prediction, transportation, and warehouse 
management in remote areas. We serve nearly 70% of China’s 
specialized and innovative “Little Giant” enterprises, helping 
more small and medium-sized enterprises to overcome the 
“digital divide” and achieve accelerated growth. 
We continue to increase investment in rural supply chain 
infrastructure and technology services, opening the whole 
industrial chain in rural areas, and promoting rural revitalization 
through comprehensive solutions. For example, we have 
established the highest altitude smart warehouses nationwide 
and cooperated with Wugong County in Shaanxi province to 
build the ﬁrst intelligent supply chain center, beneﬁting rural 
development with high-eﬃciency logistics. 
In addition, by enlarging the investment in “new infrastructure 
abroad” and combining global routes exploration and local 
warehouse construction, we have set up a stable and eﬃcient 
new infrastructure for businesses going abroad. Thus, reaching 
more than 220 countries and regions worldwide, creating an 
expressway for Chinese brands and services to “go global.”
goods, we will encourage more businesses and consumers to 
join in low-carbon consumption actions. 
We are closely following the trend of green investment, and 
we have seen that more and more investors are concerned 
about climate risks. This year is our ﬁrst time incorporating 
the topic of climate-related ﬁnancial information disclosure 
into this ESG report. We have comprehensively analyzed the 
business risks and opportunities faced by JD.com in diﬀerent 
climate scenarios and formulated a risk management system 
and strategy for 2030. We hope that through systematic 
transformation, we will obtain new development opportunities 
while building climate competitiveness in the next decade. 
We are honored to see our eﬀorts widely recognized. We have 
been ranked on the FORTUNE 2022 World’s Most Admired 
Companies list at No.6 in the Internet Services and Retailing 
Category and ﬁrst among Chinese enterprises for our social 
responsibility performance. Additionally, we rank third among 
Chinese enterprises in Forbes’ 2021 Best Employers in the 
World. 
These honors give us the momentum to go further. In the past 
year, we have had a lot of internal discussions and thoughts 
on ESG. We are making ESG a top-down consistent guiding 
direction and evaluation mechanism through continuous 
institutional improvement. 
When faced with the uncertainty of the future, we retain a 
sense of awe — but we will always think and act as though we 
are experiencing day one. We will continue to strengthen the 
supply chain infrastructure construction and contribute our 
professional insights and innovative solutions to a better and 
more sustainable future — and time will prove our original 
aspirations and beliefs. 
 
Richard Qiangdong Liu
 
Chairman of Board of Directors, JD.com
According to the Global Risk Report 2022, the world’s top ﬁve 
most threatening risks in the next decade are all environmental 
risks. In 2021, we already felt the destructiveness of extreme 
weather to the supply chain. We hope to exert the inﬂuence of 
our value chain, and fully address the global climate challenge. 
We continue to accelerate our low-carbon operations. In 2021, 
all oﬃce buildings built by JD.com acquired three-star design 
mark certiﬁcations for green buildings. Using technologies 
such as liquid cooling, the new green data center operated 
by JD Cloud achieved annual operation with a Power Usage 
Eﬀectiveness (PUE) lower than 1.1. We lead the whole value 
chain to exert a low-carbon impact by facilitating the full 
deployment of new energy vehicles, promoting circular 
packaging, and building “zero-carbon” logistics parks. As 
announced in the new ﬁve-year “Green Stream Initiative,” we 
have promised to invest another RMB 1 billion in constructing 
a low-carbon integrated supply chain. We promote green 
consumption, and by expanding the categories of low-carbon 


2021 JD.com Environmental, Social and Governance Report
Overview
05
06
Highlights of Responsibility Performance in Key Areas 
In 2021, JD.com intercepted over 16 million illegal advertisements.
By the end of 2021, JD Logistics operated over 1,300 warehouses, which covered an aggregate gross ﬂoor area of over  
24 million square meters, including 43 “Asia No.1” smart mega logistics parks in 33 cities nationwide. On the basis of 
nearly 10 million SKUs
1 of self-operated commodities, JD.com has always been a global leader in operational eﬃciency. 
In 2021, more than 3,000 senior managers of JD Retail listened to users’ feedback on site. They helped solve 167 pain 
points and optimized more than 200 items relating to users’ experiences.  
In 2021, JD’s anti-corruption training covered 98.8% of the total employees. The participation rate of online anti-corruption 
training courses among new employees was as high as 100%.
JD.com made more than 60 internal regulations, covering key areas such as security management, privacy protection and 
data security, which apply to all businesses and suppliers.
Leading the Sustainable Future as a New Type Real Economy Enterprise
Promoting Good Consumption 
1 SKU: Stock Keeping Unit
By the end of 2021, the number of employees in JD.com’s listed and non-listed companies has exceeded 420,000, 
including more than 300,000 front-line employees, of whom 80% are from rural areas. In the past three years, nearly 
40,000 jobs have been provided to fresh graduates; at present, more than 500 employees have doctorate degrees, and 
the number of R&D professionals has exceeded 18,000.
In 2021, the satisfaction survey conducted among employees in the Beijing headquarters and various workplaces showed that the 
employee satisfaction rate was as high as 4.36/5.
In 2021, JD’s full-time employees received 54.44 hours of training on average.
In 2021, the listed and non-listed companies under JD.com organized more than 20,809 training sessions, and added 
another 10,262 training courses, with total course sign-ins of 160 million internal person-times and 16,000 
daily active users.
A total of 10,368 female employees beneﬁted from women-empowerment activities. There are 851 female lecturers 
registered at JD.com, accounting for 49% of all lecturers.
JD Cloud has provided digital solutions for more than 1,500 large-scale enterprises and 1.5 million small and medium-
sized enterprises (SMEs), facilitating digital transformation and upgrading traditional industry.
JD.com has provided C2M solutions to more than 1,200 manufacturers.
In 2021, JD.com continued implementing the “Mantianxing Project” in 28 provinces, municipalities and autonomous regions to 
serve SMEs. As of now, JD.com has served more than 27,000 provincial-level SMEs, accounting for almost 70% of all 
provincial-level SMEs.
JD Industry launched a series of new-generation infrastructure for industrial supply chain management, such as enterprise 
distribution centers, Jinggong Cabinet, and smart mobile warehouses. It has deployed over 200 facilities nationwide to help 
solve the pain points faced by industrial enterprises.
JD.com runs more than 70 data centers, 70 city clouds and nearly 100 edge data centers worldwide.
Boosting High-quality Development 
Cultivating Talents 


2021 JD.com Environmental, Social and Governance Report
Overview
07
08
Statement from the Board 
ESG Governance Structure 
JD.com’s Board of Directors promises to strictly abide by the 
requirements of the environmental, social and governance 
(ESG) reporting guidelines of the stock exchanges where 
JD.com is listed, and continuously improve the ESG 
governance system. 
The year 2021 witnessed JD.com’s continued eﬀorts in 
strengthening the Board’s participation and supervision 
in the company’s ESG management, further integration of 
ESG into the company’s major decision-making and daily 
management processes, and the Board’s strategic support for 
the company’s business development and risk management. 
Through benchmarking analysis and stakeholder surveys, 
JD.com continuously identiﬁes the key ESG issues most 
relevant to shared value creation for stakeholders, industries, 
and JD itself. To ensure the eﬀectiveness of the company’s 
JD.com has established an ESG governance system applying 
ESG principles, which lays a solid foundation for ESG planning, 
regular evaluation, and management of related risks. The ESG 
governance system can help JD.com manage environmental, 
societal, governance, and non-ﬁnancial risks more eﬀectively, 
maintain active engagement with multiple stakeholders 
ESG strategy, the Board of Directors contributes to the 
identiﬁcation of material ESG issues, assesses the eﬀects of 
these identiﬁed issues, and takes them as essential references 
for risk and opportunity evaluation. Meanwhile, the Board of 
Directors follows the company’s ESG governance structure. By 
collaborating with the Strategic Executive Committee (SEC), 
the Board supervises the fulﬁlment of ESG goals and targets, 
regularly reviews the progress of ESG work, and facilitates ESG 
governance to become a standard practice in the company.
As a technology and services enterprise with the supply chain 
at its core, JD.com will give full play to the value creation of 
a new real economy enterprise in the future; continuously 
fulﬁlling our mission to be “Powered by Technology for a More 
Productive and Sustainable World,” and commit to being the 
most trusted global corporate citizen. 
such as regulatory authorities, investors, and the public, and 
further strengthen corporate governance. By implementing 
and continuously improving the ESG strategy and governance 
system, JD.com will achieve the steady operation and 
sustainable growth and contribute to a more productive and 
sustainable world by leveraging its business strengths.
In 2021, JD.com issued more than 2.8 billion electronic invoices, thus saving about 16,000 tons of paper, equivalent 
to the felling of over 310,000 fewer adult trees and reducing carbon emissions by 15,000 tons.
By the end of 2021, JD.com’s rural revitalization “Benfu Plan” had driven rural areas to realize an output value of RMB  
320 billion.
JD Health launched the “Rare Diseases Care Program” and established the “JD Health Rare Diseases Care Fund” together with the 
Beijing Illness Challenge Foundation (ICF). This program helps rare disease populations alleviate three major barriers namely, 
the diﬃculty in accessing high-quality diagnosis and treatment, necessary medicines and ﬁnancial support. In 2021, more than 
24,000 patients with rare diseases purchased relevant medicines and obtained corresponding medication services from JD 
Health, and the Fund has aided 69 patients with rare diseases.
In 2021, JD Foundation donated more than RMB 120 million. During the “Children’s Book Donation” campaign, 
67,608 children’s books were donated to 119 project sites in 17 provinces, municipalities and autonomous regions, 
through JD.com’s public welfare platform. Furthermore, “Fun Festival,” the gamiﬁcation public welfare activity co-organized by 
JD.com and its partnering brands, donated a variety of products worth RMB 967,000 to SOS Children’s Village in China.
On February 18, 2022, JD.com donated anti-pandemic relief materials worth RMB 100 million to medical workers in Hong 
Kong, of which the ﬁrst batch of 6,000 packs of supplies arrived on February 23, 2022.
In 2021, using technologies such as liquid cooling, the new green data center operated by JD Cloud achieved annual operation with 
a Power Usage Eﬀectiveness (PUE) lower than 1.1,  the energy saving of 30% in infrastructure, and a 10% reduction in total 
carbon emissions.
By the end of 2021, circular packaging boxes had been put into regular use over 200 million times. Through the “Green 
Stream Initiative,” JD Logistics had driven the whole industry to reduce the amount of disposable packaging by nearly 10 
billion pieces. So far, more than 200,000 businesses and hundreds of millions of consumers 
have been involved in the campaign for packaging reduction.
JD Logistics launched new energy vehicles in more than 50 cities nationwide. So far, the number of new energy logistics vehicles 
has reached 20,000. This alone can reduce carbon dioxide emissions by about 400,000 tons per year, equivalent to 
the annual carbon dioxide absorption of 20 million trees.
Safeguarding the Natural Environment
Promoting Inclusive Development of the Society
Board of Directors
Strategy Execution Committee
ESG Task Force
ESG heads from sub-groups and business lines
Sub-groups and business lines
ESG data collection and 
information disclosure
Instructs
 Supervises
Coordinates and 
executes
Reports
Day-to-Day Reports
Day-to-Day Reports
 Data support
Follow-up
ESG Governance Structure
Decision-making
Execution


2021 JD.com Environmental, Social and Governance Report
Overview
09
10
The SEC is responsible for making decisions on the strategic goals, directions, and key scope of work in the core areas of the Group’s 
sustainable development, in addition to clarifying the internal organizational structure of ESG management and supervising and 
guiding the overall implementation of work. The SEC reports ESG-related work to the Board of Directors to ensure that ESG key 
topics are integrated into the company’s overall strategy and contribute to sustainable growth. For instance, the SEC will establish a 
governance system and strategic framework based on the identiﬁcation of climate-related risks and opportunities and conduct regular 
supervision and information disclosure on the progress of risk management and other related work. 
Strengthens the sustainable development consensus and strategic synergy among sub-groups and business lines; drives forward the 
implementation of ESG management regulations and sustainable development culture. 
Sets up a climate action task force to coordinate the identiﬁcation and management of climate-related risks and opportunities. 
The ESG task force continuously incorporates ESG related risk management into the company’s daily code of conduct and is 
responsible for coordinating ESG heads of various sub-groups and business lines to implement and promote ESG work. 
Strategy Execution Committee (SEC)
ESG Task Force
Sustainable Development Strategic Framework
JD.com has always adhered to the mission of “Powered by 
Technology for a More Productive and Sustainable World.” 
On this basis, in 2021, JD.com brought up a brand-new 
sustainability strategic position, “Leading the Sustainable Future 
as a New Type of Real Economy Enterprise.” On the basis of 
the ESG governance system as the organizational driver and 
supply chain infrastructure and digital technology innovation 
as the technological driver, JD.com has been performing 
according to the sustainable development framework. JD has 
been actively fulﬁlling its social responsibilities, and enabling 
a more productive and sustainable future by promoting 
inclusive development, cultivating talents, promoting good 
consumption, boosting high-quality economic development, 
and safeguarding the natural environment. 
Organizational Driver
Technological Driver
Powered by Technology for  
a More Productive and Sustainable World
Leading the Sustainable Future as a New Type of Real 
Economy Enterprise
Strategic 
Mission
Strategic 
Positioning
Sustainable Action 
Framework
Corner 
Stone
ESG Governance System
Supply Chain Infrastructure + Digital 
Technology Innovation
Promoting 
Inclusive 
Development
Cultivating 
Talents
Promoting 
Good 
Consumption
Boosting 
High-Quality 
Development
Safeguarding 
the Natural 
Environment


2021 JD.com Environmental, Social and Governance Report
Overview
11
12
Responding to the expectations of multiple stakeholders and continuously striving for sustainable values co-creation through ongoing 
dialogue and cooperation are the cornerstones for JD.com to achieve long-term development and growth. JD.com fully considers the 
comprehensive impact of its own operation on stakeholders. By maintaining regular and diversiﬁed communication with stakeholders 
such as consumers, employees, shareholders and investors, government regulatory agencies, business partners alongside the value 
chain, the communities, and the environment, and promptly responding to their concerns and expectations, JD.com has continuously 
improved its ESG governance level. At the same time, maintaining good relationships and continuous communication with stakeholders 
provides a key reference for JD.com to identify important sustainability opportunities, enhance related work, and strengthen the quality 
of information disclosure. 
Materiality Assessment and Stakeholder Engagement
Through benchmarking analysis and stakeholders’ surveys, JD selected 35 strategic issues conducive creating sustainable shared 
values and formed a materiality matrix. Among them, the high and moderate priority material issues are regarded as the key 
disclosure topics in this report. The data availability determines the scope and boundary of the report. 
Identiﬁcation and Analysis of Material Issues 
Stakeholder Engagement
Materiality Assessment Flow
2  
The material issues as the key topics are based on the analysis results of the ESG material issues of JD.com and the comprehensive identiﬁcation of the daily 
communication with JD.com’s stakeholders. 
Benchmarking Analysis
Stakeholders Survey
Identiﬁcation of Issues Creating 
Sustainable Shared Values
Materiality Matrix
Materiality Matrix
International standards, ESG rating 
agencies, and HKEX requirements
Macro-economic policies, 
industry policies, and regulatory 
requirements 
Peers’ best practices, JD business 
positioning, and strategy 
Questionnaire 
survey
Interviews 
Importance to stakeholders 
Importance to JD business 
strategy
High priority 
material issues 
Moderate priority 
material issues 
Low priority 
material issues 
Stakeholders 
Material Issues
2
Communication
Consumers 
Employees 
Shareholders 
and Investors 
Government 
Regulatory 
Agencies 
Partners on 
the Value 
Chain
Communities 
and 
Environment 
 
●Cyber data security 
 
●Doing business with integrity 
management 
 
●Privacy protection and 
personal information security 
 
●Doing business with integrity 
management 
 
●Cyber data security 
 
●Eﬃcient and intelligent supply 
chain 
 
●Privacy protection and 
 
●Cyber data security 
 
●Responding to climate change
 
●Promoting high-quality 
employment 
 
●Anti-corruption compliance 
 
●Industry digitalization and 
high-quality development
 
●Integrity management 
 
●Cyber data security 
 
●Eﬃcient and intelligent supply 
chain 
 
●Consumer rights and satisfaction 
 
●Sustainable revenue and growth
 
●Better quality products and 
services 
 
●Business inﬂuence and partner 
ecosystem construction
 
●Environmental and social 
risk identiﬁcation and 
management
 
●Responding to climate change
 
●Green packaging and resource 
recycling 
 
●Continuous online and oﬄine 
communication (apps/
websites/stores) 
 
●24/7 customer service hotline 
 
●Daily media communication 
 
●All-staﬀ emails, 
communication meetings, 
forums, the employees’ 
representative congress, 
training activities and 
feedback mechanisms
 
●Phone calls, meetings and 
company visits 
 
●Corporate annual report, 
quarterly reports and 
announcements
 
●Roadshow 
 
●Daily reports and 
communication
 
●Participation in policy 
recommendations. 
 
●Industry forums and 
conferences 
 
●Daily procurement, training, 
and evaluation 
 
●Industry forums 
 
●Supplier conferences 
 
●Public welfare programs and 
fund-raising platforms 
 
●Daily media communication 
 
●Social media communication 
 
●Consumer rights and 
satisfaction 
 
●Better quality products and 
services 
personal information security 
 
●Anti-corruption compliance 
 
●Protection of employee’s 
healthcare and rights
 
●Employee training and overall 
development
 
●Privacy protection and 
personal information security 
 
●Sustainable revenue and 
growth
 
●Board’s  participation in ESG 
management
 
●Digital technology innovation 
and new infrastructure 
development 
 
●Promoting high-quality 
employment 
 
●Rural revitalization and 
common prosperity 
 
●Creating a fair business 
environment
 
●Green packaging and resource 
recycling 
 
●Responsible procurement 
 
●Sustainable consumption 
 
●Rural revitalization and 
common prosperity 
 
●Social media 
communication 
 
●Consumer research 
 
●Employee service hotline, 
bigear@jd.com, the Group’s 
trade union, the Group’s 
audit channel, etc. 
 
●Daily reports and 
communication on 
sustainability and ESG 
related issues 
 
●Field investigation
 
●Cooperation agreements 
signing and strategic 
partnership establishment
 
●Responding to inquiries 
for listed companies from 
regulatory agencies
 
●Daily media communication 
 
●“Jing Dian” Academy, “Jing 
Mai” Platform
 
●CSR forums and activities 
 
●Volunteer activities 
Independence and diversity of Board of Directors
Moderate
High
High
Importance to stakeholders
A corporate culture of equality, inclusiveness and diversity
Green and responsible investment
Business inﬂuence and partner ecosystem construction
Protection of employee’s healthcare and rights
Boosting real economy and supporting SME growth
Strategic philanthropy 
and charity
Sustainable consumption
Intellectual property 
protection (IPP)
Supplier risk management; Creating a fair 
business environment
Anti-pandemic and disaster relief
Promoting high-quality employment
Rural revitalization and common prosperity
Deeply participating in “Dual  
Circulation”
Digital technology innovation and new-generation infrastructure development
Responding to climate change
Environmental and social risk identiﬁcation and management
Employee training and overall development
Information transparency and eﬃcient communication
Dissemination of healthcare science 
and inclusive healthcare
Improving energy eﬃciency
Board’s participation in ESG management
Sustainable revenues 
and growth
Better quality products and 
services
Industry digitalization and high-quality development
Anti-corruption compliance
Eﬃcient and intelligent 
supply chain
Privacy protection and personal 
information security
Consumer rights and satisfaction
Cyber data security
Doing business with integrity
Responsible procurement
Green packaging and resource recycling
Importance to JD.com’s strategies


2021 JD.com Environmental, Social and Governance Report
Leading the Sustainable Future as a New Type of Real Economy Enterprise
13
14
Leading the Sustainable Future as a New 
Type of Real Economy Enterprise
Part I


2021 JD.com Environmental, Social and Governance Report
Leading the Sustainable Future as a New Type of Real Economy Enterprise
15
16
……
……
JD.com: New Type Real Economy-
based Enterprise Panorama
Continuously unleashing the great growth potential of a real economy-based 
enterprise for high-quality growth
Digital upgrade of 
s
m
a
l
l
 
a
n
d medium-siz
e
d
 
s
t
o
r
es
Digital u
p
g
r
a
d
e
 
o
f
 
i
n
d
ustrial OEMs
Clients
Employees 
First party 
products
Tens of 
thousands of 
oﬄine stores
……
……
……
Attributes of real economy 
enterprises
+
Digital technology abilities
Rooted in the real economy
Growing up in the real economy
Serving the real economy
Self-operated 
logistics
 infrastructure
Data as of 
December 31, 2021
Hebi, Henan 
province
Joint promotion
Wuhan, Hubei 
province
Double engine to 
support Hubei 
province
Linzhi, 
Tibet
Xiuwen and 
Shibing, Guizhou 
province 
China 
Energy 
BAIC
Geely 
Auto 
Haima 
Motor
Linde 
Forklift
China 
Huadian  
ZOOMLION
Midea
Haier
Joyoung
ECOVACS 
Wuyi and Fuping, 
Hebei province
Hotan, 
Xinjiang
Suqian and 
Fengxian, Jiangsu 
province
Lishu, Jilin 
province
Kuandian and 
Benxi, Liaoning 
province
Hardware store
Convenience 
store
Drugstore
Nantong, Jiangsu 
province
Home textiles
Putian, Fujian 
province
Public brand 
building
Services targeted 
to specialized and 
innovative SMEs 
in Beijing
Xinji, Hebei 
province
Expanding 
domestic sales
Qingdao, 
Shandong province
Enterprise 
digitalization
Suzhou, Jiangsu 
province
City Service 
Festival
Anji, Zhejiang 
province
Developing the 
2B market
“
M
a
ntian
x
i
n
g
 P
r
o
j
e
c
t
”
 
to empower SM
E
s
Chenghai, 
Guangdong 
province
Toys
Shifang, Sichuan 
province
Bamboo pulp
Baigou, Hebei 
province
Bags and suitcases
Xuchang, Henan 
province
Wig 
Zhuji, Zhejiang 
province
Hosiery 
Jinjiang, Fujian 
province
Sneakers 
Auto repair shop
Flower shop
Community 
supermarket
Grocery Store
“Cost reduction 
and eﬃciency 
improvement”
 
for SMEs
Rural revit
a
l
i
za
t
i
o
n
 
“Benfu Plan”
 
“Digital brain”
 for large 
e
n
t
e
r
p
r
i
s
e
s
Unleash the Great Growth Potential with JD’s Identity as a Real 
Economy  Enterprise 
Compliance Governance to Achieve More Sustainable and Steady 
Development and Growth 
A real economy-based enterprise possesses the genes and 
advantages of traditional enterprises, as well as innovative 
digital technologies and rich industry insights. It continuously 
promotes the upgrade of the quality and eﬃciency of the 
real economy by building and opening its digital intelligent 
technology capabilities. Rooted and developed in the real 
economy, JD.com continues to open its digital technology 
capabilities and digital intelligent supply chain infrastructure 
to fully serve the development of the real economy, unleash 
Compliance management is the core initiative for JD.com to 
practice the philosophy of achieving success the right way. It is 
also an important foundation for JD.com to improve the level of 
risk management continuously. Our compliance management 
beneﬁts from eﬀective protection with three “defensive lines.” 
It relies on ﬁve key actions: laws and regulations compliance, 
the vitality of SMEs, support rural revitalization, promote 
sustainable and high-quality industrial development, 
and ultimately lead a sustainable future. By continuously 
strengthening ESG governance and managing social and 
environmental risks more systematically, JD.com will 
strengthen its positioning as a supply chain-based enterprise, 
constantly unleashing the great growth potential of a real 
economy-based enterprise and realize more steady growth and 
high-quality development. 
anti-corruption and integrity compliance, information security 
compliance, auditing compliance and transaction risk 
control. It ensures eﬀective compliance management through 
multiple mechanisms such as comprehensive publicity, joint 
accountability, and rewards.  
One Principle: Achieving Success the Right Way
Guided by the concept of “achieving success the right way” and adhering to the principle of “compliance represents 
development,” the Group complies with laws and regulations, builds a culture of integrity and anti-corruption, enables 
eﬀective compliance management driven by technology and data, and establishes a forward-looking, ﬂexible, and eﬃcient 
compliance system.   
Three Defensive Lines: All-Round Guarantee 
JD.com: New Type Real Economy Enterprise Panorama
Continuously unleashing the great growth potential of a real economy enterprise for high-quality growth
Every employee is familiar with and ﬁrmly implements JD.com’s 
compliance system and adheres to the bottom line of compliance 
by resisting undesirable temptations. 
The professional teams shall publicize and implement a good 
compliance culture, apply smart technology to all essential nodes 
of risk and compliance management, reduce corporate risks, and 
ensure long-term and stable development.
By following the compliance system and upholding to the principle 
of fairness, justice and independence, the supervision and audit 
team oversees the compliance practices of each organizational 
unit, investigates and combats corruption, and ensures operational 
compliance. 
Applicable to all employees
Applicable to risk 
management teams including 
legal, ﬁnance, information 
security and risk control
Applied to independent 
supervisory and audit team
The ﬁrst 
defensive line
The second 
defensive line
The third 
defensive line
Compliance Management System 
Employees 
Directly employing over 
300,000 logistics front-
line employees
Driving nearly 20 million 
new jobs 
First party 
products
Nearly 10 million 
retail SKUs
Clients
Serving about 570 million 
customers
Serving over 8 million 
business clients
 91% of Fortune Global 
500 enterprises
Self-operated logistics 
 
infrastructure
Over 1,300 warehouses
With an area of more than 24 million 
square meters
Same- and next-day delivery service 
available in 93%  
districts and counties, 
and 84% villages and towns 
Serving about 600,000  
administrative villages
Tens of thousands 
of  
oﬄine stores
SEVEN FRESH Supermarket, 
JD Home Appliance  
Store, JD 
Convenience Store, JD Auto 
Service,  
JD Industry Intelligent 
Retail Store, JD Pharmacy  
and 
other oﬄine stores 


2021 JD.com Environmental, Social and Governance Report
Leading the Sustainable Future as a New Type of Real Economy Enterprise
17
18
Laws and Regulations Compliance 
Anti-Corruption and Integrity Compliance 
JD.com is supervised by the public security organs at both national 
and local level, the Ministry of Industry and Information Technology of 
the People’s Republic of China (PRC), the Cyberspace Administration of 
China, the State Administration for Market Regulation of the PRC, China 
Consumers’ Association, the State Post Bureau of the PRC and so on. 
The Group has been rigorously complying with a series of Chinese laws 
and regulations, including Criminal Law of the PRC, Civil Code of the 
PRC, E-commerce Law, Cybersecurity Law, the Provisions on Ecological 
Governance of Network Information Content, Advertising Law, Product 
Quality Law, Food Safety Law, Law of the PRC on the Protection of the 
Rights and Interests of Consumers, Postal Law, Interim Regulation on 
Express Delivery, and more. Concurrently, in the process of developing 
international business, JD.com strictly adheres to local laws and 
regulations in the countries where it operates. Moreover, it establishes 
a legal compliance system abroad and gradually improves it with 
business expansion.  
JD.com always upholds the “zero tolerance” attitude towards corruption. It has established and constantly improved the anti-
corruption system to ensure it can eﬀectively prevent, monitor, and respond to corruption. Key measures are taken to build the anti-
corruption system, including the construction of a comprehensive anti-corruption policy system, well-established training system, 
publicity and education, accurate identiﬁcation and assessment of corruption risks, a strict whistle-blower protection and reward 
system, joint anti-corruption action with industry partners, optimization of international anti-corruption system, and so on.   
JD.com has established sound anti-corruption management regulations and systems, including the JD.com Business Conduct and 
Ethics Code, JD.com Anti-Corruption Regulations, JD.com Whistle-blower Protection and Reward System, JD.com Integrity Reward 
Policy, JD.com Active Filing Reward Policy (for Trial Implementation), JD.com Gifts Management Regulations, Vendor Paid Travel 
and Business Dinner Regulations, Anti-Commercial Bribery Agreement, etc., and has always practiced the concept of “compliance 
represents development” and the core corporate value of “integrity.”
To advocate for employees’ integrity and self-discipline and create a 
transparent and compliant workplace, JD.com has established a multi-
level and diversiﬁed training and publicity system and conducted 
anti-corruption training across the Group, covering 319,093
4 full-time 
employees, accounting for 98.8% of the total number of employees. 
New employees will have to complete the online anti-corruption 
training course and pass the examination before the probation’s 
completion. All employees are required to receive anti-corruption 
training and assessments every year, while director-level or above 
leaders should take anti-corruption special training. 
Five Perspectives
JD.com regards legal compliance as the basic requirement to achieve its business objectives, and 
strictly abides by relevant national laws, regulations, and rules.   
JD.com has always adhered to the “zero tolerance” attitude towards corruption and is determined 
to create an incorruptible and integrity business environment. 
JD.com attaches great importance to information security, ensures that employees have full access 
to the basic knowledge and principles of information security; establishes a sound responding 
process and disposal mechanism for system security, external attacks and violations; safeguards 
the conﬁdentiality of information and data of the enterprise, employees and customers, making 
sure the information and data could only be obtained and used when necessary. 
JD.com strictly complies with all legal requirements for a listed company. The management makes 
a written statement on the eﬀectiveness of internal control of ﬁnancial reporting in the annual 
report. 
All business units in JD.com shall always maintain a keen awareness of transaction risk 
management, regulate business activities, improve the business transaction system, and connect 
to JD’s risk control system to ensure accurate identiﬁcation and intelligent confrontation of 
business transaction risk behaviors.
Ensure the compliance policy is 
deeply rooted in the hearts of all 
employees through promotion 
and implementation. 
The system of “Accountability 
Basics and Control (ABC)
3” and 
collateral penalties are carried 
out in cases of major compliance 
issues.
Oﬀer rewards to employees 
who have performed well in 
compliance and those who have 
reported violations.
covered  
319,093  
full-time employees
accounted for  
98.8%  
of the total number of 
employees
4 
 The anti-corruption training data is based on the online check-in data of full-time employees except the ones who are in pre-dismission, maternity leave and long-
term leave as of April 2021.
3  
Based on the “ABC principle,” JD.com implements a two-level decision-making system in terms of ﬁnancial power and personnel power. In addition to the special 
provisions of multi-level approval, the general decision-making of managers should be resolved within two superior levels.
Comprehensive Anti-Corruption Policy System 
All-Round Training, Publicity, and Education 
Compliance Enforcement Mechanism 
The anti-corruption training 
Laws and regulations 
compliance
Anti-corruption and 
integrity compliance
Information security 
compliance
Auditing compliance
Transaction risk 
control
Full publicity and 
implementation
Joint 
accountability
Rewards


Leading the Sustainable Future as a New Type of Real Economy Enterprise
20
JD.com analyzes and categorizes business risks through case review, establishes early warning and communication mechanisms, and 
helps business departments take the initiative in prevention and internal control. 
In terms of internal anti-corruption, JD.com has set up a 
corruption reporting center to comprehensively collect all kinds 
of corruption cases in diﬀerent forms, while it guarantees the 
reporter and the reported information are strictly conﬁdential. 
The whistle-blower can contact JD’s corruption reporting 
center by calling 400-601-3618 or emailing jiancha@jd.com.
JD.com encourages insiders to report instances of corruption 
with their real names actively and describe them truthfully 
and objectively. If a corruption was conﬁrmed ﬁnally through 
investigation, the rewards will be provided to the whistle-
JD.com continues to build the Sunshine Integrity Alliance® 
(hereinafter referred to as “the Alliance”), and the Sunshine Integrity 
Member Platform has served more than 600 member enterprises. 
In 2021, the Alliance made great eﬀorts to facilitate the enterprise-
school-research institution cooperation model through various 
actions. It supported the ﬁrst “Integrity and Compliance Innovation 
Award for Private Enterprises” event held by the Anti-Corruption 
and Compliance Research Institute of Internet Enterprises of East 
China University of Political Science and Law. During the event, 18 
outstanding enterprises won awards for their innovation initiatives 
on integrity and compliance, demonstraing the best practices and 
eventually promoting the compliance culture of the industry. In 
addition, the Alliance published the book Anti-corruption Code for 
Internet Enterprises, which showcases innovative management 
practices collected from outstanding enterprises such as JD.com, 
Meituan.com, ByteDance and Xiaomi, to improve the level of 
JD.com is actively promoting international business compliance 
to secure the company’s international business strategy. In 2021, 
through establishing the international anti-corruption policy 
system, opening reporting channels and conducting anti-corruption 
training including Foreign Corruption Practices Act training and 
publicity, JD.com has built an anti-corruption and compliance 
regulation system for its international business, to ensure healthy 
and sustainable expansion in the international market. 
In 2022, JD.com will carry out anti-corruption, integrity and 
Information Security Compliance 
JD.com incorporates internet security and privacy protection into 
the company’s key development strategy. Data of consumers, 
suppliers, partners, employees, and other related entities 
are considered valuable assets. JD.com has established a 
comprehensive internet security and privacy protection system 
based on national laws, policies, and regulatory requirements, with 
reference to international standards and industry’s best practices, 
and subject to the company’s “zero-trust” security architecture. 
The system covers aspects of policy, management, technology, 
supervision and training, etc. In addition, JD.com works closely 
with ecological partners for a trustworthy security infrastructure to 
continuously tackle information security problems. 
compliance management and promote the compliance 
ecosystem of the industry. In the future, JD.com will continue to 
adhere to the business philosophy of “integrity management, 
achieving success the right way,” collaborate with industry 
and social partners with an open mind and continue working 
together to build an integrity ecosystem, and jointly construct a 
transparent business environment. 
compliance management for international business across 
multiple dimensions, such as organizational capabilities 
building, key issue investigation, anti-corruption and integrity 
culture promotion, etc. A well-established governance 
structure, regulation system, and management ﬂow will uplift 
organizational capabilities. An eﬀective deterrent for corruption 
will be achieved by cracking down on corruption cases in critical 
risk areas within key countries and regions. In the meantime, 
employees’ compliance awareness and corporate’s compliance 
culture will be enhanced and promoted through various forms. 
blower or the reporting unit. Especially for the whistle-blower, 
JD.com will oﬀer cash rewards ranging from RMB 5,000 to RMB 
10,000,000.
Accurate Identiﬁcation and Evaluation of Corruption Risks 
Join Hands with Industrial Stakeholders to Create an Integrity and Anti-Corruption Ecosystem 
Active Construction of the International Anti-Corruption System 
Strict Whistle-blower Protection and Reward System 
2021 JD.com Environmental, Social and Governance Report
19


2021 JD.com Environmental, Social and Governance Report
Leading the Sustainable Future as a New Type of Real Economy Enterprise
21
22
At the same time, JD.com has set up a data monitoring and 
auditing mechanism to ensure comprehensive control over 
data security. Internally, JD.com has formulated the Basic 
Security Requirements and Guidelines for JD’s Business and 
Data Openness, stipulating that all businesses involved in 
data opening and the data security capabilities of partners are 
subject to the evaluation by JD.com Information Security Team. 
Furthermore, JD.com assesses cross-border data ﬂow with 
reference to relative national laws, policies, and regulations, 
and conducts the security control for cross-border data ﬂow in 
JD.com highly values the enhancement of the data security and privacy protection and keeps improving the system and measures 
with reference to Data Security Law, Personal Information Protection Law, and other related laws and regulations. JD.com’s “zero-
trust” security system covers data security, application security, oﬃce network security, privacy protection and other security 
domains, containing more than 40 information security and privacy protection regulations such as Information Security and Privacy 
Management Code, Data Security Management Norms, Data Classiﬁcation and Grading Management Norms and User’s Personal 
Information Security Management Norms, and has been gradually implemented, optimized and upgraded by complying with the PDCA 
model
5. In addition, JD.com built a privacy evaluation mechanism for business conduction and R&D testing, making sure all activities 
involving users’ privacy are subject to privacy impact assessment and regular audit. 
strict accordance with JD.com Security Management Standards 
for Cross-border Data Flow Protection. 
JD.com has built a “zero-trust” security system that adapts to all 
asset types of identities, applications, data, and devices. With 
the system’s equipment, JD.com has signiﬁcantly advanced 
its security research capabilities. In 2021, JD.com detected the 
“Mystique” and other high-risk vulnerabilities that aﬀect the 
security of 800 million Android users worldwide, which highly 
demonstrates its social responsibility practice of protecting 
network security and privacy. 
In terms of system design, JD.com refers to ISO27001, ISO27701, 
GB/T 35273 Information Security Technology - Personal 
Information Security Speciﬁcations, Network Security Law, 
Personal Information Protection Law, Data Security Law and 
other domestic laws, regulations and standards, and employs 
external experts and lawyers to provide professional support and 
guidance. Internally, JD.com has formulated more than 60 internal 
system requirements covering all business lines and suppliers in 
security management, privacy protection, and data security, and 
will continue to strengthen related work. 
In terms of supervision and management, JD.com has established 
the Safety and Risk Control Committee as the company’s highest 
information security and privacy protection management body, 
with the Chief Compliance Oﬃcer as its chairman. The Chief 
Compliance Oﬃcer and technology vice presidents from sub-
groups and business lines are the representative members to 
jointly make decisions on the strategic planning of information 
security and privacy. The Committee obtains a multi-level 
structure that consists of a Safety and Privacy Management task 
force and a Safety Enforcement task force. It leads the overall 
supervision, coordination, and standardization of information 
security and privacy-related work. The Safety and Privacy 
Management task force is responsible for the supervision, 
coordination and implementation of resolutions made by the 
Committee, while the Safety Enforcement task force implements 
risk and vulnerability rectiﬁcation, promotes security, privacy and 
risk control programs, conducts compliance rectiﬁcation against 
regulatory requirements, and follows up daily work such as work 
orders related with information security. 
To support and guarantee the implementation of information 
security compliance, JD.com has formulated relevant rules 
and regulation system for information security management 
and personal information protection and incorporated the 
implementation and fulﬁlment of the rules as important 
assessment criteria for management and key position 
employees. The information security department and legal 
compliance department are responsible for supervision and 
management of the company’s data security and personal 
information protection, and all internal employees are required 
to take information security related training courses. 
ISO27001 Information Security Management 
ISO27701 Privacy Information Management 
System 
“Trusted Cloud” Level-3 Certiﬁcation issued by 
Data Center Alliance 
Level-3 Certiﬁcation of Security Level 
Protection approved and issued by the 
Ministry of Public Security 
Level-3 Certiﬁcation of DSMM (Data Security 
Maturity Model) awarded to JD Technology
External Recognition of Data Security and 
Personal Information Protection: 
Leading Practice
5 PDCA: Plan, Do, Check and Act.


2021 JD.com Environmental, Social and Governance Report
23
Competition Compliance 
Continuously strengthening the governance ability of 
the platform and formulating a series of governance 
rules concerning competition compliance based on 
national laws and regulations. 
Setting up professional competition compliance teams 
and conducting daily inspections. 
Developing and applying a multi-technology system 
and proceeding with diversiﬁed and tiered governance. 
Carrying out special governance for competition 
compliance in key ﬁelds. 
Formulating competition compliance manuals and related 
learning materials. 
Carrying out all-round and diversiﬁed promotion and 
training on competition compliance. 
Cooperating with external experts and lawyers to support 
competition compliance. 
Conducting comprehensive compliance supervision and 
management for the Company’s business activities under 
the leadership of the compliance department.
JD.com strictly abides by the Anti-Monopoly Law of the PRC and Anti-Unfair Competition Law of the PRC and related regulations, and 
takes speciﬁc measures that include but are not limited to the below to maintain competition compliance: 
The Group has an audit department as the independent internal audit institution to supervise and 
evaluate the establishment and implementation of the internal control system of the Group and its 
subsidiary companies. The Group’s audit department head reports to the Chief Compliance Oﬃcer (CCO) 
for administration-related works, and the audit committee for internal control compliance. 
Audit department convenes a meeting at least once every six months to report work progress and results 
to the CCO and the Audit Committee. 
The internal audit provides independent and objective evaluation and consultation for management. This can add 
value and optimize the operation of the organization. By applying systematic and standardized methods, the audit 
evaluates and improves the eﬀectiveness of risk management, control, and governance processes. As a result, it helps 
the organization boost the eﬀectiveness of internal control, authenticity and integrity of ﬁnancial information, eﬃciency 
and eﬀectiveness of business activities, and other goals. 
Audit Compliance 
Transaction Risk Control 
All business units in JD.com shall always maintain a keen sense of transaction risk management, standardize business activity rules, 
and improve the business transaction system. They will strictly control the transactions that aﬀect user experience or violate platform 
policies. This is to ensure the legitimate rights and interests of both parties of a transaction and eﬀectively prevent and control risks. 
JD.com Security and Risk Control Committee has a risk control working group, composed of risk control heads from each system. It 
comprehensively controls the transaction risks of the whole group, maintains the frequency of monthly communication on decision-
making, and further communicates and makes decisions based on industry policy interpretation, risk trend research and judgment, 
risk-related public opinion across sub-groups, etc. 
Internal Audit and Control System 
Measures and Eﬀectiveness 
Reporting 
frequency
Reporting 
mechanism
JD Social Value Proposition Demonstrated as a New Type of Real 
Economy Enterprise
Leading the 
sustainable future 
as a new type 
of real economy 
enterprise
JD.com takes merchandises and services as the fundamental, relies on technology innovation, 
and leverages its strong supply chain, digital technology, and marketing abilities to satisfy 
consumers’ diversiﬁed needs at any time and pursuing for the ultimate experience, and 
continues to lead good consumption. 
As a technology and service enterprise with supply chain at the core, 
JD.com continuously promotes technology innovation and connects 
with industrial scenarios, eﬀectively driving the digital, intelligent, low-
carbon transformation of the upstream and downstream partners 
throughout the industrial chain. The company will continue to help the 
real economy improve the quality, decrease the cost, and increase the 
eﬃciency.
JD.com is committed to performing as an “employment stabilizer” and 
providing an ideal career development platform for every employee. 
JD will continuously promote ESG as a common belief and day-to-day 
code of conduct within the company.
JD.com will leverage its supply chain ability and inﬂuence of the 
industrial chain and actively respond to environmental challenges to 
continuously drive forward the green transformation of supply chain 
while empowering green consumption. JD hopes to contribute to fulﬁll 
the nation’s carbon peak and carbon neutrality goals and achieve its 
own green development.
JD.com supports rural revitalization through its “Benfu Plan” and empowers SMEs with digital 
technology. By conducting various corporate philanthropy programs, we facilitate the two-way 
ﬂow of resource elements between urban and rural areas, leading more people to pursue a 
better life while promoting an inclusive society. 
Promoting Good Consumption 
Boosting High-quality Development 
Cultivating Talents
Safeguarding the natural environment 
Promoting Inclusive Development of the Society
Leading the Sustainable Future as a New Type of Real Economy Enterprise
24


2021 JD.com Environmental, Social and Governance Report
Promoting Good Consumption
25
26
Promoting Good Consumption 
Part II
JD.com takes merchandises and services as fundamental. It relies on 
technology innovation, leverages its strong supply chain, digital technology, 
and marketing abilities to satisfy consumers’ diversiﬁed needs at any time and 
pursuing for the ultimate experience, and continues to lead good consumption. 


2021 JD.com Environmental, Social and Governance Report
Promoting Good Consumption
27
28
All-Round Product Quality and Safety Guarantee 
To better protect consumers’ interests, JD.com initiated the “1234 Program,” that is, sticking to one direction of “constructing the 
digital quality ecosystem,” carrying out two major actions of “building the product quality ecosystem,” and “building the all-chain 
quality control capability;” establishing three capabilities including “big data quality control,” “merchant quality improvement,” and 
“quality control systematization;” and implementing four initiatives including “merchant entry auditing,” “diagnosis assistance,” “daily 
supervision” and “reward and punishment mechanism,” thus to improve the whole-cycle quality control measures covering merchant 
entry, incubation, management and elimination. 
Product Responsibility and Content Management 
To assure the product quality sold on the platform and guarantee consumers’ safety, JD.com has established a quality management 
mechanism with the measures below: 
Strictly Forbidden to Sell Unqualiﬁed Products 
Rules Guarantee 
Qualiﬁcation audit system 
Dynamic veriﬁcation of 
qualiﬁcation validity 
Unannounced on-site 
inspection 
Transparent transmission 
of business rights and 
interests 
Positive and negative 
evaluation analysis 
Quality issues diagnosis 
Quality-related public 
opinion monitoring 
Mysterious sampling and 
experiencing sampling 
Merchant training and 
assessment 
Merchandise listing and 
removing
Merchant credit 
management rules 
Periodic evaluation
Integration and 
co-development 
with brands and 
merchants
High-quality 
standards 
development
Quality-based 
selection
Traﬃc support 
Warehousing 
inbound check 
and acceptance
Warehouse 
inspection
Unannounced 
audit
Building merchandise quality ecosystem 
Building all-chain quality control capability 
One 
direction 
Two major 
actions 
Three 
capabilities 
 
Four 
initiatives 
Constructing digital quality ecosystem 
Whole-cycle quality control measures  
Merchant entry audit 
Diagnostic assistance 
Day-to-day supervision 
Reward and punishment 
mechanism 
Quality control big data 
capability
Merchant quality 
improvement capability
Quality control 
systematization capability
Entry  
Incubation  
Management  
Elimination  
JD.com’s Quality Ecosystem
First, establish the “Basic Qualiﬁcation Standard for JD.com Marketplace Merchant Entry” and “Qualiﬁcation 
Management Rules for JD.com Retail Business Suppliers,” which reﬁne the entry qualiﬁcation standards for 
diﬀerent categories, and establish diﬀerent requirements for merchant and brand qualiﬁcation for diﬀerent 
categories. 
Second, issue the “JD.com Marketplace Merchant Violation Credit Management Rules” and the “JD.com 
Supplier Violation Management Rules,” which deﬁne the behaviors of selling counterfeits or unqualiﬁed 
products and set the punishment. According to the rules, related products will be removed from the platform. 
In addition, the merchant or supplier will receive a deduction of credits or have their stores closed. 
Third, set the “General Principles of JD.com Marketplace Product Quality Inspection Sampling” and the 
“General Principles of JD.com Retail Business Supplier Product Quality Inspection Sampling,” and formulate 
the quality inspection speciﬁcation for sub-categories according to national and industry standards, which 
describe and explain the inspected items. In addition, issue the “JD.com Marketplace Product Labeling 
Sampling Rules” and “JD.com Retail Business Supplier Product Labeling Sampling Rules” to conduct special 
sampling inspections for the commercial marks on the products and the packaging. 
Fourth, issue the “JD.com Marketplace Forbidden Product and Information Rules” and “JD.com Marketplace 
Product Shelf-Life Rules” to make institutional requirements for the products that have been explicitly 
eliminated or stopped selling, and have expired or deteriorated. The synergy with regulatory authorities has 
been built to eﬀectively intercept and remove unqualiﬁed products by continuously updating the product 
list and keyword screening. Meanwhile, the inbound warehousing standard has been established to conduct 
sampling inspections on package labels and logos. Moreover, on-shelf time will be limited for products with 
expiration dates. 
Fifth, issue the “JD Retail Counterfeit Accountability Rules” to reiterate the company’s policy of “zero 
tolerance” towards counterfeits. The employees involved, their direct and indirect leaders will be brought to 
account.


2021 JD.com Environmental, Social and Governance Report
Promoting Good Consumption
29
30
JD.com carries out full-cycle quality control management. 
Before merchants enter the platform, JD.com conducts strict 
reviews of their qualiﬁcations, including product qualiﬁcations, 
brand qualiﬁcations, certiﬁcation of authorization, etc., 
and makes an environmental investigation for production. 
JD.com has established multiple quality guarantees during 
the sales process through inbound warehousing inspections, 
unannounced audit, and random sampling inspection.
Management Measures 
Intellectual Property Protection 
JD.com attaches great importance to intellectual property 
protection. As a leading supply chain-based technology and 
service provider in China, JD.com is constantly exploring IPR 
protection in the e-commerce business. JD is making eﬀorts 
to ensure genuine licensed products, purifying the business 
environment, and safeguarding the legitimate rights and 
interests of IPR holders by adopting comprehensive measures 
covering all critical control processes including before, during, 
and after issues. JD.com is more focused on reinforcing front-
end control. 
Taking the example of merchants labeling improper or 
fake patents, JD has built an internal algorithm model and 
connected it with an external patent database to use systematic 
interception to prevent and control such behaviors. This is to 
reduce the misleading of and potential damage to consumers 
caused by fake patent numbers, expired patents and improper 
labeling, with a recognition accuracy as high as 94%.
During the Beijing 2022 Winter Olympics and Winter 
Paralympics, JD.com paid great attention to IPR protection 
for Olympic-related goods. JD.com devoted a special team to 
preventing and managing risks beforehand and established 
a green channel for complaints handling. This was in close 
collaboration with the Beijing Winter Olympic Organizing 
Committee. 
Simultaneously, JD.com’s intellectual property protection 
platform enables the comprehensive protection of users’ 
privacy and enhancement of users’ experiences, and greatly 
facilitates the registration and use of accounts for international 
rights holders. 
With respect to the Group’s own IPR, JD’s technological 
innovation achievements, brands, commercial logos, soft 
works, domain names, and other intellectual property assets 
are fully protected in a timely manner through eﬀective 
business collaboration and active follow-ups. A series of 
In 2021, more than 460  
internal training sessions on intellectual 
property were organized
Nearly 10,000 trainees in total 
participated in the training
Regarding fresh food quality management, JD.com has set up a 
series of proprietary sensory standards for fresh goods. Taking 
hairy crab quality control standards as an example, JD.com 
cooperated with Suqian Agriculture and Rural Bureau to build 
Suqian Bawang crab brand. By deepening the cooperation with 
upstream, midstream, and downstream players alongside the 
industrial chain, JD.com has jointly established commodity 
standards for the hairy crab, built collaborative warehouses for 
cold-chain products, created well-known regional brands and 
enabled omnichannel sales. 
targeted internal and external management measures are 
taken to ensure a clear workﬂow, clear measures, and eﬃcient 
implementation of various intellectual property management 
processes, and further improve the management structure and 
work details by implementing and certifying the enterprise 
intellectual property management system. 
JD.com actively encourages employees to apply for patents 
and protect R&D innovation, and incorporates the incentives 
for innovation into the daily work, including incentive 
rules, event promotion and publicity, talent evaluation, etc. 
Meanwhile, the Group constantly strengthens employees’ 
awareness of intellectual property protection through internal 
communication and training programs. In 2021, more than 
460 internal training sessions on intellectual property were 
organized, covering nearly 10,000 trainees accumulatively.  


2021 JD.com Environmental, Social and Governance Report
Promoting Good Consumption
31
32
Content Speciﬁcation and Management of Marketing 
JD.com highly values the safety control of advertising content, formulating the JD.com Advertising Audit Rules in accordance with the 
Advertising Law and other laws and regulations, allocating a professional risk control and audit team to improve the risk control ability 
of the platform continuously. 
JD.com has continuously improved the rules of advertising content security and gradually built the risk control path for 
advertising content standardization and compliance management. By continuously optimizing and perfecting the algorithm 
and manual auditing mechanism, setting prohibited categories and adding the interception of sensitive words, the Group can 
eﬀectively screen the non-compliant advertisements and intelligently classify and control all types of advertisements. In addition, 
JD.com has formulated rules and penalties for violations to strengthen the management of advertisers; established an inspection 
mechanism and conducted high-frequency investigations on advertisements to eliminate illegal advertisements in a timely 
manner. As a result, in 2021, JD.com intercepted over 16 million illegal advertisements. The Group makes full eﬀorts to ensure 
that advertising content is compliant and legal and keeps in line with public order, good customs, and mainstream values. 
JD.com has established a knowledge base of advertising content security, constructed its communication matrix, rolled out 
online learning channels on Jing Dian Academy and Jing Mai Platform, and conducted trainings through various forms such 
as live streams, videos, cartoons, and articles to help advertisers understand the Advertising Law and other related laws 
and regulations, and raised their awareness concerning advertising risks. In 2021, JD.com organized 59 training sessions 
on advertising rules and content security for advertisers in combination with market supervision requirements; released 87 
professional learning articles on the advertising auditing standards and guidelines, which are accessible to about 190,000 
advertisers. These practices have improved advertisers’ risk awareness and advertising eﬃciency, resulting in an increase of 
advertisement approval rates.
JD.com values advertisers’ experience, keeps tracking advertisers’ demands and feedback on advertising audit services through 
regular research and surveys, and evaluates the eﬀectiveness of advertising audit services from the perspective of advertisers’ 
demands, to improve the quality of the services. 
Continuous Commitment to the Superior Consumer Experience 
JD.com is committed to bringing superior shopping 
experiences to users.  In diﬀerent consumption 
scenarios and on diﬀerent ends, JD oﬀers users their 
desired products and services at the right time and 
place with its powerful supply chain infrastructure, data, 
technology, and marketing capabilities. By the end of 
2021, the number of active users on JD.com increased 
to 569 million. That is a net increase of 98 million when 
compared to the same period last year, stemming 
from competitively priced goods of super quality and 
considerate services. 
In 2021, by introducing more than 370 supermarkets 
such as Wal-Mart and Yonghui Supermarket, JD.com 
covered over 34,000 oﬄine stores and provided 
over 3 million SKUs in all categories. These include 
computer and digital products, mobile phones, home 
appliances, consumer goods, fashion, home furnishing 
products, fresh food, livelihood services, and industrial 
products. Thus, JD provides consumers with a wide 
variety of high-quality choices and intelligent services 
to institutional customers, including governments, 
enterprises, and institutions. 
Consumer Rights and Service Management 
JD.com always adheres to the original intention of “customer ﬁrst” to provide consumers with considerate and privileged services. 
JD.com fully implements a “customer-oriented” strategy to form a complete and closed-loop from customer insight to problem 
identiﬁcation, optimization and improvements in customer experience. 
Experience of Excellence  
All Categories for All Multitude 
In 2021, by introducing more than 
370 supermarkets such as  
Wal-Mart and Yonghui Supermarket, 
JD.com covered over 34,000 
oﬄine stores, provided over  
3 million SKUs in all categories
The number of active users 
on JD.com increased to 
569 million
Net increase of  
98 million in terms 
of active users compared to 
the same period last year
Advertising Content Governance 
Advertiser Compliance Training 
Advertiser Audit Service 


2021 JD.com Environmental, Social and Governance Report
Promoting Good Consumption
33
34
To provide consumers with privileged services from JD.com at 
the fastest speed, JD Logistics constantly upgrades the service 
eﬃciency. Over the past year, JD.com has invested more than 
RMB 35 billion in the domain of services. By the end of 2021, JD 
Logistics operated over 1,300 warehouses nationwide, running 
43 “Asia No.1” large-scale smart warehouses in 33 cities, 
covering an area of 24 million square meters. On the basis of 
nearly 10 million SKUs of self-operated commodities, JD.com 
has always been a global leader in operational eﬃciency. Since 
the end of the 2020 Q3, JD.com had opened approximately 
500 warehouses and 13 “Asia No.1” smart industrial parks 
nationwide in one year. Through the use of a variety of 
automation equipment, the comprehensive eﬃciency of the 
newly open “Asia No.1” has been improved by over four times, 
Fast Delivery 
helping JD.com realize classiﬁed and customized distribution 
services, including same- and next-day delivery, night delivery, 
ﬂash delivery, scheduled delivery, luxury express, and the 
cold chain delivery with temperature control over the whole 
process, and customized delivery. In 2021, consumers in more 
than 300 cities across the country were able to experience the 
fastest minute-level delivery experience, and JD.com’s one-
hour delivery service, “Nearby,” was launched on the JD app, 
which has covered nearly 400 cities so far. Through ten years of 
logistics infrastructure construction, JD.com has signiﬁcantly 
improved the distribution eﬃciency in remote regions. At 
present, JD.com enables consumers in 93% of districts and 
counties, and 84% villages and towns in China to enjoy same- 
and next-day delivery service. 
Adhering to the development vision of “becoming the most 
trustworthy international supply chain service provider,” JD 
Worldwide (JDW) is committed to introducing JD quality 
goods to the vast global market. While bringing high-quality 
goods to global consumers, JD Global Sales has also become 
a solid backup force for Chinese vogue brands to go overseas. 
JD.ID, JD’s joint venture in Indonesia and JD Central, JD’s joint 
venture in Thailand, also uphold the development concept of 
“genuine licensed goods,” providing a fast, high-quality, and 
delightful shopping experience to local consumers in Southeast 
Asia. In January 2022, JD.com landed an independent retail 
brand in Europe for the ﬁrst time - ochama, with the new model 
of “super warehouse stores,” marking the ﬁrst retailer in the 
Netherlands that oﬀers online shopping covering all product 
categories. On the one hand, ochama has selected many 
Selling to the World and Sourcing from the World
brand products covering fresh food, household appliances, 
beauty products, baby and maternal products, fashion, home 
furnishing, etc.; on the other hand, ochama brings forward its 
automated stocking warehouse to the store by deploying the 
mechanical arm, AGV automatic handling robot, and feed box 
conveying system. All online shopping orders were handled 
by robots in terms of goods storage, sorting and transferred 
in stores. The consumers entering the store can witness and 
experience the future vision of automatic shopping in person. 
Besides, JD Worldwide has also reached a strategic partnership 
with Shopify and will give full play to their respective 
advantages and capabilities in supply chain infrastructure and 
digital technology to jointly create a more convenient and 
reliable cross-border e-commerce channel for Chinese and 
overseas merchants. 
JD.com has invested more than RMB  
35 billion in the domain of services
JD Logistics operated over 1,300 
warehouses nationwide
The warehouse area managed by JD 
Logistics exceeded 24 million 
square meters accumulatively
JD.com dealt with nearly  
10 million SKUs of self-operated commodities
Since the end of the 2020 Q3, JD.com 
had opened approximately 500 
warehouses in one year
Consumers in more than 300 cities across 
the country were able to experience the fastest 
minute-level delivery experience


2021 JD.com Environmental, Social and Governance Report
Promoting Good Consumption
35
36
JD.com applies smart technology to improve customer service experience. With the rapid development of AI technologies, JD.com 
has formed an intelligent customer service matrix including “Intelligent Emotional Customer Service,” “Merchant Customer Service 
XiaoZhi,” “AI Shopping Guide Assistant,” “Intelligent Dispatch,” “Intelligent Assist,” and “Intelligent Management.” JD.com integrated 
its best customer service and marketing practices over the years and all-chain AI innovation capabilities to create the platform-based 
digital intelligent HMI product, “YanXi.” “YanXi” focuses on experience, eﬃciency and transformation from text and voice to multimodal 
interaction, and from conversational intelligence to emotional intelligence. 
To further meet the diversiﬁed needs of customers, JD.com 
developed a new model of C2M (Customer-to-Manufacturer) 
“reverse customization,” which combines quality-improving 
and the upgrading of consumption on the consumer side with 
the digital transformation of manufacturers on the supply 
side. The model can not only accurately satisfy the diversiﬁed, 
personalized, and quality-centered needs of consumers and 
enhance the consumers’ experience, but also facilitate the 
manufacturing enterprises’ access to new technology and 
more open digital intelligent supply chain system to help them 
accelerate digital transformation.   
JD.com considers users’ voices, continuously carries out the 
surveys among users, and fully implements a “customer-
centered” experience strategy. In 2021, more than 3,000 JD 
Retail senior managers listened to users’ feedback on site. They 
helped solve 167 pain points and optimized more than 200 
items relating to users’ experiences.
Smarter Shopping 
Start C2M Thru to the End 
Adhere to the Motto of Customer First, “Live 
Up to the Love” 
In addition, many innovative customer service management 
programs have been carried out under JD’s private label 
brands over 2021, which helped realize the closed-loop 
integrated services from service delivery to customer needs 
fulﬁlment. Among them, the tool “Operation Analysis Compass” 
can analyze and study the market, brands, categories, users, 
products, consumption trends, etc. It provides strong data 
support for product managers, who can then make accurate 
and eﬃcient decisions based on product lifecycle assessments 
from the product positioning, operation, supply chain and 
users’ experiences, and obtain the rapid business growth. 
In addition, during the development of products, consumer 
experience programs such as “Tasting Experience Oﬃcer,” 
“Community Questionnaire Survey,” and “Oﬄine Test of New 
Products” were rolled out to collect consumers’ feedback. 
And the iterative products were continuously developed and 
optimized according to users’ evaluations after purchase to 
keep reﬁning the customer experience. 
JD.com is also committed to promoting the service level of 
the whole industry. In 2021, JD Retail actively participated in 
the opinion collection and compilation of the rules for after-
sales service certiﬁcation initiated by the State Administration 
for Market Regulation. JD Retail fully cooperated with the 
certiﬁcation institutions designated by the State Administration 
for Market Regulation to sort out relevant standards. JD.com 
itself has successfully obtained the certiﬁcation, becoming the 
ﬁrst batch of certiﬁed enterprises. 
JD.com has continuously launched various services to meet the 
needs of diﬀerent user groups. For example, focusing on the 
community consumption scenario, JD.com relies on millions of 
community-based stores, and builds multi-scenario and multi-
template consumption channels for users, e.g., “in-store,” “at-
home,” pre-selling, and self-pickup, so consumers can truly 
enjoy a convenient shopping experience in real-time and on-
demand. 


2021 JD.com Environmental, Social and Governance Report
Promoting Good Consumption
37
38
Special service line for the seniors: in 2021, JD.com launched a special service line for the seniors, staﬀed with 
excellent customer service agents to provide millions of consultations for the seniors throughout the year. 
JD.com App  Senior Edition: JD.com App has launched “Senior Mode,” which simpliﬁes the information and 
enlarges font size, making it easy to read and use. With system updating, more and more users enjoy the easy-
to-use switch with just one touch. We provide more secured, aﬀordable, convenient, and diversiﬁed services and 
create a more favorable shopping experience for the seniors.
JD.com-ZTE collaborates to innovate the smartphone for the seniors: JD.com and ZTE cooperate deeply to 
jointly develop a caring mobile phone for the seniors, the 5G “time machine” Blade V2021, which is dedicated to 
solving the pain points of the seniors in using smartphones, designing smartphones with more considerations, and 
helping seniors enjoy the more convenient life brought by technological innovation. 
JD.com’s “Care-for-the-Seniors Shopping Festival,” namely “Nuanyang Action”: JD.com fully integrates 
retail, logistics, health, and technology service businesses. By relying on the advantages of supply chain and digital 
technology capabilities. JD.com works with government departments, social organizations, and partners to create 
a new standard covering whole-scenario and one-stop care scheme for the seniors. JD.com continuously upgrades 
its multi-functional commodities and strengthens service capabilities for the seniors, enabling their consumption 
needs covering household, healthcare, online and oﬄine, mental health and fashionable lifestyle, etc., thus helping 
them overcome the digital divide, embrace fulﬁlled lives, and joyfully live at home without worrying about medical 
care and provisions.
JD.com has launched several products and measures to help the seniors overcome the “digital 
divide” and experience the more convenient life brought by technological innovation. 
Respond to Complaints, Enquiries and Requests 
Customer Privacy and Data Security 
In 2021, JD.com deﬁned and improved the overall data application mechanism and process, classiﬁed and managed data assets in 
terms of the level of sensitivity. The highly sensitive data were encrypted to avoid potential data security risks. In the future, JD.com will 
continue to carry out regular information security rectiﬁcation according to the Group’s rules, and further safeguard customer privacy 
as well as data information security. 
JD.com has set up the customer service teams with 15,000 service employees in Suqian, Chengdu, 
and Yangzhou, which provide comprehensive customer services on request consulting, dispute 
settlement and complaint handling services to customers through online communication, 
telephone, and mail. 
In response to complaints, JD.com ensures a timely response and eﬃcient handling through 
“front-end control” and the establishment of a “green channel.” In terms of the “front-end control,” 
preliminary research and potential risks evaluations are carried out to prevent risks from occurring. 
When it comes to the “green channel” process, JD.com strengthens the trainings for customer service 
personnel while strengthening the necessary investment, to improve problem-solving eﬃciency. 
With such a mechanism in place, 100% of customer complaints were promptly tackled and settled. 
Eﬃcient Customer Service Team 
Complete Complaint Handling Process 


2021 JD.com Environmental, Social and Governance Report
Promoting High-quality Development
39
40
Promoting High-quality Development 
Part III
JD.com exerts its growth momentum as a new type of real economy enterprise, and 
continuously promotes technology innovation and connects with industrial scenarios. JD 
eﬀectively drives the digital, intelligent, and low-carbon transformation of the upstream 
and downstream partners throughout the industrial chain, and will help the real economy 
improve the quality, decrease the cost, and increase the eﬃciency.


2021 JD.com Environmental, Social and Governance Report
Promoting High-quality Development
41
42
Supplier Management 
Supplier Admittance and Compliance Management 
Identiﬁcation and Management of Environmental and Social Risks of Suppliers 
JD.com establishes a rational and eﬀective supplier management 
mechanism and manages the suppliers through its specialized 
procurement and expenditure department. All the supplier 
candidates must complete a registration for the “JD.com Supplier 
Collaboration Platform on Recruitment and Procurement.” 
Following the screening process covering initial contact, 
inspection, sample testing, and on-site investigation, only 
suppliers who meet the requirements are selected for the long 
list or short list of the project. We also set speciﬁc screening 
requirements and shortlist qualiﬁcations for suppliers bidding for 
each category and project. Only those who pass a comprehensive 
evaluation can be incorporated into procurement operations. 
In accordance with suppliers’ qualiﬁcations and service delivery 
capacity, and incorporating with JD’s business perspective, 
strategic goals as well as past cooperative experiences with 
certain suppliers, JD manages its suppliers by categories and 
grades. At the same time, JD.com continues to follow up the 
whole process of suppliers’ contracts fulﬁllment, tracks and 
quickly solves relevant risks raised from the demand issuing 
departments, strictly conducts a quarterly assessment of 
suppliers, and implements rewards and punishments accordingly. 
JD.com adheres to the concept of mutually beneﬁcial cooperation 
and integrity management, which always insists on placing the 
interests of clients, business partners, and employees in a priority 
position. “Achieving success the right way” is the long-standing 
business philosophy that we consistently uphold, and we are 
Throughout the process of supplier screening, review, and 
management, JD.com fully considers environmental, social, 
and governance factors and formulates speciﬁc standards 
and restrictions based on diﬀerent types of suppliers. For 
example, for production-based suppliers, especially those 
who have a substantial environmental impact, must have the 
dedicated to creating a transparent business environment with 
our partners. JD’s Procurement and Expenditure Department 
resolutely resists any forms of bribery and corruption. Within 
one year from the date of resignation, JD.com shall cease any 
business dealings with personnel that have resigned from the 
procurement and expenditure department. We encourage our 
business partners to actively report instances of corruption to 
JD.com’s supervisory department upon discovering any act of 
misconduct among our employees. After investigation, if the 
reported cases are veriﬁed, the whistleblower will be rewarded 
according to the JD.com Whistleblower Protection and Reward 
Scheme. 
JD’s Procurement and Expenditure Department requires 
all business partners, including suppliers, to sign the Anti-
Commercial Bribery Agreement. We inform our business partners 
of the integrity policy by issuing holiday integrity announcements, 
organizing regular anti-corruption compliance information 
sessions, and other forms of measures. JD forbids its business 
partners to provide local specialties, cash-ﬁlled red envelopes, 
and other types of gifts to our employees. We also prohibit our 
business partners from entertaining or oﬀering other kinds of 
illegitimate gifts to our employees. Whether our employees 
accept or not, the involved business partner will permanently 
lose the cooperation opportunity with JD.com. We will deal with 
the dishonest business partner according to the Anti-Commercial 
Bribery Agreement. We will also disclose the dishonest 
information on the Sunshine Integrity Alliance platform. 
Bidding and Procurement Business Management Rules, Tripartite Performance Appraisal Procedure, Supplier Quality Exceptional 
Handling Procedure, Supplier Agreement Honoring Feedback and Handling Process 
authorized environmental impact assessment certiﬁcate and 
other licensing documents during the screening process. When 
it comes to the rights and interests of labors and employees, 
especially the safety related issues, suppliers need to take 
appropriate measures to guarantee the occupational health of 
their employees. 
Since 2020, JD has formulated green procurement management to ensure the eﬀectiveness of JD Logistics 
procurement practices, and consistently conducts the Green Stream Initiative by incorporating the concept of 
environmental protection and green operation.
1
In the bidding and pricing process, suppliers’ contribution to environmental protection can be served as a 
bonus. Meanwhile, the penalties for violations of green management rules are clariﬁed in the contract terms. 
Concerning the supplier performance evaluation, the corresponding environmental assessment clauses are 
added regarding green procurement categories. Suppliers are subject to our supervision in environmental 
protection, resource conservation, corporate social responsibility, and sustainability. 
2
3
JD.com strictly declares that it is forbidden for our cooperating suppliers to engage in illegal employment, 
violate labor laws, and engage in other illicit behaviors. Based on the circumstances, the suppliers will be listed 
as entities with whom JD.com shall never cooperate.
JD formulated a negative list mechanism for green procurement suppliers. For suppliers shortlisted in the green 
procurement resource system, JD shall suspend or terminate the procurement contracts if any circumstances 
deﬁned in the negative list or other environmental problems have occurred. If the Group incurred any loss 
because suppliers deliberately concealed their violation of environmental laws and regulations, JD has the 
right to protect its own interests in accordance with relevant laws and regulations. 
4
5
JD organizes suppliers to participate in the SBTi training so that they can have a better understanding of carbon 
neutrality-related knowledge. JD also conducts carbon emission data collection and model construction to 
monitor the suppliers’ progress in achieving carbon emission control goals. 
6
JD reduces its cost of disposable plastic packaging by adopting various means of leasing, purchasing, and using 
recyclable packing boxes, insulation cases, circular transshipment bags, etc., to continuously improve its green 
supply chain performance. 
Regulation Document Regarding Supplier Management
In addition, JD.com has implemented a series of measures to encourage suppliers to improve their performance in respect to 
environmental and social impacts: 


2021 JD.com Environmental, Social and Governance Report
Promoting High-quality Development
43
44
Promoting the Development of the Real Economy 
JD Cloud has provided comprehensive technology solutions 
for 814 ﬁnancial institutions by leveraging the digital intelligent 
ﬁnancial cloud that connects the industrial supply chain. These 
institutions include banks, insurance companies, funds, trusts, 
and securities companies. The technology solutions help them 
establish underlying cloud intrinsic capabilities. The solutions 
cover data and intelligence, business innovation, business 
scenario expansion, industry-ﬁnanced integrations, intelligent 
risk control, and full scenario marketing and operations 
capabilities that align with their strengthens and future needs 
in digital transformation.
JD has always insisted on the shared value of “boosting the real economy with JD’s identity as a real economy enterprise.” Relying 
on our solid infrastructure, digital intelligent social supply chain with high eﬃciency and innovative technical service capabilities, we 
have persistently explored new growth momentums for millions of our partners, promoted the high-quality development of the real 
economy, and created more value for the society while accelerating our sustainable development.
Financial Services 
Supplier Empowerment and Development Policy 
Improving Public Governance Eﬃciency Empowered by JD’s Digital Intelligent 
Supply Chain Infrastructure 
JD continues to support local and SME suppliers in the 
bidding and procurement procedures with extra support on 
local featured agricultural products and signature industry 
development. We help the signature industrial belts to equip 
with parcel pick-up capacity and introduce local packaging 
manufacturers. While promoting the logistics parcel pick-up 
business, JD has stimulated the rapid development of regional 
signature and packaging consumables industries. 
Meanwhile, we actively support women’s economic 
empowerment, women’s leadership promotion, and women-
owned business development along our supply chain. In 
respect to supplier admittance and selection, we also give extra 
focus on female leadership factors on the top of suppliers’ 
capacity and business qualiﬁcation.
JD Cloud has provided comprehensive technology 
solutions for 814 ﬁnancial institutions, including 
banks, insurance companies, funds, trusts, and 
securities companies
Business challenge
Project value
JD has created the ﬁrst “digital bank teller” in China that can independently handle real bank transactions, which has 
achieved a breakthrough in the application of digital tellers from traditional consultation, inquiry handling, and navigation 
to the actual banking business. This project reshapes the user experience and service mode of bank outlets, greatly 
improves the capacity and eﬃciency of remote banking services, and reduces the operating cost. 
In the banking industry, traditional bank branches have some pain points, such as high operating costs, long queuing in rush 
hours, and insuﬃcient reception capacity of remote tellers, which restrict business expansion. 
The digital teller has formed a multi-channel, full-scenario, end-to-end VTM digital teller solution by connecting with VTM 
and agricultural aid appliance. 
JD Intelligent Customer Service cooperated with Jiangnan Rural Commercial Bank to launch 
VTM
6 digital bank tellers.
6 VTM refers to Video teller machine.


2021 JD.com Environmental, Social and Governance Report
Promoting High-quality Development
45
46
Promoting Digital Transformation of Various Industries by JD’s Technological 
Capability 
Technological Capabilities 
JD Internet Hospital of the First Aﬃliated Hospital 
of Henan University of Traditional Chinese Medicine
JD.com AI NeuHub open platform, intelligent HMI platform “YanXi” and “JD Smart Cloud” solutions which 
help enterprises create applications targeting various industrial scenarios.
JD.com has established more than 70 data centers, 70 city clouds and nearly 100 edge data 
centers worldwide. 
JD.com “Zhizhen Chain” Anti-counterfeiting Traceability Platform has served over 1,500 enterprises, 
covering over 400,000 kinds of goods from 1,900 brands, with billion-
entry data linked to the blockchain and over 10 million “quality traceability” inquiries 
from consumers. 
JD.com’s IoT operating system serves for many institutional clients, such as government, central State-
owned enterprises, and diﬀerent industries covering energy, transportation and logistics, ﬁnance, real estate, 
food safety, etc. By working with more than 1,000 industry partners, the system accesses more than 
4,000 kinds of smart devices, connects 220 million highly active devices and serves  
26 million families. 
Artiﬁcial intelligence
Cloud computing
Blockchain
IoT
JD empowers the public healthcare by leveraging its core competence in 
technology, utilizing its advantages in digital intelligence technology and 
supply chain infrastructure to establish a graded diagnosis and treatment 
system, optimizing the medical resources distribution, reducing medical 
expenditure, improving basic healthcare services, and providing the public 
with high-quality, comprehensive, and inclusive healthcare products and 
services, driving more people to pursue a healthy life. 
We have cooperated with many public hospitals to develop smart medical 
projects. JD Internet Hospital of the First Aﬃliated Hospital of Henan 
University of Traditional Chinese Medicine was jointly established by JD 
Health and the First Aﬃliated Hospital of Henan University of Traditional 
Chinese Medicine, which provides online and oﬄine integrated healthcare 
services for patients. By the end of 2021, the total number of registered 
patients was nearly 150,000, and the services covered 31 provinces, 
municipalities and autonomous regions in China. In response to storms, 
ﬂoods, and epidemic relief requests, we eﬀectively help tackle the 
challenges in seeking medical treatment. In addition, JD Health has jointly 
established Internet Hospitals with Peking University Shougang Hospital, 
Tianjin University of Traditional Chinese Medicine First Aﬃliated Hospital, 
Cangzhou Central Hospital, Taicang First People’s Hospital, and other 
Grade 3AAA hospitals (top tier hospital in China), and innovated online 
and oﬄine integrated medical and healthcare service system. 
Public Healthcare 
The total number of 
registered patients was nearly 
150,000
The services covered  
31 provinces, municipalities and 
autonomous regions in China


2021 JD.com Environmental, Social and Governance Report
Promoting High-quality Development
47
48
BAIC and JD.com cooperate in the digital procurement of industrial products, intelligent cockpits, and autonomous logistics 
vehicles, accessing the cloud, digital marketing, and other aspects to deepen BAIC’s digital transformation and upgrade 
comprehensively. For example, BAIC Data collaborates with JD Cloud to build a hybrid industrial cloud, the BAIC Hybrid Cloud 
Platform (BPStack) and the Digital Marketing and User Operation Platform, which provides BAIC with various cloud products and 
services such as databases, internet middleware, hybrid cloud management, etc. The platforms also provide BAIC with services 
such as infrastructure leasing and hardware equipment hosting, signiﬁcantly improving BAIC Group’s IT management capability and 
successfully saving 50% of IT costs. 
In June 2021, BAIC’s online shopping mall App built by JD Retail Cloud was launched, which sold hundreds of vehicles within half a 
year. This system integrates the information of thousands of BAIC oﬄine stores nationwide. Consumers can not only see cars online, 
but also make an appointment to test drive and pick up cars at any oﬄine store. They can also enjoy the whole life cycle services 
such as car purchase, maintenance, repair, and used car replacement. 
JD Logistics helps Volvo’s after-sales spare parts supply chain to reduce cost and increase eﬃciency. Based on JD Logistics’ 
fundamental supply chain network and big data technology, JD Logistics helps Volvo achieve the optimal supply chain and 
inventory structure, focusing on warehouse network planning, inventory management, last mile delivery and other ﬁelds, eventually 
we help Volvo simulate the optimal cost structure and creates an intelligent replenishment verifying mode. According to the data 
collected from Xi’an pilot project, the satisfaction rate toward Volvo’s order delivery increased along with a signiﬁcant increase in 
the annual inventory turnover. This project realized the accurate prediction backed by big data and visualized control of the whole 
process and supported multi-channel business development. 
JD Technology has now become a core platform of JD.com to 
provide technical services to external clients. With profound 
industrial know-how, excellence in risk management, user 
operation and enterprise service, JD technology can provide 
customers with diversiﬁed technology services including 
customized solutions and product research development 
JD Logistics integrates a connective, eﬃcient and more ﬂexible 
end-to-end logistics network by taking the integrated supply 
chain as its core competence. By leveraging our in-depth 
business experiences, industry insights, and the automation, 
digitalization, and intelligentization capabilities, we provide 
our customers with one-stop supply chain solutions and high-
JD C2M intelligent manufacturing platform is a customer-oriented infrastructure 
that customizes production based on customers’ demands. Using our in-depth 
insight on consumer needs and market trends, the relevant product design, 
production and circulation can be reversely customized through this platform, 
so that manufacturers can accurately respond to consumers, realize “production 
by sales” and “production on-demand,” greatly shorten the R&D process for new 
products, improve the performance of new products, reduce turnover costs 
and inventory risks. While helping brand owners improve their new product 
development capabilities, it also strengthens the overall resource eﬃciency 
of society and facilitates the transformation and upgrading of industrial 
development. As of the end of 2021, JD has built C2M reverse supply chain for 
more than 1,200 manufacturing enterprises. 
Through JD Cloud’s C2M reverse customization solution, Deyi Dairy has set up a business middle platform covering online 
and oﬄine omni-channel, which can serve for customer insight collection, target customer positioning and precise marketing 
through data assets depositing. 
As of the end of 2021, 
JD has built C2M reverse supply chain 
for more than  
1,200 manufacturing 
enterprises
quality logistics services covering all business scenarios, from 
warehousing to distribution, and from manufacturing to end-
users. At the same time, we enable various industries, including 
FMCG, apparel, home appliances and furniture, 3C, automotive 
and fresh produce, to reduce cost and create more values for all 
the industries. 
JD C2M optimizes and upgrades the manufacturing supply chain
sell hundreds of 
vehicles within half a year
successfully save 50% of IT costs
targeting diﬀerent industries. Based on the digital intelligence 
technology capability, JD Cloud has provided digital solutions 
for more than 1,500 large enterprises and over 1.5 million 
SMEs, helping thousands of industries achieve high-quality 
development and realizing the digital transformation of real 
economy.
Based on cutting-edge technologies such as artiﬁcial 
intelligence, cloud computing, big data, internet of things, etc., 
and relying on years of experience in supply chains, JD provides 
Empowering Industries
digital intelligent solutions with supply chain at its core for 
diﬀerent industries.
Helping the high-quality development of industries with digital intelligence technology 
Empowering the sustainable industrial development with JD Logistics’ integrated supply chain
Manufacturing Industry
Automobile Industry
Digital Transformation of Traditional Industries
JD.com helps BAIC


Promoting High-quality Development
50
shortens the time spending in single 
equipment maintenance by more than 
20%
helps the after-sales team save 
4,200 hours  
of troubleshooting every year
By the end of 2021, JD Industry has deployed over 
200 facilities nationwide
The ﬁrst “smart mobile warehouse” 
has been put into use
Empowering SMEs  
Through a complete service portfolio and various speciﬁc 
measures, JD.com has helped SMEs strengthen their supply chain, 
enhance their innovation ability, and uplift their development 
momentum. 
In the ﬁeld of enterprise services, JD Cloud has provided digital 
solutions based on full-stack cloud service products for over 
1.52 million SMEs, helping them achieve digital intelligent 
transformation. Besides, to lower the “threshold” of the 
digital procurement for SMEs, JD JOYBUY has established a 
“quick procurement, easy management and one-stop” digital 
procurement service platform. By digitalizing the procurement 
process, eight core procurement service capabilities (quick 
selection of products, quick bargaining, quick contract signing, 
quick order placing, quick payment, quick invoicing, quick 
reimbursement, and high-quality service) have been strengthened 
to help SMEs reduce cost. As a result, SMEs can enjoy the beneﬁts 
brought by digital technology without extra investment. 
JD Cloud has provided digital solutions 
based on full-stack cloud service 
products for over  
1.52 million SMEs
JD Cloud and Zoomlion jointly built the industry’s ﬁrst “AI expert diagnosis system for pumping 
machinery.” Relying on our intelligent HMI platform “YanXi,” the project realizes AI-driven industrial 
automation and intellectualization, which greatly improves equipment fault diagnosis eﬃciency 
and ensures the continuity of industrial client’s construction projects, and helps the after-sales team 
save 4,200 hours of troubleshooting every year, shortens the time spending in single equipment 
maintenance by more than 20%, and creates indirect economic beneﬁts of more than RMB 2.3 
million for a single product line. 
“AI expert diagnosis system for pumping machinery”
In 2021, JD Industry launched a series of new-generation infrastructures for industrial supply chain 
management, such as an enterprise distribution center, Jinggong Cabinet, and smart mobile 
warehouses. So far, JD Industry has deployed over 200 facilities nationwide to help solve the pain 
points faced by industrial enterprises. Through the introduction of smart mobile warehouse, JD 
industry promotes the integration of digital procurement and infrastructure, which helps solve 
the challenges owing to the remote of construction sites faced by engineering and construction 
industry, such as diﬃculties in achieving accuracy in procurement planning, onsite management 
of material consumption and distribution, and inventory dynamic management. Our solution 
greatly improves the eﬃciency of material supply at the construction site and ensures the whole 
construction to proceed as scheduled. The ﬁrst “smart mobile warehouse” has been put into use in 
the Hanzhong-Bazhong-Nanchong High-speed Railway construction project of Sichuan Chuanjiao 
Road and Bridge Co., Ltd. The infrastructure has been widely used in many real enterprises such 
as Angang Steel, Sinochem and the Three Gorges Group, providing concrete support for industrial 
enterprises to enjoy the distinguished values brought by intelligent supply chain. 
Engineering Industry
2021 JD.com Environmental, Social and Governance Report
49


2021 JD.com Environmental, Social and Governance Report
Promoting High-quality Development
51
52
In 2020, JD collaborated with China Ministry of Industry and 
Information Technology (MIIT)’s SME Development Promotion 
Center to launch a “Mantianxing Project” targeting to SMEs. 
In 2021, the “Mantianxing Project” continued to implement 
in 28 provinces and cities to create a customized service 
model of “one city, one strategy” and stimulate SMEs’ growth 
impetus. Under this project, we invited SMEs to visit our 
company, sponsored several SME seminars, and improved 
the talent training system for SMEs. We also launched relevant 
plan to empower specialized and innovative SMEs to build 
Serving SMEs through “Mantianxing Project” 
In addition, under JD’s private label brands, we launched the 
industrial belt “C.E.O” (Co-Create, Empower, Open) plan at 
the end of 2020, and fully promoted the transformation and 
upgrading of SMEs on the industrial belt, reducing costs and 
increasing eﬃciency. Relying on the digital intelligent social 
supply chain, JD’s private label brands expand their capabilities 
in product selection, brand incubation, user cultivation and 
channel penetration to high-quality factories. They fully 
empower factories to accomplish digital transformation, 
accelerate the digital intelligent upgrading of the manufacturing 
Industrial Belt “C.E.O” Plan Under JD’s Private Label Brands
JD.com have served over  
27,000 
provincial-level SMEs
promoted 61 manufactured 
goods with sales exceeding RMB 
10 million 
covered 70%  
of the national industrial belts
helped high-quality agricultural products 
including over 800 tons  
of rice and miscellaneous grains to 
expand their national market
Among 4,762 specialized and 
innovative “Little Giant” enterprises, 
accumulatively over  
3,200 have received 
our services
By December 2021, the industrial belt “C.E.O” plan under JD’s private label brands
industry, and collaborate with industrial belt partners heading 
for intelligent manufacturing, so as to deepen the penetration 
of the industrial Internet alongside the industrial belt, and 
at the same time bring more cost-eﬀective factory sourced 
goods to consumers. By December 2021, the industrial belt 
“C.E.O” plan under JD’s private label brands covered 70% of the 
national industrial belts. In 2021, it promoted 61 manufactured 
goods with sales exceeding RMB 10 million and helped high-
quality agricultural products including over 800 tons of rice and 
miscellaneous grains to expand their national market.
an industrial ecosystem. By the end of 2021, we have served 
over 27,000 provincial-level SMEs, accounting for nearly 70% 
of all nationwide qualiﬁed SMEs. Among 4,762 specialized 
and innovative “Little Giant” enterprises, accumulatively 
over 3,200 have received our services. We also created a 
“digital workbench” to provide SMEs with user-friendly digital 
application tools, lower their threshold of digitalization, help 
SMEs overcome the “digital gap” and achieve lower cost and 
higher eﬃciency management. 
As shortlisted in the third batch of specialized and innovative “Little Giant” enterprises by the MIIT, Zhida Technology has 
been long devoted in product development with its strong technical capabilities. However, due to its long-term service to 
automakers, it lacks experience in the end user market, and there is also not an existing well-operated channel to accurately 
reach out customers. 
Zhida Technology, by cooperating with JD.com, has successfully unlocked the “password” to explore the end user market. 
JD.com, with its strong supply chain capability and infrastructure nationwide, eﬀectively assists “Little Giant” enterprises 
to build high-quality customer service and strengthen their supply chain. By leveraging the competence cross online and 
oﬄine channels, JD successfully help Zhida Technology quickly establish a nationwide channel system with full regions 
and customer coverage. At the same time, JD has more than 500 million high-quality users, who are highly overlapped with 
the target customers of Zhida Technology and provides strong support for Zhida Technology to quickly “break the ice” in 
the end user market and strengthen its brand inﬂuence. Overall, JD.com assists Zhida Technology to open an incremental 
market and achieve a nearly 10-fold increase in turnover. 
Zhida Technology 


2021 JD.com Environmental, Social and Governance Report
Cultivating Talents
53
54
Cultivating Talents 
Part IV
JD.com has always been committed to providing a safe workplace 
and ideal development space for every employee. Meanwhile, we 
strictly protect employees’ rights and interests and provide various 
welfare and caring projects. JD.com continuously concerns about the 
talent development and ensures the best allocation of talents on the 
right position. We attracted the diversiﬁed talents and established a 
comprehensive professional team to lay a solid foundation for JD to 
achieve a long-term success.


2021 JD.com Environmental, Social and Governance Report
Cultivating Talents
55
56
Employment and Labor Standards 
As stated in the notice on the “14th Five-Year Plan for 
Employment Promotion” issued by the State Council, 
the overall stability of the employment and the steady 
improvement of the employment quality are the principal 
goals to achieve by 2025. In 2021, JD.com continued to play 
the role of “employment stabilizer.” As of the end of 2021, the 
number of employees of JD.com’s listed and non-listed entities 
had  exceeded 420,000
7. JD.com has always placed a high value 
on talent acquisition and development. In the past three years, 
358 jobs have been opened to fresh graduates, providing nearly 
40,000 job opportunities, and specialized training programs 
have been developed to empower young talents to achieve a 
more fulﬁlled career. In addition, JD.com continues to provide 
a broader and more inclusive scientiﬁc research platform for 
professionals. So far, JD.com has built up a well-established 
professional team composed of over 500 experts with doctor’s 
degree experts and 18,000 R&D professionals. JD launched the 
“Doctoral Management Trainee” program in 2017. Since then, 
JD.com respects and protects employees’ rights and interests 
and follows the principles of relevant international human 
rights rules, including the Universal Declaration of Human 
Rights and the international labor conventions approved and 
recognized by the Central People’s Government of the PRC, on 
the premise of observing the laws and regulations of the areas 
where it operates.
JD.com adheres to the principles of openness, fairness, 
impartiality and equal recruitment, signs labor contracts in 
accordance with the law, forbids any forms of discrimination, 
treats employees of diﬀerent countries, nationalities, genders, 
religious beliefs and cultural backgrounds equally, actively 
provides employment opportunities for the disabled groups, 
guarantees the rights of female employees, ensures  the men 
and women employee to enjoy the equal pay for equal work, 
strictly implements the maternity leave regulations for female 
employees, and guarantees the equal legal rights and interests 
of every employee according to law. To prohibit the use of 
child labor and forced labor, JD.com Employee Handbook 
strictly deﬁned the relevant employment qualiﬁcations, and 
High-quality Employment 
Human Resource Compliance Management 
the program has attracted many excellent doctoral students 
from the leading universities domestically and abroad to join 
JD.com. Up to date, the proportion of staﬀ holding doctorate 
degrees in the JD Explore Academy has been approaching 50%, 
providing great momentum for JD’s technology innovation.
The State Council’s “14th Five-Year Plan for Promoting the 
Modernization of Agriculture and Rural Areas” regards the equal 
development of farmers and rural areas as a strategic priority.  
The number of front-line employees of JD.com reached more 
than 300,000, 80% of whom are from the Chinese rural areas. 
By giving them a solid living guarantee and stable income, 
JD.com drives forward the employment of rural population and 
promotes the rapid development of the livelihood and economy 
in rural areas. Moving forward, based on its identity as new real 
economy enterprise, JD.com will be committed to promoting 
the stable and high-quality employment on a larger scale. 
clearly stipulated that hiring individuals under the age of 16 is 
prohibited. 
JD.com regulates employment according to law, and 
establishes labor and employment management rules 
including labor contract management, employee recruitment, 
vacation, education, and training, etc. In 2021, the company 
revised the management rules such as JD.com Employee 
Handbook to optimize the company’s employment 
management mechanism further.
The Code of Business Conduct and Ethics provides clear 
regulations on anti-discrimination, harassment, health 
and safety, personal privacy, etc., and eﬀectively protects 
employees’ interests and beneﬁts.
The Customer Service Center in JD Retail set up a specialized 
department recruiting people with disabilities. In 2021, 186 
disabled employees hired by JD served in Suqian, Yangzhou, 
and Chengdu. 
The number of employees of JD.com’s 
listed and non-listed entities has exceeded  
420,000
R&D professionals exceed  
18,000 people
So far, JD.com has more than  
500 experts with doctor’s degree
The number of front-line 
employees of JD.com reached 
more than  
300,000
In the past three years,  
358 jobs  
have been opened to fresh graduates
Providing nearly  
40,000 job 
opportunities
The proportion of staﬀ holding 
doctorate degrees in the JD 
Explore Academy has been 
approaching 50%
80% of front-line 
employees are from the 
China’s rural areas
7 
 The statistical scope of total employees of JD.com is the total number of full-time employees and part-time employees of listed companies and non-listed 
companies under JD.com.


Cultivating Talents
58
Employee Satisfaction 
To continuously improve employees’ experience and create 
a favorable workplace, JD.com regularly conducts a quarterly 
satisfaction survey among employees. In 2021, the survey 
conducted in the Beijing headquarters and regional oﬃces 
showed that the employee satisfaction rate was as high as 
4.36/5, demonstrating a quarter-on-quarter increase. The 
survey mainly focused on the satisfaction toward various 
services provided to employees in the workplace, including 
catering (employee restaurants, coﬀee shops, etc.), travel 
(shuttle bus, free taxi service during commuting), supporting 
facilities (supermarkets, gymnasiums, etc.), oﬃce environment 
(oﬃce appliance, hardware, functional areas) and many other 
aspects. In addition, JD.com will make pertinent improvements 
on low-scoring service items, publicize the optimization result 
to the employees and work with the operation team to carry 
out random quality checks. 
Occupational Health and Safety 
Employee Training and Talent 
Development 
JD.com has been committed to taking employees’ occupational 
health and safety as the top priority and provides a complete 
welfare system to guarantee a safe and healthy workplace 
for every employee. Taking JD Logistics as an example, the 
relevant management systems and monitoring processes 
that have been formulated include Quality, Environment, 
Occupational Health and Safety Monitoring and Measurement 
Control Procedure, and Environment, Occupational Health, 
and Safety Operation Control Procedure, etc. In addition, its 
“Occupational Health and Safety Management System” has 
been certiﬁed by authoritative organizations. In addition, 
JD.com conducts safety drills for all employees twice a year, 
to strengthen employees’ safety awareness, improve personal 
emergency handling ability and further improve the company’s 
emergency management. 
Human Resources Management 
JD.com is convinced that talents are the company’s highest-
valued assets. JD.com constantly provides high-quality training 
to facilitate employee development and creates a career 
development platform to satisfy the diversiﬁed interests of 
employees. In 2021, JD.com’s sub-groups and business lines 
organized 20,809 training sessions and developed 10,262 new 
training courses, with total sign-ins of 160 million person-times 
and 16,000 daily active users. 
Internal Communication Mechanism of Employees 
JD.com respects the demands and opinions of every employee 
and is persistent in strengthening the construction of the internal 
communication channels and ensuring the good operation 
of the employee rights protection system and mechanism. By 
setting up various channels and approaches, including the 
employee service hotline 400, bigear@jd.com, the Group’s 
trade union, and the Group’s supervisory department, etc., we 
consistently optimize the mechanism for employee consultation 
and complaint handling. We’ve greatly promoted response 
eﬃciency resulting in a systematic improvement in the issue 
handling process and closed-loop management eﬀectively 
tackling employees’ concerns. We have set up the varying 
problem-solving mechanism in terms of the risk level and the 
impact of certain incidents. For ordinary incidents, the feedback 
will be provided within 48 hours; for emergency incidents, the 
response will be given within 1 hour, as for the feedbacks on the 
investigation for special or momentous events will be provided 
to the involved employees within 7 working days. For overseas 
employees, two mailboxes have been set up, jdw_radar@jd.com 
and globahrssc@jd.com to collect employees’ opinions, and the 
HR colleagues from the Group or local level will follow up to get 
the problems solved.
JD’s ﬁrst collective bargaining negotiation and workers’ 
representative congress was held in November 2021. JD’s 
commitment to the implementation of relevant laws and 
regulations regarding workers’ participation and organization 
of trade unions, proposed in the Trade Union Law of the PRC 
and the Labor Law of the PRC was well demonstrated through 
this event.  The legal procedures and regulation system 
regarding employees’ right in collective bargaining was clariﬁed. 
Meanwhile a series of collective negotiations were held on labor 
remuneration, safety, insurance and welfare, vocational skill 
training, and other key issues. As a result, a draft of the collective 
contract was developed. The founding of a trade union and 
negotiation mechanisms plays a positive and constructive 
role in safeguarding the rights and interests of employees and 
thoroughly responding to concerns from employees at all levels. 
In 2021, JD.com’s sub-groups and 
business lines organized  
20,809 training sessions
Developed  
10,262 new training courses
Total sign-ins reached  
160 million person-times
16,000 daily active users
Employee Training 
2021 JD.com Environmental, Social and Governance Report
57


2021 JD.com Environmental, Social and Governance Report
Cultivating Talents
59
60
Since the Big Boss project was launched, employees enthusiasm and organizational innovation have been greatly stimulated. The 
construction of the Big Boss system was further developed in 2021, laying a solid foundation for supporting diversiﬁed, ﬂexible 
business needs and the development of an increasingly growing organization. 
Employee Beneﬁts 
JD.com always adheres to the philosophy of “people-oriented, places the wellbeing of employees prior to the interests of enterprise,” 
respects and rewards the value contributed by every employee. 
In 2021, all provinces, municipalities and autonomous regions 
in China successively issued the policies on the treatment of 
work-related injury insurance. The measures for speciﬁc groups 
include workers who have exceeded the statutory retirement 
age to participate in work-related injury insurance programs, 
etc. At the same time, many provinces and cities have adjusted 
the bottom wage criteria and the maximum and minimum 
limitation of wage bases required to pay the various social 
insurances. JD.com actively responds to national policies. In 
2021, JD.com continued to pay the ﬁve social insurance funds 
and one employee housing fund, and improved basic beneﬁt 
treatment such as work-related injury insurance. In addition, 
JD.com continues to improve the salary level of employees. 
From July 1, 2021, to July 1, 2023, JD.com plans to take two 
years to gradually increase the employees’ average annual 
revenue from a 14-month salary to a 16-month salary. 
JD.com has always adhered to the concept of employee 
success prior to business success. JD follows a “contributor-
oriented” principle and rolls out the incentives to reward the 
employee contributors with the matched economic incomes 
and promotion opportunities, so that to fulﬁll employees’ 
value and facilitate their career success while contributing to 
the sustainable success of the Company. In 2021, JD builds 
a “comprehensive incentive system” to fully enable talent 
development with innovative measures. 
JD.com has launched diversiﬁed talent training solutions and 
carried out well-designed recruitment programs for diﬀerent 
target groups, striving to establish an ideal career platform 
promoting the comprehensive development of talents. These 
programs include JD.com’s Rising Star Program for professional 
talents, the leadership training program TET, the DMT program 
for doctoral scientists, internship recruitment for on-campus 
students, and the “JD RUN” summer internship camp. 
JD.com actively develops hobby communities for employees, 
and establishes 63 internal “Communication Networks” with 
diﬀerent focuses, covering interests and hobbies, friend-
making, technology sharing, etc. The “Communication 
Network” gets annual voluntary posts reaching more than 
72,000 pieces, showing great activeness and eﬀective 
interaction, creating a good internal communication channel 
for employees. 
JD.com highly values women employees’ health and career 
development. By inviting numerous internal and external guest 
speakers, such as Olympic champion Deng Yaping and the 
champion of JD.com Hackathon Yu Bingjing, etc., to organize 
various themed sharing sessions on women empowerment, 
such as personal inspiration stories, leadership experiences, 
scientiﬁc research, etc. So far, about 10,368 women employees 
have been empowered in JD. Furthermore, JD possesses 851 
female lecturers, accounting for 49% of all lecturers. 
About  
10,368 women 
employees in total have been 
empowered in JD
The “Communication Network” 
gets annual voluntary posts 
reaching more than  
72,000 pieces
The adoption of the principles that endow the front-line decision-makers with authority allows JD 
to be more ﬂexible and rapidly respond the clients’ needs. At the same time, JD further clariﬁes and 
reﬁnes the evaluation principle ensuring controllable proﬁt and loss, optimizing the cost eﬃciency of 
each integral organization module. 
In terms of employee performance appraisal and incentive policies, Big Boss project has made 
great innovations, ensured the more diverse incentives and reasonable allocation scheme, and fully 
implemented JD’s “contributor-oriented” principle.
Female Employee Development and Leadership Empowerment 
Big Boss
Employee Compensation System 
Talent Development System 
Comprehensive Incentive System
Diversiﬁed Talent Training
Employee’s Hobby Community


Cultivating Talents
62
Pleasing Working Environment
Through the housing plan, grants for employees’ children, extended maternity leave, and other programs and initiatives, JD.com 
safeguards the health and wellbeing of employees’ families and ensures that employees can work happily and live healthily. 
The Settlement Plan is a full-service welfare program. All employees who meet the seniority 
requirements can apply for an interest-free loan of up to RMB 1 million, when they buy the ﬁrst 
house in their working city. From 2018 to 2021, JD.com had oﬀered interest-free loans totaling 
RMB 750 million, and about 1,900 employees have beneﬁted. In addition, since 2016, JD.com 
has provided 2,537 welfare housing units for employees. 
JD’s Love Relief Fund aims to provide ﬁnancial support for employees and families in need. The 
scope of assistance covers the employees and their families suﬀering from serious diseases, 
employees passing away or having disabilities, schooling continuity for deceased employees’ 
children, employees whose homes got destroyed, etc. From 2018 to 2021, a total of 1,491 in-
kind supplies were provided, with a total value reaching RMB 61.48 million. 
In 2021, 11 families have beneﬁted from the Employee’s Children Caring and Scholarship 
program.  Suppose employees unexpectedly lose their working capability or pass away due to 
diseases or accidental events, their children can apply to receive grants to ﬁnish their studies 
from kindergarten to college. 
JD.com actively responds to the “Notice of the Oﬃce of the National Healthcare Security 
Administration on Doing a Good Job in Supporting the Maternity Insurance of the Three-Child 
Policy” and other related policies and launched the company’s welfare policy. First, JD.com 
covers the cost of giving birth to the third child in the medical security policy, which eﬀectively 
ensures the wellbeing of the three-child family. JD.com has also provided an additional 30-day 
extra-long welfare maternity leave on top of the national and local legal welfare for women’s 
fertility since 2015. Ever since the release of the State Council’s “Decision on Optimizing Birth 
Policy to Promote Long-term Balanced Population Development,” parental leave in all related 
provinces in China has been extended or added. JD.com actively responds to the call for 
national and local policies. As such, JD.com adjusted and improved the company’s vacation 
system as well as its leave application process. For provinces or cities where the relevant 
policies have yet been covered, employees can continue to extend maternity leave days in 
accordance with the welfare maternity leave scheme executed by JD.com. Therefore, the 
maternity-friendly policy of JD.com reached full coverage among employees. 
Since 2017, JD cooperated with Oriental Cambridge Education Group to set up a childcare 
center at the headquarters. As of the end of 2021, the nursery service beneﬁted more than 1,600 
person-times. At the same time, JD collaborated with Etonkids, a high-end kindergarten brand, 
to build the kindergarten project together. More than 350 JDer’s children had been enrolled by 
the end of 2021. 
In 2021, JD continued to implement EAP care program. 
JD.com established two new self-constructed workplaces in 2021. Building No.2 of the Beijing headquarters was 
completed in October 2021. As a part of the headquarters park, the newly constructed park covered 530,000 square 
meters. The Southwest Headquarters Building was completed in August 2021. The building area reached 250,000 
square meters, and the design incorporated “Chinese Knot” elements. Furthermore, the exterior shape of the Southwest 
Headquarters Building is interlaced like the number “8.” The overall design of these two buildings presents the concept 
of low-carbon emissions and environment-friendliness, demonstrating a strong sense of technology, provides a pleasing 
and beautiful workplace for all employees. We built barrier-free infrastructure in these newly self-constructed buildings, 
including ramps, elevators, restrooms, and parking spaces, according to the design requirements of National Barrier-free 
Design Code, to provide more convenience for those with disabilities.
JD has set up the health counseling room, gyms, staﬀ canteen and cafeteria, baby-care rooms, children’s playgrounds, 
and other healthcare facilities. JD arranges nearly 200 shuttle buses that serve more than 30,000 employees, while 
cooperating with online ride-hailing companies to provide free taxi service for oﬀ-work commuting. At the same time, JD 
continues to expand its contract with nearby merchants and retailers so that employees can enjoy various beneﬁts and 
well-being in more consumption scenarios. JD is constantly making eﬀorts to promote JD headquarters’ welfare program 
among all facilities across the country.
JD organizes an annual Sports Season for its employees. By carrying out challenging competitions, JD attracts employees 
with diﬀerent hobbies and from diﬀerent age groups to participate in cross-team recreational activities such as football, 
badminton, and e-sports. In 2021, a total of 13,000 employees participated in the Sports Season, contributing to the 
creation of a happy workplace of JD as well as a corporate value of teamwork and taking the challenge. 
During the traditional Chinese festivals, JD distributes customized welfare gifts to express holiday care to employees. In 
2021, more than 800,000 welfare gift boxes for festivals were distributed, covering all JD employees. 
Family and Life Care 
Workplace Welfare 
Settlement Plan 
Love Relief Fund
Education Support
Maternity-Friendly 
Policy
JD Children’s 
Education
Employee Assistance 
Program (EAP)
Workplace Facilities
All-Staﬀ Sports Season
Employee Caring Program
2021 JD.com Environmental, Social and Governance Report
61


2021 JD.com Environmental, Social and Governance Report
Safeguarding the Natural Environment
63
64
Safeguarding the Natural Environment
Part V
Since the inauguration of the 14th Five-Year Plan period, China has actively promoted green 
development. The nation’s carbon peak and neutrality goals, as well as the more speciﬁc “1+N 
policy system,” give clear instructions toward a holistically green, low-carbon transformation 
of society. Contributing to the fulﬁlment of national dual carbon targets represents not only 
the responsibility of JD.com, but also an opportunity for JD to achieve stable and continuous 
success in the future. In 2021, JD.com exerted its supply chain capacity and the inﬂuence of 
industrial chain, actively responded to environmental challenges, and continuously enhanced 
JD’s environmental protection strategy. Relying on our business capability, we are committed 
to safeguarding nature, advancing green development with our more sustainable corporate 
operations, continuously developing a green supply chain, and further promoting green 
consumption among consumers. 


2021 JD.com Environmental, Social and Governance Report
Safeguarding the Natural Environment
65
66
Green Oﬃce 
We are committed to building a green oﬃce space by continuously 
promoting energy conservation and resource recycling through 
our oﬃce practices.
Due to the intelligent operation and maintenance system 
deployed in the power distribution room in JD.com’s oﬃce 
building, the building’s energy consumption and energy safety 
can be monitored online in real-time. Targeted energy-saving 
schemes can then be developed by integrating the system’s 
analysis results. In 2021, all the traditional lighting lamps in 
public areas of Building No. 1 have been transformed into LED 
lamps, with a total of about 14,000 LED downlights replaced. The 
lights in public areas can be turned on and oﬀ automatically by 
the central control system. The grid lights in the oﬃce area are 
being gradually replaced with LED panel lights, and the power 
consumption of a single lamp is reduced from 84W to 40W. After 
the replacement, the lighting power consumption in the oﬃce 
area of Building No. 1 was reduced by 5,000-9,000kWh per day on 
average
8, Meanwhile the average illuminance in the oﬃce area 
increased from about 300Lux to about 450Lux, which can not only 
reduce the energy consumption, but also improve the employees’ 
experiences in the workplace. Besides, more than 2,300 LED lamps 
in the basement of the headquarters have also been replaced with 
dimmable intelligent lamps, which can automatically adjust the 
area illumination and empower the low-carbon workplace with 
intelligent technology. Furthermore, the cooling of air conditioners 
in summer strictly maintains a 26-degree Celsius standard, which 
is uniformly dispatched by the central control system, and all 
panel setting temperatures are centrally controlled accordingly to 
reduce energy consumption in the workplace. 
JD.com gradually optimizes the existing network structure to 
create a completely wireless oﬃce environment. We have plugged 
We have rolled out paperless oﬃce initiatives in many business 
scenarios, such as electronic contracts, electronic ﬁle archiving, 
electronic invoicing, etc., which not only greatly reduces tree 
felling and carbon emissions, but also improves information 
management eﬃciency, and facilitates employees’ daily work 
at a lower operational cost. 
JD’s personnel documents are all signed electronically, 
such as employees’ entry and exit process, renewal of labor 
contract, loan agreement for housing plan, tenancy agreement 
for welfare housing, etc. As of the end of 2021, employees of 
JD.com had signed more than 1.839 million documents online. 
Signing an electronic labor contract is not only beneﬁcial to 
environmental protection, but also can improve the eﬃciency 
of personnel management as well as employee’s services 
within the company. 
JD.com has been appointed as a pilot unit of electronic 
archives management by the National Archives Administration 
of China. Since January 2020, when it passed the acceptance 
of the government expert task force, electronic archiving has 
reduced the use of paper vouchers printing by nearly 5 million 
sheets each year, which is equivalent to saving 5,600 adult trees 
felling and reducing carbon emissions by 26 tons. 
Green Operation 
in 5,520 wireless routers, and the oﬃce areas deployed with 
wireless infrastructure exceed 500,000 square meters. This reduces 
the cost of the Premises Distribution System (PDS) and switches. 
IDC computing storage resources are also constantly optimized. 
In 2021, JD’s information technology department optimized 179 
servers to save about 470,000 kWh of electricity per year and 
consequently reduce about 286.7 tons of carbon emissions. 
In 2021, all JD.com’s regional headquarter parks deployed the 
rainwater storage tanks with a volume reaching 2,700 cubic 
meters to facilitate rainwater collection. This deliberate design 
helps save the water resources and eﬀectively alleviate the 
municipal drainage pressure, demonstrating the innovative water 
management concept in line with “Sponge City” practice. JD.com 
headquarter buildings have also been equipped with a sewage 
treatment station, which can achieve up-to-standard discharge 
of wastewater, and at the same time, facilitates the reuse of the 
partial reclaimed water after sewage treatment. It is estimated 
that more than 3,000 tons of water can be saved every month. 
With the application of inductive sensor faucets and water-
saving toilets, the water consumption of restrooms will be further 
reduced. Our micro-spraying technology for large-area irrigation 
achieves a signiﬁcant water reduction in aﬀorestation irrigation. 
We organize publicity campaigns daily for water-saving 
and electricity-saving in the whole workplace to strengthen 
employees’ awareness of saving resources. In October 2021, 
JD.com headquarters Building No.2 was partially put into use and 
obtained the three-star design certiﬁcation for green buildings. In 
the future, the experience of the headquarters’ green operations 
will be gradually applied to all JD’s self-built workplaces, creating 
a greener and energy-saving workplace for all. 
As one of the ﬁrst batch of pilot companies, JD.com has fully 
implemented the practice of electronic invoicing. According 
to statistics, in 2021, more than 2.8 billion electronic invoices 
were issued by JD.com, thus saving about 16,000 tons of 
paper, equivalent to less felling of over 310,000 adult trees and 
reducing carbon emissions by 15,000 tons. 
In 2021, more than  
2.8 billion 
electronic invoices 
were issued in JD.com
Saving about 
 16,000 tons 
of paper
8 
 During 2021, about 14,000 LED downlights were applied in Building 1 of JD.com Headquarters, where 5,000 lighting hours were counted according to the criterion 
of serving the staﬀ for 8 working hours. The remaining 9,000 lamps were counted according to the actual lighting hours, including the lighting hours generated by 
overtime working staﬀs, and the actual light-out time of the Group were considered as the statistical benchmark.
Oﬃce Space 
Paperless Oﬃce 
JD.com’s Green and Low Carbon Target 
Support China’s Goal of Carbon Neutrality by 2060 
JD.com’s Environmental Protection Strategy 
Green Operation 
Low Carbon Supply Chain 
Sustainable Consumption
Green Oﬃce 
Green 
Packaging 
Green Products 
and Services
Green Transportation 
Green Lifestyle Promotion
Green and Low 
Carbon Data 
Center 
Green 
Warehousing 
Sustainable 
Consumption 
Advocacy


2021 JD.com Environmental, Social and Governance Report
Safeguarding the Natural Environment
67
68
Since the outbreak of the COVID-19 pandemic, we have provided a remote 
working system for employees, which can save time and tangible costs occurring 
in employees’ commuting and business travel. In 2021, employees logged in 
for work remotely through the VPN and SDP 9,213,820 times. 1,626,711 online 
meetings were held through the Joymeeting App, with 29,418,076 participants 
and 327,984 hours of meeting time, including 323,598 visitors from outside. 
At the same time, we promoted green travel and commuting among employees. 
We launched a strategic move with Didi and CaoCao online car-hailing 
platforms, aiming to reduce the carbon footprint of employees’ travel by 
carpooling. In 2021, JD employees’ carpooling resulted in 209,000 orders (2-3 
people to share a carpooling order), accounting for 90% of the total taxi-hailing 
orders, which greatly improved the employees’ eﬃciency and utilization rate 
of vehicle resources, while helping save the energy, reduce the emissions and 
eﬀectively alleviate the traﬃc congestion. Among them, the mileage of applied 
electric vehicles reached 3.233 million kilometers, reducing carbon emissions 
by about 258.7 tons. Besides, JD provides green commuting services for 
employees. There are about 200 shuttle buses in JD headquarters, including 80 
new energy buses with an annual traveled mileage of 1.273 million kilometers, 
which reduces carbon emissions by about 742.2 tons. 
Green and Low-Carbon Data Center 
Adhering to advancements in technology and pioneering in green initiatives, JD.com has created energy-saving, emission-reduced 
and environment-friendly low-carbon data centers by innovating hardware technology, optimizing software capabilities, using clean 
energy, and reducing energy consumption intensity. 
From planning, designing, construction, to O&M (operation and 
maintenance), JD Cloud’s new generation green data centers 
implement the low-carbon and energy-saving strategy in the 
whole product and operation life cycle. We use natural cooling 
sources, deploy clean energy and revamp used equipment. 
We also promote energy and cold storage, optimize the 
architectural layout, adapt designs in favor of low energy 
consumption and eventually achieve a system-wide synergy 
eﬀect maximizing energy-saving and emission- reduction. 
With the principal supplies preformed in factories, produced 
at local level, and generated from recycled materials, JD Cloud 
completes the rapid and low-carbon delivery of the data 
centers. In addition, based on the “IoT + AI” O&M platform, JD 
Cloud empowers eﬃciency optimization of data centers, waste 
recycling and the dynamic and controllable O&M management 
for equipment, helps reduce the employee’s workload on O&M, 
implements the SOP of O&M, and continuously improves O&M 
quality and eﬃciency. 
While maintaining rapid growth, JD Cloud has applied green 
energy to cloud computing to construct a clean, low-carbon, 
safe, and eﬃcient energy system by further promoting 
carbon reduction in infrastructure, using recycled energy, 
To improve the energy eﬃciency of a data center, JD Cloud 
establishes cooperation with Huawei. Relying on the experience 
in data center technology innovation, construction and 
operation from both perspectives, a set of innovative solutions 
has been co-developed and successfully launched, including 
intelligent indirect evaporative cooling system EHU (Environment 
Handling Unit) and medium voltage direct supply integrated 
power supply system SST, which strengthens the recycling of 
cold energy resources and improve the power supply eﬃciency. 
Intelligent indirect evaporative cooling system EHU applying AI 
comprehensive energy eﬃciency optimization technology, can 
At the beginning of 2021, JD Cloud East China Data Center was 
successfully shortlisted as the “2020 National Green Data Center” 
honored by the Ministry of Industry and Information Technology, 
the National Development and Reform Commission and the 
Ministry of Commerce. At the 2021 CIFTIS (The China International 
Fair for Trade in Services), JD Cloud East China Data Center 
won the “Green Development Service Demonstration Case,” 
demonstrating its outstanding practice in energy saving and 
emission reduction. In November 2021, JD Cloud won the ﬁrst 
prize for the “Data Center Science and Technology Achievement 
Award,” which is known as the “Nobel Prize” of the IDC industry, 
by virtue of the industry-leading technology of liquid cooling and 
heat recovery system for rack cabinets in data centers.  
and deploying a large-scale distributed photovoltaic power 
generation system. With the help of “Jinggang,” a software-
hardware integrated virtualized architecture, the server 
performance gets improved by 30%, and large-scale application 
of cold plate liquid cooling and heat recovery technologies 
achieves a 10% reduction of carbon emissions in total. Taking 
JD Cloud North China Data Center located in Langfang, Hebei 
province, as an example, this system can reduce the center’s 
heating costs by more than RMB 1 million while reducing 
carbon emissions by over 2,000 tons every year. 
At the same time, intelligent algorithms and tools such as 
machine learning are introduced into the O&M to make 
the system more intelligent, to strengthen the overall 
computing performance. By deploying the inspection robots, 
the O&M system achieves 24-hour unattended inspection, 
from automatic inspection, fault location to automatic 
troubleshooting. 
Using technologies such as liquid cooling, the new green data 
center operated by JD Cloud achieved annual operation with 
a Power Usage Eﬀectiveness (PUE) lower than 1.1, 30% energy 
saving in infrastructure and 10% reduction in total carbon 
emissions. 
automatically switch the cooling mode according to the weather, 
and directly use the natural cold air of the data center to cool 
down the computer room. East China Data Center located in 
Suqian, Jiangsu province, for instance, the outdoor natural cold 
sources can be fully collected and utilized for nearly ﬁve months 
throughout the year, which helps signiﬁcantly reduce the 
operating cost. Medium voltage direct supply integrated power 
supply system SST can achieve high-intensity and high-eﬃciency 
power supply. Compared with the traditional power supply and 
distribution solution, its footprint gets reduced by 45%, while its 
power supply eﬃciency reaches as high as 95.3%, and the direct-
current (DC) eﬃciency achieves as high as 97%. 
Remote Work and Green Travel 
New Generation Green Data Center 
Cooperate with Huawei to Help Green and Intelligent New Infrastructure 
Industrial Recognition of Green Operation and Carbon Reduction 


2021 JD.com Environmental, Social and Governance Report
69
Low-Carbon Supply Chain 
Based on green and high-eﬃciency supply chain best practices, 
the “Green Stream Initiative” presents an important corporate 
sustainability strategy of JD.com, which carries out various low-
carbon and energy-saving practices in packaging, warehousing, 
transportation, and recycling. With the continuous 
implementation of the “Green Stream Initiative,” the Group is 
committed to shaping a symbiotic ecology to empower the 
sustainable development of global business society. Relying on 
its ﬁndings in exploring “all-chain carbon reduction measures,” 
JD.com has been oﬃcially selected as one of the “Best 
Practices for Enterprises to Achieve Sustainable Development 
Goals 2021 (carbon peak and carbon neutrality goals)” awarded 
by Global Compact China Network, which represents the 
eﬀorts and contributions made by JD.com in responding to 
global compact principles and promoting global sustainable 
development.
Green Packaging 
Regarding packaging design and use, JD.com always adheres 
to the principle of being green and sustainable and practices 
the concept of green packaging from the aspects of packaging 
material optimization, use of circular packaging, and the 
reduction of packaging. By the end of 2021, JD Logistics has 
driven the whole industry to reduce the consumption of 
disposable packaging by nearly 10 billion pieces.
JD.com advocates the use of renewable green materials, develops 
delivery bags applying degradable materials to replace petroleum-
based plastic bags, and is committed to promoting 100% renewable 
and replaceable packaging materials. It is estimated that by 2030, 
more than 80% of JD’s upstream brands will be motivated to develop 
environment-friendly packaging. 
JD Logistics uses reusable circular delivery boxes, foldable thermal 
insulation boxes, and circular transshipment bags instead of 
disposable plastic packaging. By the end of 2021, circular packaging 
such as the “Green Stream Boxes” have been used 200 million 
times. In August 2021, JD Logistics carried out a pilot project of 
circular packaging in Haikou, Hainan province, where more than 
10,000 circular packaging boxes were distributed, and for the ﬁrst 
time the circular delivery bags were piloted to reduce the use of 
disposable PE packaging bags gradually. JD Logistics will strengthen 
the collaboration with the upstream and downstream partners to 
promote the use of circular packaging across the whole supply chain. 
As important ways to reduce the amount of delivery packaging 
from the source, the modes of direct procurement from the place of 
origin, direct delivery of primary packaging, and direct shipment of 
the aggregate orders are adopted. JD Logistics encourages upstream 
brands and enterprises to implement primary packaging by providing 
them with preferential policies for warehouse entry. Direct delivery 
of primary packaging has been adopted by thousands of SKUs from 
brands such as P&G and Unilever, which has demonstrated the great 
value in saving the packaging materials. 
The “Green Stream Initiative” boosts packaging reduction by 
engaging the brand partners and empowering the systematic 
green transformation of the industry. So far it has helped save 10 
billion delivery cartons annually and motivates more than 200,000 
merchants and hundreds of millions of consumers to act. During 
the Singles Day Grand Promotion in 2021, each parcel delivered to 
consumers reduced paper packaging materials by 210 grams. Each 
parcel reduced disposable plastics by 11 grams and 25 centimeters of 
adhesive tape on average thanks to the implementation of the Green 
Stream Initiative.
JD Logistics has driven the whole industry to reduce 
the consumption of disposable packaging by  
nearly 10 billion pieces
Circular packaging such as the “Green Stream 
Box” has been used for  
200 million times
It is estimated that by 2030, more than 
80% of JD’s upstream brands will be 
motivated to develop environment-friendly 
packaging
So far, the Green Stream Initiative has helped 
save 10 billion delivery cartons annually 
and motivates more than 200,000 
merchants and hundreds of 
millions of consumers to act
During the Singles Day Grand Promotion in 2021, 
each parcel delivered to consumers reduced paper 
packaging materials by 210 grams.  
Each parcel reduced disposable plastics by 11 
grams and 25 centimeters of adhesive tape on 
average
Packaging Material Optimization 
Circular Packaging 
Packaging Material Reduction
Safeguarding the Natural Environment
70


2021 JD.com Environmental, Social and Governance Report
Safeguarding the Natural Environment
71
72
Green Transportation  
To make the company’s footprints on the road greener, JD 
Logistics has successively deployed new energy vehicles in 
more than 50 cities across the country to replace traditional 
fuel cargo vans. By the end of 2021, the number of new energy 
logistics vehicles reached 20,000, which can reduce carbon 
dioxide emissions by about 400,000 tons per year, equivalent to 
the annual carbon dioxide absorption by 20 million trees. 
At the 2021 Global Smart Supply Chain Summit, JD Logistics 
launched the 5.0 version of autonomous delivery vehicles 
with markedly enhanced automation and speed performance. 
During JD.com Singles Day Grand Promotion, nearly 400 JD 
Logistics autonomous delivery vehicles were in service. These 
vehicles were distributed in over 25 cities across the country, 
and the number of delivered orders increased by over 200% 
compared with the same period of the last year. Autonomous 
delivery vehicles are incrementally becoming a vital supporting 
force in the last mile distribution and safeguarding the delivery 
of anti-epidemic supplies. In the coming two to three years, JD 
Logistics will continue developing and launching thousands of 
autonomous delivery vehicles to improve the user experience 
and logistics eﬃciency.  
JD.com Singles Day Grand Promotion 
Leads Sustainable Consumption 
Shopping festivals, such as JD’s Singles Day Grand Promotion, 
present great opportunities for us to promote environmental-
friendly products and low-carbon logistics services. At the 
same time, we actively advocate the concept of sustainable 
consumption and a greener lifestyle.
In 2021, JD.com oﬀered massive types of products that meet the 
“green consumption” standards during the Singles Day Grand 
Promotion. As of November 7, consumers had purchased more 
than 3.5 million energy-saving products and more than 400,000 
water-saving products from JD.com. 
On the aspect of logistics services, recycled packages were used 
11.35 million times accumulatively during the shopping festival, 
which is equivalent to reducing the disposable garbage by 3,400 
tons. At the same time, JD Logistics’ all-chain carbon reduction 
measures throughout the logistics processes reduced carbon 
emissions by 26,000 tons during the event.
Green Warehousing 
The Group actively promotes more intelligent industrial 
parks to achieve zero carbon emissions through “green 
infrastructure + carbon reduction technology innovation.” 
JD.com’s Xi’an “Asia No.1” Logistics Industrial Park has 
obtained the carbon neutrality certiﬁcation issued by the 
Beijing Green Exchange and Centre Testing International 
(CTI). Shenzhen CTI, a third-party certiﬁcation body 
authorized by the China National Accreditation Council 
for Conformity Assessment (CNAS), has veriﬁed the 
greenhouse gas emissions of the park are in line with 
the international standard ISO14064. According to the 
veriﬁcation results, the park has realized the application 
of a distributed photovoltaic power generation system 
and an energy storage system on the warehouse roofs 
and independently neutralized part of greenhouse gas 
emissions. With the support and guidance of the Beijing 
Green Exchange, the remaining emissions were oﬀset 
by purchasing Chinese Certiﬁed Emission Reduction 
(CCER). Hence Xi’an “Asia No.1” Logistics Industrial Park 
has realized carbon neutrality in 2021, becoming the ﬁrst 
“zero-carbon” logistics park in China. 
Since 2018, JD.com had fully started the construction of a 
roof photovoltaic power generation capacity ecosystem, 
and comprehensively promoted the deployment and 
application of clean energy based on photovoltaic power 
generation in JD.com’s smart industrial parks. By the 
end of 2021, JD.com had completed the installation of 
photovoltaic power generation systems in the ﬁrst batch 
of 12 smart industrial parks. We expect to build a total 
photovoltaic power generation capacity of 1,000 MW in 
three years, which can provide adequate green energy 
for 85% of JD.com’s smart industrial parks. In addition to 
Xi’an “Asia No.1,” Suqian “Asia No.1” Smart Industrial Park, 
located in Jiangsu province, is also actively promoting 
the distributed photovoltaic installation and systematic 
energy transformation, and it plans to build another 
carbon-neutral demonstration park in early 2023. 
The logistic industrial parks of JD.com are equipped 
with the rainwater collection system. The collected 
rainwater will be used for aﬀorestation irrigation and road 
cleaning in industrial parks. Through the process such as 
heating supply and cooling, rainwater recycling as well 
as the reuse of the reclaimed water, the consumption 
of circulating water in JD’s intelligent industrial parks in 
China amounted to about 22,750 tons annually. 
Regarding resource recycling, the management personnel 
of JD logistic industrial parks assign the roles and 
responsibilities of collection and recycling of diﬀerent 
wastes to various divisions. The property management 
team is mainly responsible for domestic garbage, 
including a designated collection of harmful pollutants 
and classiﬁed garbage disposal.  The staﬀ canteen 
team takes care of the kitchen wastes. JD Logistics is 
responsible for recycling logistic waste such as packing 
boxes. With all eﬀorts made, JD aims to minimize the 
impact of wastes on the ecological environment.
In addition, JD.com actively uses green supply chain 
technology to empower the green development of 
the industry. We provided the customized services for 
BMW Hefei to construct the regional aftermarket parts 
center, which has obtained LEED (Leadership in Energy 
and Environmental Design) certiﬁcation. BMW Hefei 
Aftermarket Parts Distribution Center has become BMW’s 
ﬁrst “green warehouse” of aftermarket parts in China that 
meets LEED certiﬁcation standards, providing an excellent 
model for green warehousing development.
During the Singles Day Grand Promotion in 
2021, JD Logistics’ all-chain carbon reduction 
measures throughout the logistics processes 
reduced carbon emissions by  
26,000 tons during the event


2021 JD.com Environmental, Social and Governance Report
Promoting Inclusive Development of the Society
73
74
Promoting Inclusive Development of 
the Society
Part VI
JD.com supports rural revitalization through the “Benfu Plan.” The Plan empowers SMEs with 
digital technology and develops various public welfare activities. It also facilitates the two-way 
ﬂow of resource elements between urban and rural areas, which enables more people to pursue 
a better life and promotes an inclusive society. 


2021 JD.com Environmental, Social and Governance Report
Promoting Inclusive Development of the Society
75
76
Public Welfare Concept and Policy 
The Focus Areas of Philanthropic Eﬀorts
JD.com supports charitable activities through JD Foundation. 
Based on the online public fund-raising platforms such as 
“Collecting Objective with Love” and “Nuan Dong Philanthropy,” 
JD.com has launched a series of corporate philanthropy 
programs such as the “Book Sharing” Children’s Book Donation 
program.  The main focus areas cover rural revitalization, rural 
education, inclusive medical care, anti-epidemic and disaster 
relief, etc. In 2021, the total amount of JD Foundation’s donation 
exceeded RMB 120 million. By leveraging their own business 
strength, all business units of JD.com actively pursue the 
company’s philosophy for public beneﬁt and conduct diversiﬁed 
activities to promote the well-being of society.
We actively fulﬁll our social responsibilities in safeguarding people’s lives, rural revitalization, education support, healthcare, and 
emergency relief by consistently conducting diversiﬁed philanthropic programs.
Survival Safeguard
JD Rural Revitalization “Benfu Plan” 
By the end of 2021, the total number of JD.com’s full-time employees reached 380,000. We secure the employment and livelihood of 
our employees and their families by providing essential welfare safeguards and rolling out a series of favorable welfare policies that are 
superior to the industry’s average practices.
JD.com attaches great importance to serving the development of agriculture, rural areas, and farmers. We have been devoted to the 
nation’s poverty alleviation since 2016. We positively contributed to the complete victory in ﬁghting against poverty through a series 
of targeted alleviation eﬀorts in rural areas, including supporting relevant industries, promoting consumption, enlarging employment, 
supporting entrepreneurship, giving donations, providing ﬁnancial support, empowering technology infrastructure, strengthening 
the healthcare system, etc. JD.com has initiated and promoted the “Benfu Plan” since October 2020. By the end of 2021, the “Benfu 
Plan” had driven the production value in rural areas to reach RMB 320 billion, which helped millions of farmers increase their income 
substantially. We take full advantage of our smart and connected supply chain and are committed to interconnecting the rural 
industrial chains. JD.com well demonstrates its ﬁve core competencies in supply chain, logistics, technology, ﬁnance, and service in 
supporting the nation’s rural revitalization strategy.
In 2021, the total amount of JD 
Foundation’s donation exceeded  
RMB 120 million 
The promotion of the rural industrial chain is essential for accelerating 
rural revitalization. As of the end of December 2021, JD.com had 
cooperated with more than 1,000 agricultural specialties production 
zones and agricultural industry belts in China. Meanwhile, JD.com 
directly connected to more than 500 large-scale, high-quality vegetable 
planting bases and jointly built more than 70 modernized, standardized, 
and smart farms. By establishing more than 700 online pavilions for 
local specialties, JD.com helped farmers in remote or underdeveloped 
areas to expand market channels for their agricultural and handicraft 
products. At the same time, JD.com provided job opportunities for a 
signiﬁcant number of migrant workers who returned to their hometowns. 
Meanwhile, JD.com guaranteed solid revenue to more than 200,000 rural 
families through stable income, social insurance, housing fund, etc. 
Empowering Rural Industrial Chain with JD’s Supply Chain and Building the “Rural Revitalization 
Expressway” with Five Core Competencies
JD.com guaranteed solid revenue to 
more than  
200,000 rural families
Supply chain 
empowerment 
New 
infrastructure 
construction 
Financial 
support
Smart and connected village
Supporting 
industrial 
belts
Ecosystem
Rural 
grassroots 
health care
Five core 
competencies
Supply chain 
Service  
Technology 
Logistics  
Finance  


2021 JD.com Environmental, Social and Governance Report
Promoting Inclusive Development of the Society
77
78
We have signiﬁcantly improved the eﬀectiveness of our logistics 
delivery in remote areas by building “Asia No.1” Logistics 
Industrial Park in Urumqi, Yinchuan, Deyang, and other central 
and western regions of China. 
In 2021, led by JD.com, the AllianzJD Insurance Sichuan branch 
developed a demonstrating service model of rural revitalization 
in Xiuwen, Guizhou province. This project planned to provide 
agriculture-related insurance services for famous local kiwifruit, 
covering product liability insurance and price insurance. 
Furthermore, the project beneﬁted the supply chain facilities 
such as production, warehouse, and logistics and helped rural 
revitalization in Xiuwen county by exerting JD’s expertise in 
insurance. 
Supporting the Supply Chain Construction 
in Central and Western China 
Providing Insurance for Supply Chain of 
Agricultural Products
Empowering All-Chain of Rural Revitalization by Digitalizing Agriculture and Constructing New 
Infrastructure in Rural Areas
Rural Education 
We are committed to promoting education in poverty-stricken 
areas in China. Based on our public welfare platform of 
“Collecting Objectives with Love,” we have taken on a series of 
corporate philanthropy programs by incorporating our smart 
and connected supply chain capability.
Since 2018, JD.com has jointly launched a Children Books 
Donation Campaign with Stars Youth Development Center 
(SYDC). Together with the People’s Daily App, we further 
promoted this Donation Campaign in 2021. This campaign aims 
to help rural schools that lack book resources update their library 
collections, enrich the reading world of children in remote rural 
areas and improve local children’s reading quality. In this event, 
JD’s couriers pick up the books from donors for free and deliver 
them to the designated schools under the guidance of the SYDC. 
The Children Books Donation Campaign not only responds to 
the advocacy of “World Book Day,” but also promotes book 
recycling and contributes to environmental protection. During 
the 2021 event, 67,608 valid children’s books were donated to 
119 project sites in 17 provinces, municipalities and autonomous 
regions through the JD Giving Platform. 
During the 2021 event,  
67,608 valid children’s books 
were donated through the JD Giving 
Platform
Children Books Donation Campaign 
By persistently strengthening our supply chain advantages in the countryside and sharing our solid capabilities 
in infrastructure construction and technology innovation, we set up the all-chain of rural revitalization that 
empowers rural industrial development. In 2021, JD Fresh collaborated with the China Geographical Indications 
Industry Associations(CGIIA) of 21 provinces, municipalities and autonomous regions in China, which advanced 
the sales and brand exposure of local landmark products such as Jiangsu Suqian Diwang Crabs, Fujian Ningde 
Big Yellow Crocker, Guizhou Xiuwen Kiwifruit, etc., and consequently helped agricultural specialty products to 
achieve scalable, high-quality, and brand-driven development. 
JD Technology also fully boosts the sustainable development of rural revitalization. JD Technology assists 
multiple agricultural product brands such as Baishui Apples, Tongchuan Chinese Herbal Medicine, and Sichuan 
Meishan Citrus in achieving an industrial upgrade. By initiating the “Village Empowerment Action
9” through our 
Jingxi Farm
10, we  led over ten thousand farmers in eight provinces to reduce costs and increase income. This 
uplifted the average yield per mu by 10-20% and resulted in cost-saving of up to RMB 50-100 per mu every year (a 
mu=0.0667 hectares). 
JD’s private label brand HuiXun cooperates with Dida Agriculture in Shanhe Town of the Wuchang City in 
Heilongjiang province to develop a specialized product of pearl rice that is only ground after the order is 
placed. The cooperation between HuiXun and Dida Agriculture closely connects the very ﬁrst and the very last 
kilometer in the logistics of agricultural products, which signiﬁcantly shortens the product circulation process. 
JD.com’s e-commerce platform stimulates product sales for local enterprises and simultaneously helps the local 
communities to generate more income. In the meantime, the new business model with a partnership between 
the e-commerce platform and brands also provides a demonstrating model that attracts local youths to start 
businesses back to their hometowns. In 2021, through cooperation with HuiXun, the purchase orders received by 
Dida Agriculture increased by 700%, while the logistics cost decreased by about 40%. 
JD Health launched an online healthcare service, “Zhen Jing Cai,” aiming to increase the accessibility of the 
medical supply chain in the rural areas, and promote the training of rural doctors. Zhen Jing Cai improved the 
digital intelligence capability of medical care institutions in rural areas and helped rural patients get diagnosed 
and receive timely medical treatment. 
9  
“Village Empowerment Action” is one of the speciﬁc programs in JD’s “Benfu” Plan.
10 Jingxi Farm is a rural revitalization solution launched by JD’s online consumption mall Jingxi.


2021 JD.com Environmental, Social and Governance Report
Promoting Inclusive Development of the Society
79
80
In 2021, JD.com joined hands with the China Social Assistance 
Foundation to launch the “Dreams-Come-True” public 
welfare activity, aiming to improve the living conditions for 
the children in Dayi Hope Primary School of Gaixin Village in 
Pu’er City of Yunnan province, Huanggang Primary School 
of Shuangjiang Township in Liping County, Qiandongnan 
Prefecture of Guizhou province, and Yuhua Hope Primary 
School of Datai Village in Fuping County, Baoding City of 
Hebei province. We helped the children to realize their dreams 
according to the “wish list” collected from all the school 
children, aiming to convey social values. 
In 2021, we worked with several partnered brands to sponsor 
a gamiﬁcation public welfare campaign, “JD Fun Festival.” 
We donated various materials and services worth about RMB 
967,000, including children’s healthcare products, health 
consultations, household appliances, amusement park tickets, 
etc. We provided livelihood support for the children in SOS 
Children’s Villages from remote regions, brought hope to 
hundreds of children who have lost their families and enabled 
them to feel warmth and care from the society.  
Medical Health 
Emergency Support 
By organizing thematic public welfare activities on 
international health days, JD.com advocates a healthy lifestyle 
and calls on the whole society to care for patients with various 
major diseases. 
Over the years, JD.com has actively participated in disaster 
relief and epidemic prevention tasks by leveraging its unique 
strength in a smart and connected supply chain. As an 
enterprise with the capability to reserve living necessities 
for city-level supplies backed by a nationwide supply chain 
network, we can quickly respond to situations from regular 
times to emergencies. We have a stable and powerful supply 
chain which can provide the whole process of supply chain 
services from upstream production and procurement to last-
On the eve of the Rare Diseases Day 2021, JD Health launched 
the “Rare Diseases Care Program” and established the “JD 
Health Rare Diseases Care Fund” together with the Beijing 
Illness Challenge Foundation (ICF). By connecting forces 
from all walks of life, we build a one-stop solution platform 
integrating “medical consultation, medication, insurance, 
and public welfare,” and provide comprehensive medicines 
and medical services for rare disease populations to help 
them alleviate three major barriers namely, the diﬃculty in 
accessing high-quality diagnosis and treatment, necessary 
medicines and ﬁnancial support. In 2021, more than 24,000 
patients with rare diseases purchased relevant medicines and 
obtained corresponding medication services from JD Health, 
and the Fund has aided 69 patients with rare diseases.
On World Breath Day in June 2021, the JD Foundation and 
nonproﬁt organizations such as DaAiQingChen, launched 
public welfare science popularization activities, drawing 
the public’s attention to respiratory health and care for 
pneumoconiosis patients. In addition to popular science 
activities, JD Foundation launched the second phase of the 
“Oxygenate Life” project, which sourced 15 oxygen generators 
and 200,000 masks to donate to pneumoconiosis patients. 
Collaborating with the Chinese Foundation for the Prevention 
of STD and AIDS, JD Health launched a special event on World 
AIDS Day, introducing a one-stop anti-AIDS solution ranging 
from relevant knowledge sharing on HIV/AIDS prevention, to 
treatment, providing reliable healthcare services to all the 
people regardless of their conditions. 
mile distribution. Our eﬃcient digital command and dispatch 
system provides high eﬃciency supply services for emergency 
materials allocation. Our self-operated business can help 
stabilize prices in special periods, and it is the “stabilizer” of 
emergency support systems in various places. In 2021, JD.com 
fully leveraged its experiences in anti-epidemic and disaster 
relief and spared no eﬀort to ensure an adequate supply of 
relief materials in disaster-stricken and epidemic-aﬀected 
areas. 
Assist Regular Health Management When Epidemic Prevention Becomes Routine
The “JD Health Rare Diseases Care Fund” has aided  
69 patients with rare diseases in 2021
JD Foundation sourced 15 oxygen generators 
and 200,000 masks to donate to 
pneumoconiosis patients
Rural Children’s Dreams-Come-True Plan 
JD Health’s Rare Diseases Care Program 
“Oxygenate Life” Project for Pneumoconiosis 
Patients 
Joined Responsibility and Eﬀorts on AIDS 
Prevention  
SOS Children’s Village in China
JD Health 
Free Online 
Consultation 
Services
Intelligent 
Government 
Service Hotline
COVID-19 
Vaccination 
Information 
Sharing Platform
Green Online 
Channel for 
COVID-19 Insurance 
Claim
JD Health also oﬀered free online consultation services in these areas, so as to eﬀectively meet people’s 
urgent need for healthcare support. 
JD.com introduced a new generation of intelligent government service hotline, which supported 
the local governments with epidemic screening work during the outbreak of epidemic in Dongguan, 
Guangdong Province in December 2021, and completed the joint screening work in only 4 hours, serving 
millions of citizens in the city. And the feedback information was collected, analyzed, and assessed to 
generate detailed reports, which were used by city governors and relevant epidemic prevention and 
control departments as a piece of important information to carry out precise anti-epidemic measures.
JD Health upgraded its online reservation and onsite testing service of nucleic acid testing and 
launched the “COVID-19 Vaccination Information Sharing Platform” to help residents get timely 
vaccination information in their cities. 
AllianzJD opened the original-bill-free mode for minor claim cases during the epidemic period, and 
the green online claim channel is opened for all COVID-19 medical cases, which is of great signiﬁcance 
under the global outbreak of COVID-19. AllianzJD also launched a series of innovative products and 
services for companies with a global business presence and provided relevant support for global 
transshipment and medical services for the COVID-19 epidemic cases. There were 1,197 COVID-19 
related claims throughout 2021, with a total indemnity of RMB 11.34 million, including many overseas 
claims cases, and more than 95% of claims were settled through the green online channel. 


2021 JD.com Environmental, Social and Governance Report
Promoting Inclusive Development of the Society
81
82
JD.com highly values the timely supply of emergency materials in case of disasters, epidemics, and other major accidents. JD 
has made a commitment that the managers of JD’s warehouses near the site of emergency are endowed with the authority to 
donate relief items needed by disaster areas from the warehouses without getting approval from upper management. 
After the outbreak of ﬂood disasters as well as the regional epidemics, JD.com kicked oﬀ the emergency mechanism 
immediately to exert the capacity of logistics infrastructure and ensure that living necessities and relief materials are delivered 
to the aﬀected areas in a timely and eﬃcient manner. During the ﬂood season in Henan province, JD.com rapidly raised and 
transported several disaster relief materials to the disaster-stricken areas. On the anti-epidemic front line, JD.com’s autonomous 
delivery vehicles undertook the heavy responsibility of ensuring the supply of livelihood materials in the epidemic control areas. 
And JD Health launched a 24-hour free online consultation service, provided emergency supplies of disinfection and epidemic 
prevention materials, and set up an oﬄine medical rescue team to carry out onsite diagnosis and treatment. 
JD Super, JD.com’s omnichannel supermarket actively conducted the stock-taking with various brand owners and suppliers. 
The physical stores of our oﬄine brand, such as SEVEN FRESH, replenished the livelihood supplies to ensure an adequate supply 
with stable prices in cities under the medium and high COVID-19 risks for at least 20 days. 
Materials Supply and Transportation Support 
Animal Protection 
We actively cooperate with animal protection foundations as well as rescue stations and undertake philanthropic actions to ensure the 
pet food supply of stray animal rescue stations. 
JD.com has formulated the Prohibited Goods and Information Management Standard for JD.com’s Open Platform according to the 
Law of the PRC on Wildlife Protection, the Regulations of the PRC on the Implementation of Terrestrial Wildlife Protection, the Fisheries 
Law of the PRC, as well as other relevant laws and regulations. The Standard prohibits the sale of animal killing tools, equipment, and 
accessories that seriously endanger animal safety, including electric ﬁsh traps, bird nets, hunting clips, stumble covers, etc. JD also 
sorts out the common illegal hunting and ﬁshing tools by establishing a special team. The special team also adopts an interception 
strategy empowered by digital technologies, as well as takes manual inspections ensuring to interdict illegal commodities before, 
during, and after the illicit products occur on our platform. We delist all illegal items and eﬀectively cut oﬀ the selling channels for 
illegal hunting and ﬁshing tools on our platform, which help prevent the wildlife and ﬁshery resource from being damaged and make 
our own contribution to the ecological environment protection.
JD Pet worked with nonproﬁt organizations and various pet-caring brands to launch the “Warm Winter Care Plan” 
during the 2021 JD.com Chinese New Year Grand Promotion. The Plan donated 10,000 kilograms of pet food for 
stray animals.
JD launched the “Order for Philanthropy Project” in 2021. Consumers can convert every online purchasing order on 
JD.com into the caring energy to donate. JD and pet product brands will match the caring energy to donate the pet 
food and vaccination services to stray animal rescue stations. The project provided concrete help to the stray pets, 
helped reduce the homeless animals, and mitigated the related social problems as well.
JD announced a donation of RMB 100 million worth of anti-epidemic relief 
supplies to healthcare professionals in Hong Kong on February 18, 2022. JD 
also maintained close communication with the social organization “Hong 
Kong Community Anti-Coronavirus Link,” to provide support whenever 
necessary in the ﬁght against the pandemic resurgence in Hong Kong. 
Thanks to the rapid response mechanism of the strong supply chain 
system, the ﬁrst batch of JD’s donations of 6,000 cartons of epidemic 
prevention supplies successively arrived in Hong Kong on February 23, 
2022. Furthermore, to meet Hong Kong residents’ surging demand for 
anti-epidemic and life necessities, JD mobilized inventories and set up a 
special portal on its App to oﬀer online shopping convenience for Hong 
Kong customers.  In addition, JD Health launched a free online consultation 
service for users in Hong Kong to have easy access to healthcare advice 
from telemedicine doctors and multimedia guidance on coronavirus 
infection prevention. 
Supported Hong Kong for Epidemic Relief with 
Various Measures


2021 JD.com Environmental, Social and Governance Report
Thematic Report on Climate-related Financial Information Disclosures
83
84
Thematic Report on Climate-related Financial 
Information Disclosures 
The crisis of climate change is threatening the safety of business assets and operations, while proactively tackling climate change can 
bring new opportunities for sustainable business growth. Meanwhile, business activities are also one of the principal causes of global 
warming. Enterprises are playing an increasingly important role in global climate and environmental governance. JD.com is committed 
to building a more productive and sustainable world. Relying on its business impact alongside the supply chain, JD.com is taking a 
leading role in engaging more partners in climate actions. In 2021, JD.com made a carbon reduction declaration to the whole value 
chain it operates in, established a green ﬁnancial framework, and continued to expand the inﬂuence of the Green Stream Initiative. 
JD.com is accelerating its low-carbon development through technology, promoting the green transition of the industry, and leading 
the society towards greener consumption. 
The recommended framework released by Task Force on Climate-related Financial Disclosures (TCFD) in 2021 is the world’s most 
inﬂuential and widely applied climate information disclosure standard. Referring to the framework suggested by TCFD, JD.com 
disclosed its climate-related governance structure, the strategic process of risks and opportunities identiﬁcation, risk management, 
and goals.
The Board of Directors of JD.com has continuously promoted the governance of the company’s climate-related risks and opportunities. 
The board of directors follows the company’s ESG governance system structure and cooperates with the Strategy Execution Committee 
(SEC) to jointly manage, supervise, and regularly review the implementation and progress of the company’s climate governance. 
The SEC conducts daily supervision and reporting with respect to climate-related risks and opportunities governance. At the same 
time, the ESG Task Force of JD.com is responsible for coordinating the daily management of climate-related risks and opportunities 
and collaborating with the relevant responsible persons from business groups and units to implement and promote related work. 
To better understand the potential impact of climate change on JD’s business, JD.com conducted a climate scenario analysis for JD’s 
external business environment in 2025 and 2030, including ecological, economic, social, etc., based on the shared socio-economic 
pathway (SSP) assumption adopted by the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC). 
Governance
Strategy 
In Diﬀerent Climate Scenarios
11, the Forecast of Macro-Environmental Situation Confronted 
by JD.com 
Management’s Role in Assessing and Managing Risks and Opportunities 
The Board’s Oversight of Climate-Related Risks and Opportunities 
Table 1: Forecast of Macro-Environmental Situation that JD.com May Face in Diﬀerent Climate Scenarios 
SSP1 (low emission scenario with strict climate 
change policy intervention) 
SSP3 (high emission scenario without 
climate change policy intervention) 
Natural 
ecology
12
 
●Mean temperature: 1.6℃ higher in 2040 than in the pre-
industrial period (a rise of 2.0℃ as in 2100).
 
●Sea level rise: 0.1m higher in 2040 than the current level (a 
rise of 0.4m as in 2100).
 
●Extreme climates: the frequency and intensity increase to 
some extent.
 
●Precipitation: When the temperature rises by 1.5-2.0℃, 
many parts of the world will encounter more severe 
agricultural and ecological drought, while the precipitation 
intensity in certain localities will increase by 10.5%-14%. 
 
●Mean temperature: 1.6℃ higher in 2040 than 
in the pre-industrial period (a rise of 3.9℃ as in 
2100).
 
●Sea level rise: 0.1m higher in 2040 than the 
current level (a rise of 0.6m as in 2100).
 
●Extreme climates: the frequency and intensity 
increase signiﬁcantly.
 
●Precipitation: When the temperature rises by 2.0-
4.0℃, most parts of the world will undergo more 
serious agricultural and ecological drought, 
while the precipitation intensity in certain 
localities will increase by 14.0%-30.2%. 
Socio-economic 
environment
13
 
●Global climate policy: major countries and regions in 
the world have announced the carbon neutrality paths 
(including China’s carbon peak by 2030 and neutrality goals 
by 2060) and strictly implemented the planned targets. 
 
●Global business models: from fossil fuel-dependent 
economy to renewable energy-driven economy.
 
●Greenhouse gas emissions in China: the carbon dioxide 
emission per unit of GDP will decrease by 18% in 2025 as 
compared with that in 2020, and by more than 65% in 2030 
as compared with that in 2005. 
 
●Carbon price in China: in 2025 and 2030, the carbon price 
is expected to reach RMB 63-87 and RMB 77-139 per ton 
respectively. 
 
●Energy consumption structure in China: the proportion of 
non-fossil fuels in primary energy consumption will reach 
20% in 2025 and 25% in 2030. 
 
●New energy vehicles in China: by 2025, the sales of new 
energy vehicles will reach about 20% of the total sales of 
new cars; and by 2030, the proportion of vehicles powered 
by new energy and clean energy will reach about 40%. 
 
●Consumption trend in China: by 2025, the green 
consumption will be widely popularized, and the market 
share of green low-carbon products will be signiﬁcantly 
increased; by 2030, green consumption will become the 
conscious choice of the public, and green and low-carbon 
products will be dominant in the market. 
 
●Global climate policy: some countries and 
regions still lack carbon neutrality goals and 
have no detailed short-term climate actions and 
long-term goals. 
 
●Global business models: proﬁt-driven business 
model, which fails to properly consider the 
environmental and social impacts, without 
obvious ﬂuctuation in renewable energy 
portfolio. 
 
●Greenhouse gas emissions in China: as in 2030, 
greenhouse gas emissions will increase by 38% 
compared with the present level. 
 
●Carbon price in China: as in 2025 and 2030, the 
carbon price keeps the same as that of 2021, 
which is RMB 49-56 per ton. 
 
●Energy consumption structure in China: the 
proportion of non-fossil fuels in primary energy 
consumption maintains as that in 2020, about 
16%. 
 
●New energy vehicles in China: the proportion 
of new energy vehicle sales to total new vehicle 
sales maintains as that in 2021, which is 11.25%. 
 
●Consumption trend in China: the concept of 
green consumption is still not dominant, and the 
market for green low-carbon products is limited. 
12 
 Sources: the sixth assessment report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) Working Group (WGI) and the CMIP6 climate model. 
13 
 Sources: Action Plan for the Nation’s Carbon Peak before 2030 issued by the State Council in 2021, Guidance on Climate Disclosures issued by HKEX in 2021, national 
carbon market transactions as of the end of 2021 issued by the Ministry of Ecology and Environment, China’s carbon market price forecast issued by Reﬁnitiv in 
2021, China’s carbon price survey in 2021 issued by China Carbon Forum, the New Energy Vehicle Industry Development Plan (2021-2035) issued by the State 
Council at the end of 2020, the proportion of new energy vehicles in China as of the end of 2021 issued by People’s Daily, the Implementation Plan for Promoting 
Green Consumption issued by the National Development and Reform Commission and other departments in 2022, and the Carbon Neutralization Path of China’s 
Energy Industry issued by the International Energy Agency (IEA) in 2021. 
11 
 SSP1 and SSP3, i.e., emission scenarios under diﬀerent climate policy interventions.


2021 JD.com Environmental, Social and Governance Report
Thematic Report on Climate-related Financial Information Disclosures
85
86
By collecting the information provided by various departments and combining it with literature-based studies on climate, 
macro-environment, industrial policies, etc., we analyze the potential impacts of high emission scenarios and low emission 
scenarios on our operation, supply chain, retail business, technological innovation, and investment and ﬁnancing. We 
then identify the potential physical and transition risks in diﬀerent climate scenarios. We deﬁne risks and opportunities as 
short-term (S), medium-term (M) and long-term (L) inﬂuence periods according to whether the risks and opportunities have 
aﬀected the business and their impact cycles
14. 
High emission scenario (SSP3), the potential impact of physical risks on JD.com business, risk identiﬁcation and impact cycle. 
Heatwave, Sea Level Rise, Flood, Frequent Extreme Weather, and Biodiversity Loss. 
According to the 2021-2022 global risk ranking of the World Economic Forum Global Risk Perception 
Survey (GRPS) in the next decade, climate-related risks such as climate action failures, extreme 
weather, and biodiversity loss are listed as the three most severe global risks. At the same time, the 
research also suggests the potential consequences caused by these climate-related physical risks, 
especially the impact on the sustainable development of enterprises. These impacts include Natural 
Resource Crises, Human Health Crises, Ecological Environment Damage, and Infrastructure Failure. 
Based on these impact dimensions, we summarize and describe the potential risks of JD.com. 
Potential Risks and Opportunities for JD.com in Diﬀerent Climate Scenarios 
Strategic 
dimension
Impact 
dimension
Risk description
Physical risk 
classiﬁcation
Impact 
Cycle
Operation
Infrastructure 
Failure
 
●The frequency of extreme natural disasters such as extreme 
precipitation, ﬂoods, typhoons, thunderstorms and extreme high/
low temperature weather events caused by climate change will 
increase, which damages the buildings and operational stability 
such as oﬃce buildings, smart industrial parks and data centers, 
and increases the cost for maintaining infrastructure such as 
warehouses and data centers. According to relevant statistic 
data, from 2000 to 2019, the frequency of ﬂood disasters in China 
increased signiﬁcantly as compared with the period from 1980 to 
1999. In 2021, Henan and Shanxi Province suﬀered from extreme 
precipitation events
15, which caused serious disasters and had an 
impact on warehousing and operation sites.
 
●Future sea level rise may force the infrastructure and business 
in coastal areas to relocate to inland areas, which will increase 
operating costs.
 
●Heatwave
 
●Flood
 
●Sea Level Rise
 
●Frequent 
Occurrence 
of Extreme 
Weather
Operation
Human Health 
Crises;
Ecological 
Environment 
Damage
 
●The increased risk of infectious diseases
16 and air pollutants caused 
by climate change will aﬀect the health and safety of employees, 
especially front-line employees.
 
●Increased heat weather events will reduce the working eﬃciency 
of employees of JD.com, endanger health and safety, and increase 
high temperature subsidies and medical expenses.
 
●With the increasing frequency of drought disasters, the consequent 
wildﬁres will cause heat damage. The smoke and dust will harm 
public health. For example, compared with the period 2001-2005, 
the annual average wildﬁre exposure
17 in China for the period 2016-
2020 increases by 24.5%
18.
 
●If JD.com’s suppliers, customers or business partners are threatened 
in respect to health and safety, JD com’s operation may be 
interrupted and damaged.
 
●Biodiversity 
Loss
 
●Heatwave
Supply  
chain 
management
Infrastructure 
Failure
Floods, typhoons, thunderstorms, higher frequency of extremely high/
low temperature weather caused by climate change will increase 
the possibility of damage to logistics infrastructure (including 
business-related facilities, regional order fulﬁlment centers, front-end 
distribution centers, other newly-established warehouses, distribution 
stations or self-pickup outlets, and road facilities), which will lead 
to the reduction of operational eﬃciency or even failure of regional 
order fulﬁlment centers, and subsequently a negative impact on 
commodity transportation, delivery and sales of goods. For example, 
severe rainstorm and ﬂood will damage the logistics planning of route, 
storage and transportation network, and the battery components 
of transport vehicles may be damaged due to heatwave or extreme 
cold weather, which will aﬀect the express delivery eﬃciency and the 
enterprise income.
 
●Heatwave
 
●Flood
 
●Frequent 
Occurrence 
of Extreme 
Weather
Ecological 
Environment 
Damage;
Nature 
Resource 
Crises
The ﬂood, typhoon, thunderstorm, and high frequency of extreme 
high/low temperature weather caused by climate change will aﬀect 
the supply and transportation of raw materials, which will lead to the 
higher price of raw materials or the challenge to commodity supply 
and inventory. Seasonal commodities such as rain gear and quilts 
will adversely aﬀect the proﬁtability and business performance of 
JD.com’s brands and partner businesses. For example, the oﬄine fresh 
stores operated by JD.com’s 7FRESH rely on continuity and timeliness 
of various suppliers and sellers in providing and distributing JD.com’s 
storage of perishable products. However, if major suppliers or sellers 
encounter extreme weather events, and the production and quality 
of agricultural products decline, JD.com’s product inventory may be 
seriously damaged, thus aﬀecting the whole supply chain.
 
●Heatwave
 
●Flood
 
●Frequent 
Occurrence 
of Extreme 
Weather
Consumers/
users
Ecological 
Environment 
Damage
Climate change leads to the destruction of the ecological environment 
and brings challenges to food chain operation as well as food safety and 
quality, consequently reducing consumer satisfaction and increasing 
potential health risks. For JD.com, the cost for restoring consumers’ 
satisfaction and protecting their rights and interests will also increase 
accordingly.
 
●Biodiversity 
Loss
M
M
M
M
M
L
L
L
S
S
S
Table 2: Potential impact of physical risks on JD.com business in high emission scenario (SSP3), risk 
identiﬁcation and impact cycle 
14 As deﬁned in this topic, short-term is designated for less than 2 years, medium-term for 2-5 years, and long-term for more than 5 years. 
15 Source: 2021 Lancet Countdown Annual Report on Population Health and Climate Change, China Edition released by the Lancet Countdown Regional Centre in Asia.
16 Source: May Coronavirus pneumonia exist for a long time? released by UNEP in 2020”   
17 Average number of days per year that people are exposed to wildﬁres. 
18 Source: 2021 Lancet Countdown Annual Report on Population Health and Climate Change, China Edition released by the Lancet Countdown Asia Center. 
Physical risk 
classiﬁcation
Business 
impact 
brought by 
physical risks


2021 JD.com Environmental, Social and Governance Report
Thematic Report on Climate-related Financial Information Disclosures
87
88
Low emission scenario (SSP1), potential impact of transition risks on JD.com business, risk identiﬁcation, and impact 
cycle. 
In respect to the risk of business transformation caused by JD’s climate actions, the tightening of macro policies 
in the low emission scenario and the holistic low-carbon transformation tendency may bring enterprises more 
potential policy restrictions, which will aﬀect JD.com’s operation and income. 
Based on the sources of transition risk caused by climate change, the risks can be deﬁned as: Policy and Legal, 
Technology, Reputation, and Market.
Table 3: Climate-Related Transition Risks and Strategic Dimension, Risk Description, Classiﬁcation and 
Impact Cycle of JD.com in Low Emission Scenario (SSP1) 
Strategic 
dimension 
Risk description 
Classiﬁcation 
Impact 
Cycle
Low-carbon 
development 
trend of the 
society
Many countries and regions may implement stricter climate-related policies (such as 
implementing carbon price mechanism and shifting to renewable energy); “Opinions 
of the Central Committee of the CPC and the State Council on Carbon Dioxide Peaking 
and Carbon Neutrality in Full and Faithful Implementation of the New Development 
Philosophy” and “Action Plan for the Nation’s Carbon Peak Before 2030” have clearly 
pointed out the safeguard schemes, such as scientiﬁc and technological support, energy 
security, ﬁnancial and monetary pricing policies, etc., for implementing the carbon 
neutrality and emission peaking goals in key domains, industries and regions, as well as 
the transition trend of regionalization and industrialization. 
 
●Policy and 
Legal
Supply chain 
management 
Laws and 
regulations 
related 
to green 
supply 
chain are 
increasingly 
strict. 
China is intensively promulgating policies and regulations related to 
green transportation, plastic pollution control and green industrial 
park development during the 14th Five-Year Plan period. If we fail 
in strengthening compliance management and promoting the 
transformation in time, the logistics business of JD.com will face increasing 
regulatory pressure. 
 
●Transportation: The “14th Five-Year Plan for Green Transportation” 
clearly puts forward the green transition strategy of logistics 
transportation and speciﬁes more quantitative targets in reducing 
pollution and carbon emission, energy consumption structure of 
logistics vehicles and transportation structure, which has become the 
mandatory task that JD.com must complete. 
 
●Packaging: The “14th Five-Year Plan of Action for Plastic Pollution 
Control” and related packaging policies of the postal service and 
logistic industry put forward clear requirements and quantitative goals 
for the whole chain governance of plastic packaging, especially the 
reduction, standardization, circulation and easy recycling of e-commerce 
and delivery packages, and specify a clear timetable for packaging 
transformation and optimized management in JD.com. 
 
●Industrial parks: “The Implementation Plan for Special Action of 
Green Development of National High-tech Zones” points out that it is 
necessary to cooperate with industrial parks in urban energy green 
transition and maximize the use of clean energy and recycling-targeted 
transformation of parks to build a low-carbon city and develop a low-
carbon economy. 
 
●Policy and 
Legal
 
●Technology 
Supply chain 
management 
Pressure 
from the 
supply side
With the tightening of the national policy on dual control of energy 
consumption intensity and total amount, the power consumption of 
high-energy-consuming enterprises is limited, and the electricity price is 
increased, and the excessive response to energy transition will impact the 
energy market. The supply of high-energy-consuming industrial products 
will shrink, and enterprises in key emission industries will face the 
pressure of capacity contraction, which may lead to the price increase of 
raw materials and the adjustment of industrial structure. Some suppliers 
of JD.com will also be potentially aﬀected, and directly manifested in poor 
supply and rise of purchase prices. 
 
●Policy and 
Legal
 
●Technology 
Pressure 
from the 
transition 
cost 
The measures taken to cope with climate change, such as the “Green 
Stream Initiative,” including the use of new energy, research and 
development and purchase of carbon reduction technologies and low-
carbon infrastructure, will increase the company’s operating costs in the 
short term. 
Social and 
cultural 
transformation 
Public attitudes and consumption preferences have shifted, with more attention paid 
to the low-carbon attributes of commodities; and the younger generation attaches 
importance to the social value of enterprises when looking for jobs. Shifts in market 
preferences (such as consumer preferences, supply and demand) may lead to an increase 
in consumers’ demand for environmentally friendly products, which in turn will lead 
to potential cost increase, including but not limited to the cost caused by changes in 
manufacturing technique, processes and facilities, or the cost increase in raw materials, 
etc. If we lag behind our peers in grasping the direction of market changes, we may lose 
revenue and market share. For example, “the Notice of the General Oﬃce of the Ministry of 
Commerce on Promoting the Green Development of E-commerce Enterprises” encourages 
e-commerce platforms to actively promote green consumption and expand sales of 
energy-saving, environment-friendly and green products. 
 
●Market 
 
●Reputation 
 
●Policy and 
Legal
Technological 
progress and 
application 
Driven by policies, the superposition eﬀect of the “dual revolution” of information 
technology and energy technology will be further revealed, and the emission reduction 
eﬀect of new infrastructure on the intelligent upgrading and transformation of industries 
and the synergy of green elements will be fully exerted. JD.com shall develop its industry 
insight and enlarge the investment in research and development of energy-saving and 
emission reduction technology solutions to tackle the needs of various industries in 
some key areas of new infrastructure, such as data center eﬃciency, artiﬁcial intelligence, 
industrial internet, etc. Without implementing that, JD will lose its ﬁrst-mover advantage 
in the trend of green transformation of the society, which may further aﬀect the future 
revenue. It is also necessary to evaluate the corresponding risks in the research and 
development and application of technologies. 
 
●Technology 
 
●Policy and 
Legal 
 
●Reputation
Climate 
investment 
and  
ﬁnancing 
Research shows that there is still a huge funding gap to accomplish the green 
transformation. Policies encourage investment ﬂowing to green enterprises and establish 
a complete system for green credit, supervision, and rating management. By the end of 
2021, the central bank had successively launched tools for supporting carbon emission 
reduction and reﬁnancing for clean and eﬃcient utilization of coal to provide preferential 
interest rate support for eligible projects. At the same time, ESG investment, which takes 
enterprise environmental risks, especially climate risks as an important dimension of 
consideration, is developing rapidly. If JD.com fails to timely and quantitatively assess 
the climate-related risks and comprehensively evaluate the systematic impact of low-
carbon transformation on business, it may lose some potential investment and ﬁnancing 
opportunities. 
 
●Policy and 
Legal 
M
M
M
L
L
L
L
S
S
S
M
M
M
S


2021 JD.com Environmental, Social and Governance Report
Thematic Report on Climate-related Financial Information Disclosures
89
90
JD.com insists that green development is the main driver for the high-quality development. We aim to seize the opportunity of a new wave of 
the scientiﬁc and technological revolution and industrial market transformation in the process of transforming to a low-carbon economy and 
provide more eﬃcient and innovative solutions to tackle global climate risks through our technological innovation.
Transition Opportunities in Response to Climate Change 
Table 4: Strategic Direction, Transition Accomplishment, Classiﬁcation and Impact Cycle Under the 
Background of Low-Carbon Economic Transformation of JD.com 
Strategic 
direction 
Opportunity 
and strategy 
Transition accomplishment
Classiﬁcation Impact 
cycle
Green 
operation 
Develop 
photovoltaic 
industrial 
parks 
In 2021, JD.com has completed the construction of the ﬁrst batch of 12 
photovoltaic power generation systems for “Asia No.1” smart industrial parks, 
and another 1,000 megawatts of photovoltaic power generation capacity is 
expected to be built in three years by JD.com, providing green energy for 85% 
of JD.com smart industrial parks. Photovoltaic power generation can provide 
abundant, clean, and safe energy sources. Under the requirement of carbon 
neutrality, the market space of photovoltaic industry will gradually expand. 
 
●Energy 
source 
Promote 
green ﬁnance 
JD.com has formulated the Green Finance Framework, which systematically 
demonstrates the principles and processes of green ﬁnance in funding 
sustainable development projects. At the end of 2021, a ﬁve-year $2 billion green 
syndicated loan was signed. Green ﬁnancing can facilitate the projects that have 
positive environmental impacts and promote sustainable practices, so as to 
support the Group’s green and sustainable development strategy. 
 
●Markets
Monitor the 
climate risks 
by using big 
data 
JD.com will further explore new data management methods to provide early 
warning and decision-making support for the potential harm to employees when 
working in severe weather and the ﬂuctuation of business volume caused by the 
concentration of social demands in extreme weather. 
On the other hand, extreme weather may increase employees’ demand for 
remote work, and we will improve the performance of the data system to meet 
this demand. Through data-enabled and system-supported measures, the 
management risks caused by climate change can be reduced, and the internal 
management eﬃciency of the organization can be improved. 
 
●Resilience 
Build 
infrastructure 
with climate 
resilience 
 
●When constructing JD.com’s new headquarters buildings NO. 2 and NO. 3 
and its Southwest China headquarters oﬃce buildings, the designers fully 
considered the possible inﬂuence of extreme weather on the buildings. The 
concept of sponge city design is adopted to maximize the natural inﬁltration 
of rainwater, replenish groundwater resources, where rainwater storage tanks 
are set up to reduce the drainage pressure of municipal rainwater system. 
 
●In JD.com’s Smart Industrial Parks, emergency response plans are formulated 
for all kinds of extreme weather, including but not limited to wind-proof 
appliance for typhoon and windy weather, heavy rain ﬂood control, snow 
sweeping and anti-freezing for blizzard weather, lightning shielding and 
detection for lightning weather, etc. 
 
●Plans for dealing with extreme weather have been made for JD.com’s Data 
Center. It is capable of weathering typhoons, lightning, rainstorms, and high 
temperature respectively. 
 
●Infrastructure construction with more climate resilience can not only 
eﬀectively resist climate disasters, but also make full use of natural resources, 
reduce water and electricity consumption of buildings and greenhouse gas 
emissions. At the same time, it helps reduce costs and meet the requirements 
of environmental supervision for emissions. 
 
●Resilience 
Supply 
chain
Develop 
new energy 
vehicles and 
optimize 
transportation 
routes
 
●As of April 2021, JD.com has deployed new energy vehicles in more than 
50 cities in seven regions of the country and made extensive use of clean 
energy charging infrastructure to reduce carbon dioxide emissions by at 
least 400,000 tons per year. By 2030, JD.com will replace and upgrade 100% 
logistics vehicles with new energy logistics vehicles. 
 
●JD.com uses big data to allow real-time route optimization, and warehouse 
and transportation network planning, to reduce the number of vehicles 
en route and improve the full-load rate of returning vehicles. Some freight 
transportation modes are changed from road transportation to railway 
transportation, and the green transportation pattern is fully implemented to 
optimize the logistics transportation eﬃciency. 
 
●Resource 
eﬃciency 
Promote 
green 
reusable 
logistics 
packaging 
 
●For logistics packaging, we are committed to promoting 100% renewable 
and replaceable packaging, replacing traditional petroleum-based plastic 
bags with packages made of green degradable materials, aiming to engage 
80% of upstream partner brands by 2030 to conduct eco-friendly packaging 
research and development. 
 
●By continuously promoting the recycling of packaging, under the “Green 
Stream Initiative,” the reusable packages have been used for 200 million 
times, and through the linkage of more than 200,000 merchants, this action 
saves 10 billion delivery cartons every year. It has driven hundreds of millions 
of consumers to participate in this initiative, eﬀectively reduced the cost of 
packaging materials, and raised public awareness of recycling. 
 
●Resource 
eﬃciency 
Improve the 
resilience of 
supply chain
For commodities with sales vulnerable to extreme weather and climate 
change, such as seasonal commodities like umbrellas, rain gear, quilts, etc., it 
is necessary to timely adjust inventory according to weather changes to avoid 
out-of-stock or dull of sale; and for primary products of agriculture, forestry, for 
instance, an annual purchasing plan shall be made, ensuring at least one year’s 
supply, and increasing the cold storage space.  
 
●Resilience 
Consumer/
user
Introduce 
green 
products and 
services
JD.com oﬀers massive types of “green commodities” to customers. Through 
intelligent recommendations to guide green consumption, the energy-saving 
appliances sold every year can reduce carbon emissions by nearly 2 million 
tons. As one of the ﬁrst batch of national pilot companies, JD.com has fully 
implemented the practice of electronic invoicing. According to statistics, in 
2021, more than 2.8 billion electronic invoices were issued by JD.com, thus 
saving about 16,000 tons of paper, equivalent to less felling of over 310,000 
adult trees and reducing carbon emissions by 15,000 tons. The supply of 
green products and services can help shape the concept of green sustainable 
consumption, while strengthening JD’s branding and market value in supplying 
green products.  
 
●Products/
services
Provide 
energy-
saving and 
carbon-
reducing 
services for 
enterprises 
through 
digital 
intelligence 
The demand for professional consulting regarding the nation’s carbon peak and 
neutrality goals from the government and enterprises, as well as establishing 
a digitalized carbon neutrality platform will gradually expand in the future. 
JD Industry takes the advantages of technologies such as internet of things, 
big data and artiﬁcial intelligence to develop digital intelligent “dual-carbon 
brains” for the government and industrial parks respectively. Combining the 
competences in industrial supply chain and industrial internet technology base 
and integrating the databases encompassing the energy, carbon emissions, 
carbon footprint and carbon emission factors, we conduct real-time monitoring 
and analysis of energy consumption and carbon emission data. We also track 
the nation’s carbon peak and neutrality goals accomplishing process through 
the analysis of energy structure and industry benchmarking and enable the 
industry to achieve the high-quality management in energy conservation and 
carbon reduction. 
 
●Products/
services
M
M
M
M
M
M
M
L
L
L
L
S
S
S


2021 JD.com Environmental, Social and Governance Report
Thematic Report on Climate-related Financial Information Disclosures
91
92
Referring to the sources of 
climate-related ﬁnancial 
information disclosure, and 
combining the possibility and 
scope of risk occurrence, the 
physical and transition risks 
related to the climate that have a 
substantial impact on businesses 
are preliminarily identiﬁed. 
Incorporate climate-related risks into JD.com’s overall risk management system. 
Further quantify the actual impact of climate change on operations, governance, and ﬁnance. 
Risk management framework integration by unifying grading setting and centralizing the management. 
Based on the evaluation of climate risks and opportunities and combining JD.com’s overall development strategy and resource 
endowment, we establish the Group’s overall carbon emission reduction strategy. We will continue to apply our technological 
capabilities and industry inﬂuence to reduce our own operation emissions, facilitate a low-carbon value chain and promote sustainable 
consumption. We will be dedicated to improving our own climate resilience and sustainable competitiveness, while supporting the 
fulﬁllment of the nation’s carbon peak and neutrality goals as scheduled. 
The key climate risks are further 
screened through literature 
research, combined with the 
key expectations of government 
regulators, investors, and 
exchanges for climate response, 
and taking into account the 
climate risks that have occurred 
or can be foreseen in actual 
business scenarios. 
Climate-related risk management 
will be integrated in the SEC 
discussion of key issues and ESG’s 
overall management framework. 
Under the supervision and 
support of the Board of Directors 
and SEC, the ESG Task Force 
will coordinate and promote the 
implementation of climate-related 
risk management in all sub-groups 
and business lines. 
Risk Management 
Metrics and Targets 
JD.com’s Process of Identifying, Assessing and Managing Climate-Related Risks 
Comprehensively Coordinate Enterprise Risk Management 
Table 5: JD.com’s Metrics and Targets on Issues Related to Climate Change 
Primary 
metrics 
Secondary metrics
Metrics description 
Target setting 
Establish 
a climate 
strategy 
Establish climate strategy 
at the Group level 
 
●Incorporate climate change into the company’s 
overall strategy framework
Preliminarily establish 
strategic framework in 2022 
Identify the value 
proposition and impetus 
for JD on climate actions
 
●Strengthen climate adaptability and resilience 
 
●Strengthen competitiveness 
　　
Cost reduction 
　　
Attraction to new type of talents 
　　
Promote product and business innovation 
　　
Income growth 
 
●Strengthen social recognition 
　　
 
Support climate public governance and obtain 
new business growth scenarios
　　
Improve reputation 
 
●Expand social inﬂuence 
　　
 
Gradually shaping consumers’ purchasing 
preferences
Establish and clarify the value 
proposition and impetus of 
climate actions by the end of 
2023
Quantify the impact of 
climate action on value 
proposition
Evaluate the company’s ﬁnancial performance 
attributed to climate action based on value 
proposition and impetus model 
Establish a value evaluation 
mechanism and quantify the 
ﬁnancial impact of climate 
action by the end of 2023
Risk 
rating 
and 
tracking 
Identify climate-related 
substantial risks 
Based on the preliminary identiﬁcation and sorting 
of climate-related risks in this report, more key 
departments should participate in risk assessment 
and grading
Establish a substantial 
climate-related risk 
management system in 
JD.com to rate various risks 
by the end of 2023
Quantify the ﬁnancial 
impact of climate risk 
Make quantitative statistics for the ﬁnancial impact of 
high-level risks based on risk rating 
Annual climate risk auditing 
Annual review and update on risk rating and ﬁnancial 
impact
After 2024, we will conduct 
an annual review of the 
actual business exposure 
to various risks and decide 
whether to update the rating 
or not according to the 
review results 
Targets
Conduct a comprehensive 
greenhouse gas accounting
Determine the boundary and scope of greenhouse gas 
accounting, and conduct a comprehensive greenhouse 
gas accounting
In preparation 
Establish the carbon 
emission reduction targets 
at the group level 
Establish and announce the carbon emission 
reduction targets at the group level 
In preparation 


2021 JD.com Environmental, Social and Governance Report
Thematic Report on Climate-related Financial Information Disclosures
93
94
Strengthen 
climate 
governance 
Establish a climate 
governance framework 
 
●Based on the existing ESG governance 
structure, strengthening the focus and 
management of climate-related issues 
 
●Management structure: the Board of 
Directors and SEC will cooperate in 
supervision and management, and 
the ESG Task Force will coordinate the 
implementation of climate objectives in 
each sub-group and business lines
In 2022, relying on the updated ESG 
governance structure, the management of 
climate-related issues will be clariﬁed
Establish a climate 
governance mechanism 
 
●Segment the Group’s carbon emission 
reduction targets and establish 
management metrics
 
●Clarify the roles and responsibilities 
among sub-groups and various business 
lines 
 
●Establish a climate-related performance 
evaluation system 
 
●Strengthen the recruitment and training 
of climate-related talents 
 
●Start to establish the climate-related 
management metrics by the end of 2023
 
●Starting from 2024, JD will establish 
climate-related performance evaluation 
system
 
●Starting from 2022, we will make 
continuous eﬀorts in relevant talents’ 
hiring and training
Promote 
carbon 
emission 
reduction 
actions in 
all business 
scenarios 
Low-carbon 
operation 
Low-carbon 
oﬃce 
 
●Strengthen the intelligent operation and 
maintenance (O&M) management of 
energy use for oﬃce space
 
●Improve the use of energy-saving facilities 
 
●Encourage remote work 
 
●Encourage employees’ green 
transportation
By 2030, we will continue to promote 
the zero-carbon oﬃce by saving energy, 
improving energy eﬃciency and increasing 
the proportion of renewable energy
Low-carbon 
data center 
 
●Using natural cold sources 
 
●Clean energy, including energy recovery 
and large-scale distributed photovoltaic 
power generation system 
 
●Energy storage and cold storage 
 
●Architectural layout and design for low 
energy consumption
 
●O&M management platform 
 
●More climate resilience, eﬀective 
resistance against extreme weather risks
 
●PUE continues to be improved on the 
basis of 1.1
 
●Infrastructure energy consumption 
continues to decrease
 
●The total amount of carbon emissions 
continues to decrease
 
●Climate resilience continues to improve
Expand the 
ﬁnancing 
scale of 
low-carbon 
projects 
Based on the published framework, 
principles, and processes of green ﬁnance, 
we will continuously identify low-carbon 
projects and expand the intensity and scale 
of green ﬁnance
Identify more projects with low carbon 
competitiveness and expand the scale of 
green ﬁnancing
Low-carbon 
supply chain 
Low-carbon 
transportation 
 
●Full coverage of new energy vehicles 
 
●Fully apply digital smart technology 
and optimize route, storage, and 
transportation network planning
 
●Optimize transportation structure and 
energy eﬃciency 
In the coming two to three years, JD.com 
will continue to develop and deploy 
thousands of autonomous delivery 
vehicles, continuously improve customers’ 
experience and service eﬃciency, aiming 
to achieve 100% new energy for logistics 
vehicles by 2030
Promote 
carbon 
emission 
reduction 
actions in 
all business 
scenarios 
Low-carbon 
supply chain 
Low-carbon 
logistics park 
 
●Energy substitution: maximize the use 
of renewable power, such as distributed 
photovoltaic and eﬃcient energy storage
 
●Eﬃcient operation: automatic operation 
+ full electriﬁcation of park energy 
consumption 
 
●Online O&M system of the solution to 
carbon neutrality goals in smart logistics 
park 
 
●Xi’an Industrial Park has become the ﬁrst 
certiﬁed “carbon neutrality” industrial 
park in China’s logistics industry, and the 
Suqian Industrial Park is expected to be 
oﬃcially certiﬁed in 2023
 
●As of the end of 2021, JD.com had 
completed the construction of 
photovoltaic power systems in the ﬁrst 
batch of 12 smart industrial parks. We 
are expected to build a total photovoltaic 
power generation capacity of 1,000 MW 
in three years, which can provide green 
energy for 85% of JD.com smart industrial 
parks
Low-carbon 
packaging 
 
●Promote reusable packaging 
 
●Packaging reduction 
 
●Packaging material innovation 
 
●Application of digital intelligence 
technology 
 
●Upstream and downstream collaboration 
 
●Reusable packaging sharing and recycling 
public system 
 
●Packaging materials will be 100% 
environment-friendly and renewable by 
2030
 
●Motivate more than 80% of upstream 
brand enterprises to develop eco-friendly 
packaging
Suppliers’ 
collaborative 
eﬀort in 
carbon 
emission 
reduction 
 
●Lead the suppliers to participate in the 
establishing and implementing carbon 
reduction targets 
 
●By 2025, to promote 50% suppliers of 
JD Logistics to participate in the Science 
Based Targets initiative (SBTi)
 
●Actively encourage upstream and 
downstream suppliers to use new energy 
vehicles
Participation 
of the whole 
value chain 
in carbon 
emission 
reduction 
actions
Promote 
low-carbon 
consumption 
 
●Participate in the formulation of national 
standards for low carbon product
 
●Expand the supply of low-carbon 
products 
 
●Strengthen low-carbon consumption and 
lifestyle campaigns 
Based on massive types of “green 
commodities,” JD.com will continue 
to expand the supply of low-carbon 
commodities and the scale of low-carbon 
consumption market
Promote 
industrial 
low-carbon 
development 
Based on digital smart supply chain 
infrastructure and digital technology 
capabilities, JD provides intelligent 
solutions for the low-carbon 
transformation of real economy 
enterprises
JD will continue to explore our new business 
and proﬁt models by technologically 
empowering the low-carbon transition of 
traditional industrial enterprises
Information 
disclosure
Conduct annual  
climate-related 
information disclosure
 
●Conduct annual review and disclosure of 
climate-related risks and opportunities 
 
●Conduct disclosure and reporting of our 
climate targets and accomplishment 
process
Starting from 2022, JD.com will continue to 
release TCFD reports


About the Report
96
2021 JD.com Environmental, Social and Governance Report
95
About the Report 
Key Performance 
Deﬁning the GHG Accounting Boundary of JD.com 
Note: The tables of 2021 JD.com’s key performance in environment, society and suppliers are prepared with reference to the 
Environmental, Social and Governance Reporting Guide issued by Hong Kong Stock Exchange and GRI guidelines issued by GSSB, and 
the greenhouse gas accounting boundary of JD.com is deﬁned with reference to The Greenhouse Gas Protocol: A Corporate Accounting 
and Reporting Standard developed by WRI and WBCSD. Unless otherwise speciﬁed, the key performance indicators cover the period 
from January 1st to December 31st, 2021. 
JD.com discloses greenhouse gas emissions in strict accordance with the environmental requirements of HKEX (Table 2). We disclose 
the greenhouse gas emissions generated by the Group’s own operations (Scope 1 and Scope 2). Concurrently, as a new type of real 
economy enterprise and a leading retail enterprise, we are also aware of the huge carbon emission reduction potential in our complex 
supply chain. Therefore, to better promote the low-carbon transition of JD.com’s supply chain, we further expand our disclosure of 
Scope 3 emissions for the ﬁrst time, that is, other indirect emissions generated in the value chain other than JD.com’s operations. We 
will also continue to improve our GHG accounting system, include more Scope 3 categories, and fully disclose the emissions from 
upstream and downstream enterprises of the Group. 
Table 1: 2021 Environmental Key Performance 
Table 2: GHG Accounting Boundary of JD.com
Category 
Indicator 
19
Data
Unit 
Emissions of Air 
Pollutants
Nitrogen oxide  
1,630,818.23
Kilogram 
Sulphur oxide 
1,271.43
Kilogram 
Particulate matte
128,690.16
Kilogram 
Greenhouse Gas 
(GHG)  
Emissions
20
Direct (Scope 1) GHG emissions 
238,774.90
Ton 
Energy indirect (Scope 2) GHG emissions 
271,067.08
Ton 
Other Indirect (Scope 3) GHG emissions 
1,906,566.66
Ton 
Waste Produced
Total non-hazardous waste 
32,340.85
Ton 
Use of Resources 
Natural gas consumption 
428,571.43
Cubic meter 
Diesel fuel consumption 
77,155,551.87
Liter 
Liqueﬁed petroleum gas consumption 
1,633,650.00
Kilogram 
Towngas consumption 
118,615,531.59
Megajoule 
Charcoal consumption 
1,038,549.00
Kilogram 
Gasoline consumption
1,823,837.71
Liter 
Electricity use 
443,819,216.26
Kilowatt-hour 
Water consumption 
5,046,291.19
Ton 
Total packaging material used for ﬁnished products
21
222,022.85
Ton 
Packaging materials used per product
22
52.07
g/piece 
Deﬁnition
Business Activity
Scope 1 
 
●Operation facilities owned or rented by JD.com, 
including but not limited to all kinds of fossil fuel 
emissions consumed by business activities such as 
heating, cooling, and power supply in oﬃce buildings 
and staﬀ cafeteria
 
●GHG emissions from fuel combustion used in land, air, 
and water transportation 
 
●GHG emissions from the operation of equipment and 
systems
 
●Carbon sinks (absorption of greenhouse gases) 
generated by newly planted trees
 
●Fossil fuel combustion from engines, cafeterias, and 
vehicles in the logistics parks 
 
●Fugitive emissions of the refrigerants from air 
conditioners in the oﬃce and cold chain logistics 
vehicles of JD.com
 
●Newly planted trees
Scope 2 
 
●Carbon emissions from electricity purchased for the 
Group’s operation 
 
●Electricity use of JD.com in oﬃce buildings, retail 
stores, logistics parks, data centers, and other 
operating places, as well as the purchase of 
electricity for new energy logistics vehicles
Scope 3 
 
●Other indirect emissions generated in the value chain 
outside the Group’s internal operations 
 
●Goods and services purchased by JD.com (logistics 
packaging) 
 
●Upstream and downstream transportation and 
distribution services of third-party logistics 
 
●Employee travel and commuting 
 
●Investment assets operation 
19 
 For the calculation method of 2021 environmental key performance indicators, reference is made to the Reporting Guidance on Environmental KPIs issued by Hong 
Kong Stock Exchange. 
20 
 “Direct (Scope 1) and indirect (Scope 2) GHG emissions” statistics include administrative oﬃces, logistics and transportation, warehousing, data centers and major 
construction projects in 2021. Due to the data availability, “other indirect GHG emissions (Scope 3)” statistics in the table include the employee shuttle buses and 
fossil fuel combustion and electricity use of some investment portfolios in JD.com, as well as emissions from JD Logistics and other sources.
21 
 The total packaging material used for ﬁnished products is provided by JD Logistics, including major logistics packaging consumables such as waybills, express 
delivery envelope, plastic ﬁlm packaging bags and other minor packaging consumables.
22 
 The data of Packaging materials used per product is provided by JD Logistics, and the calculation method is total packaging material used for ﬁnished products/
total number of packages. 


2021 JD.com Environmental, Social and Governance Report
About the Report
97
98
Table 3: 2021 Green Oﬃce Operation Performance 
Category 
Indicator
Quantity 
Unit 
New Energy 
and Emission 
Reduction 
Performance
Carbon emissions reduced by electronic invoicing 
145,694
Ton 
Carbon emissions reduced by electronic ﬁling 
2,602
Ton 
Carbon emissions reduced by using new energy employee 
shuttle buses 
742.26
Ton 
Carbon emissions reduced by paperless new employee 
onboarding process 
52
Ton 
The mileage of electric vehicle for employee transportation 
3,233,289
Kilometer 
Carbon emissions reduced by using electric vehicles in 
employee commuting
258.66
Ton 
Paper documents saved by paperless oﬃce 
2,499,999
Number of 
documents 
Joymeeting Online 
1,626,711
Number of online 
meeting sessions
29,418,076
Cumulative number 
of participants 
327,984
Online meeting hours 
Server 
optimization 
Optimized servers 
179
Number of servers 
Electricity saving 
470,000
Kilowatt-hour 
Amount saved 
560,000
RMB
Carbon emission reduction 
286.70
Ton 
Remote work by using VPN 
9,213,820
Number of VPN logins 
New energy vehicles used in administrative activities 
80
Number of vehicles 
Electricity saving in the oﬃce of data center
797,103
Kilowatt-hour 
Carbon emissions reduction due to other green transformation 
and technology in data center
23
1,847.05
Ton 
Water Use 
Eﬃciency and 
Water Saving 
Performance
Water saving in data center 
21,408
Cubic meter 
Water circulation in the oﬃce of data center
325
Cubic meter 
23 
 For Carbon emissions reduction due to other green transformation and technology in data center,” energy-saving measures mainly include sealing of cold and hot 
passages, use of energy-eﬃcient equipment, optimized planning of loading scheme, transformation of intelligent cold water automatic control, etc. 
24 
 The “total number of full-time employees” and “total number of part-time employees” in employment data is calculated on the number of employees of listed and 
non-listed companies under JD.com. The statistics about gender, age and position are only available for full-time employees of the Group. 
25 
 The statistical method of percentage of female senior management staﬀ  is the number of female senior managers/the total number of senior managers in 
JD.com, and for the data source, please refer to https://ir.jd.com/zh-hans/management. 
Table 4: 2021 Social Key Performance 
Category 
Indicator 
Quantity 
Unit 
Employment
24
Total number of full-time employees 
383,084
Person 
Total number of part-time employees 
43,735
Person 
Percentage of male employees 
75.39
%
Percentage of female employees
24.61
%
Percentage of male employees (excluding front-line employees) 
62.25
%
Percentage of female employees (excluding front-line employees) 
37.75
%
Percentage of employees aged under 30 
40.80
%
Percentage of employees aged 30-50
58.18
%
Percentage of employees aged above 50 
1.02
%
Total number of management staﬀ
15,319
Person 
Number of male management staﬀ
13,314
Person 
Number of female management staﬀ 
2,005
Person 
Number of management staﬀ aged under 30 
3,430
Person 
Number of the management staﬀ aged 30-50 
11,762
Person 
Number of the management staﬀ aged above 50 
127
Person 
Percentage of female senior management staﬀ
25
25
%
Basic salary ratio of full-time male and female employees (excluding 
front-line employees) 
1.04
N/A
Remuneration ratio of full-time male and female employees 
(excluding front-line employees) 
1.13
N/A
Health and 
Safety 
Lost days due to work injury 
53,227
Day 
Frequency of health and safety training 
2
Twice a year 
Percentage of employees covered by health and safety training
100
%


2021 JD.com Environmental, Social and Governance Report
About the Report
99
100
Category 
Indicator 
Quantity 
Unit 
Development and 
Training 
Percentage of employees trained 
74
%
Percentage of trained male employees in total male employees
76
%
Percentage of trained female employees in total female employees
70
%
Percentage of trained management staﬀ in total management staﬀ 
97
%
Percentage of trained general employees (excluding management 
staﬀ) in total general employees
73
%
Total training time for all employees 
20,855,445.41
Hour 
Total training time for all male employees 
16,678,108.21
Hour 
Total training time for all female employees 
4,177,337.21
Hour 
Average training hours per male employee 
57.75
Hour 
Average training hours per female employee
44.31
Hour 
Average training hours per full-time employee 
54.44
Hour 
Total number of employees that attended anti-corruption training 
319,093
Person 
Percentage of employees that attended anti-corruption training
26
98.80
%
Total training hours for women’s vocational empowerment and 
leadership programs
27
10,910 
Hour 
Product 
responsibility 
Number of incidents violating the health and safety regulations of 
customer-oriented products and services
0
Case 
Anti - corruption
28
Number of public lawsuits against company or employee for 
corruption
0
Case 
Filed and investigated corruption cases 
12
Case 
Number of incidents in which employees were ﬁred or punished 
due to corruption 
69
Case 
Community 
investment 
Charity donation
29
1.2
In hundred 
million yuan 
26 
 The statistical scope for “percentage of employees that attended the anti-corruption training” is as of April 2021, according to the online sign-in data of full-time 
employees and except the ones who are in pre-dismission, maternity leave and long-term leave. 
27 
 “Training for women’s vocational empowerment and leadership programs” has a cumulative training duration of 10,910 hours, with a total of 10,368 participants. 
28 
 Among the anti-corruption data, the statistics of “ﬁled and investigated corruption cases” and “number of incidents in which employees were ﬁred or punished due 
to corruption” are based on JD.com’s “commercial bribery, occupation and employee fraud” incidents (excluding JD Logistics and JD Health). 
29 “Charity donation” is based on the statistics of the 2021 annual work report of JD Foundation. 
30  
The statistical scope for “total number of suppliers” refers to suppliers who received pre-wining bids in the procurement business of JD.com’s Procurement and Cost 
Department. 
JD’s Progress on the United Nations Global Compact 
The United Nations Global Compact is a voluntary strategic initiative advocated by the United Nations to promote enterprises’ 
operation and strategy to meet ten fundamental principles in four areas of human rights, labor, environment, and anti-corruption. 
JD.com became a member to the United Nations Global Compact in September 2021. We recognize and support the ten principles and 
incorporate them into our corporate strategy, values, and daily operations. At the same time, we hope to cooperate more closely with 
the United Nations, especially on the sustainable development goals. 
Category
Principle 
Corresponding Chapter
Human rights 
Principle 1: businesses should support and respect the 
protection of internationally proclaimed human rights
Employment and Labor Standards 
Principle 2: make sure that they are not complicit in human rights 
abuses
Labor standard 
Principle 3: businesses should uphold the freedom of association 
and the eﬀective recognition of the right to collective bargaining
Internal Communication Mechanism of 
Employees 
Principle 4: the elimination of all forms of forced and compulsory 
labor
Employment and Labor Standards
Principle 5: the eﬀective abolition of child labor
Principle 6: the elimination of discrimination in respect of 
employment and occupation
Environment 
Principle 7: businesses should support a precautionary approach 
to environmental challenges
Green Operation
Low-Carbon Supply Chain
Thematic Report on Climate-related 
Financial Information Disclosures
Principle 8: undertake initiatives to promote greater 
environmental responsibility
ESG Governance Structure
Sustainable Development Strategic 
Framework
Identiﬁcation and Management of 
Environment and Social Risk of Suppliers
Thematic Report on Climate-related 
Financial Information Disclosures
Principle 9: encourage the development and diﬀusion of 
environmentally friendly technologies
Green Operation
Low-Carbon Supply Chain
Thematic Report on Climate-related 
Financial Information Disclosures
Fight against 
corruption 
Principle 10: businesses should work against corruption in all its 
forms, including extortion and bribery
Anti-Corruption and Integrity Compliance 
Table 5: 2021 Supplier Management Key Performance
Category 
Indicator 
Quantity 
Unit 
Supply Chain 
Management 
Total number of suppliers
30
4,690
Number of 
suppliers


2021 JD.com Environmental, Social and Governance Report
About the Report
101
102
United Nations Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) Response 
 
●JD.com is ranked on the FORTUNE 2022 World’s Most 
Admired Companies list at No.6 in the Internet Services and 
Retailing Category. Particularly, JD ranked the ﬁrst among 
Chinese enterprises in terms of social responsibility index. 
 
●The second “China Brand Power Festival,” the top ten brands 
of “Hope of Domestic Products.” 
 SDGs
Our Actions 
In response to China’s vision of rural revitalization, we continue to promote JD.com’s “Benfu 
Plan.” By giving full play to our ﬁve core competencies of the supply chain, logistics, ﬁnance, 
service and technology, we join hands with all sectors of society to build an “expressway” for 
rural revitalization. By taking advantage of the business capabilities of JD Retail, JD Logistics, JD 
Technology, JD Health and Jingxi, we focus on developing the signature projects such as “JD.
com’s Campaign of Rural Revitalization·Featured Products from Thousands of Rural Counties,” 
“Delivery within 24 hours for Thousands of Rural Counties and Towns,” rural digital smart service 
system, “Zhen Jing Cai” medical consultation service, and “Village Empowerment Action,” and 
continue to get rooted in the countryside and share solid infrastructure and innovative technical 
services, so as to realize the digital-reality integration and empower the  “full chain” of rural 
revitalization. At the same time, with the help of JD Giving Platform, we have launched a series of 
public welfare activities such as “Children Books Donation Campaign” and “I Will Fulﬁll Your Wish” 
and are committed to improving the rural education in China. 
We actively assist disaster relief and epidemic prevention by relying on our digital intelligent 
social supply chain and long-term accumulated relevant experience. We use the resources of 
JD Health to deal with the public health security crisis. We empower public healthcare through 
our science and technology ability, optimize the allocation of medical resources and promote 
inclusive medical and health services. In addition, we provide a well-functioning welfare 
guarantee system to ensure the physical and mental health of our employees.   
We provide employees with an equal, safe, and decent work environment, and support them 
to obtain fair income, a better workplace, sound welfare and personal development prospects. 
Meanwhile, we actively support women’s economic independence and leadership promotion, 
women-owned enterprises empowerment and other projects along the whole value chain. At 
the same time, we support SMEs to obtain more equitable development opportunities, and help 
them through the “Mantianxing Project” by stimulating their self-motivation. We also introduce 
the “C.E.O” (Co-Create, Empower, Open) plan for the industrial belt, make every eﬀort to 
accelerate the transformation and upgrading of SMEs in the relevant industrial belt, reduce costs 
and increase eﬃciency, and promote the development of the real economy.   
Based on cutting-edge technologies such as AI, cloud computing, big data, internet of things, 
etc., as well as our years of in-depth exploration in the supply chain, we will exert our growth 
eﬃciency as a new type of real economy enterprise, empower the digital upgrading in various 
industries by our innovative solutions, help industries reduce costs and increase eﬃciency, and 
accomplish the low-carbon transformation more eﬃciently. 
We provide smart solutions for urban planning, transportation, environment, energy, business 
and security issues through technologies such as big data, AI and cloud computing. We promote 
the eﬃciency of public governance through our social supply chain infrastructure. We put our 
“Intelligent Mobile Warehouse” into use in the construction project of Hanzhong-Bazhong-
Nanchong high-speed railway to improve the accuracy and eﬃciency of its procurement 
management. In addition, JD Health brings its supply chain and healthcare services to rural areas 
and enhances the healthcare capabilities in rural communities.
With our commercial operation, supply chain management and technological innovation, we 
strive to achieve a low carbon and environmentally friendly business model, promote sustainable 
and responsible consumption, and continuously deepen the environmental protection strategy 
of JD.com. Based on the green and eﬃcient supply chain, we have launched the “Green Stream 
Initiative,” implemented low-carbon and energy-saving practices in our supply chain in terms 
of packaging, warehousing and transportation, and are committed to establishing an iconic 
business ecology of sustainable development in the global society. 
We are fully concerned with the impact of our operations on stakeholders, respond to the 
expectations of multiple stakeholders, and continue to work for sustainable value creation 
through dialogue and cooperation. Relying on our solid infrastructure, eﬃcient digital intelligent 
social supply chain and innovative technology service capabilities, while maintaining our 
own sustainable development, we persistently open the new growth space for millions of our 
partners, empower the high-quality development of the real economy and create more value for 
the society. 
ESG-Related Honors and Social Recognition 
2022
 
●Fortune 2021: Fortune Global 500 list, ranking 59
th. 
 
●China’s top 500 private enterprises, ranking the second. 
 
●China Enterprise Evaluation Association “2021 Top 100 New 
type of Real economy enterprises List,” ranked second. 
 
●Ranked among the “Better Life 2021 - Top Ten of Chinese 
Consumer Brands.”
 
●Won “Corporate ESG Best Practices of the Year,” 2021 ESG 
Pioneer 60.
 
●“All-chain carbon reduction measures” selected by Global 
Compact Network China as the “Best Enterprises in Achieving 
Sustainable Development Goals in 2021 (Carbon Peak and 
Carbon Neutralization).” 
 
●Shortlisted in “Carbon Neutral Best Practices” rewarded by 
People.cn, All-China Environment Federation, and Center for 
Environmental Education and Communication of Ministry of 
Ecology and Environment. 
 
●Participated in UN Climate Change Conference (COP 26) in 
2021 as a guest speaker.
 
●Won the “Annual Recommended Case of 2021 People’s 
Corporate Social Responsibility-Green Development Award” 
sponsored by People.cn. 
 
●Recognized as “Beijing Advanced Company for Poverty 
Alleviation and Cooperation.” 
2021
 
●The “Implementation and Thinking of JD.com’ Strategy 
Exerting the Advantages as A New Type of Real Economy 
Enterprise” won the First Prize of “2021 Outstanding 
Achievements of Chinese Enterprise Reform and 
Development” granted by China Enterprise Reform & 
Development Society. 
 
●Forbes: 2021 World’s Best Employer, ranking third among 
Chinese enterprises. 
 
●Shortlisted in 2021 overall ranking of China’s most attractive 
employers, ranking among the top three in the Internet 
industry. 
 
●“Large-scale robot warehouse scheduling algorithm” won the 
highest industrial application award in the global research 
and management scientiﬁc community - “Franz Edelman 
Outstanding Achievement Award.” 
 
●Became the ﬁrst logistics enterprise in China awarded with 
the Data Management Capability Maturity Model (DCMM) 
Level 4 certiﬁcation.” 
 
●Won the First Prize of “Beijing Science and Technology 
Progress Award.” 
 
●Approved by the “2030 Megaproject” - New Generation 
Artiﬁcial Intelligence.
 
● JD.com “Asia No.1” Xi’an Intelligent Industrial Park has 
obtained the carbon neutrality certiﬁcation issued by Beijing 
Green Exchange and Centre Testing International (CTI). 


2021 JD.com Environmental, Social and Governance Report
About the Report
103
104
HKEX Content Index
ESG Indicator
Reporting Section
Introduction 
Report Proﬁle 
Statement from the board 
Statement from the Board 
ESG governance system 
ESG Governance Structure  
Corporate social responsibility strategy 
Sustainable Development Strategic Framework 
Materiality assessment and stakeholder engagement 
Materiality Assessment and Stakeholder Engagement 
Environment
General disclosure of emissions 
Low-Carbon Supply Chain 
Types of emissions and respective emissions data 
Table 1:  2021 Environmental Key Performance 
Direct (Scope 1) and “energy indirect” (Scope 2) GHG emissions 
Table 1:  2021 Environmental Key Performance 
Total hazardous waste produced 
N/A
31
Total non-hazardous waste produced 
Table 1:  2021 Environmental Key Performance 
Description of emission target(s) set, and steps taken to achieve them
Thematic Report on Climate-related Financial 
Information Disclosures 
General disclosure of resources used
Low-Carbon Supply Chain 
Direct and/or indirect energy consumption by type (e.g., electricity, gas or 
oil) in total
Table 1:  2021 Environmental Key Performance 
Performance water consumption in total     
Table 1:  2021 Environmental Key Performance 
Total packaging material used for ﬁnished products (in tons) and, if 
applicable, with reference to per unit produced
Table 1:  2021 Environmental Key Performance 
Employment and Training
General disclosure of employment 
Human Resource Compliance Management 
Total workforce by gender and age group
Table 4: 2021 Social Key Performance
Disclosure of health and safety 
Table 4: 2021 Social Key Performance 
Number and rate of work-related fatalities that occurred in each of the past 
three years (including the reporting year)
N/A
32
Description of occupational health and safety measures adopted, and how 
they are implemented and monitored
Occupational Health and Safety 
General disclosure of development and training
Anti-Corruption and Integrity Compliance 
The percentage of employees trained
Table 4: 2021 Social Key Performance 
The average training hours completed per employee by gender and 
employee category 
Table 4: 2021 Social Key Performance 
General disclosure of labor standards   
Employment and Labor Standards 
Description of measures to review employment practices to avoid child 
and forced labor
Employment and Labor Standards 
31 “Total amount of hazardous wastes generated” cannot be disclosed temporarily because of incomplete data. 
32 
 “The number and rate of people who died at work in the past three years (including the reporting year)” cannot be disclosed for the time being because of 
incomplete data. 
Supplier Management
General disclosure of supply chain management
Supplier Admittance and Compliance Management 
Number of suppliers
Table 5: 2021 Supplier Management Key Performance
Description of practices relating to engaging suppliers, and how they are 
implemented and monitored
Supplier Admittance and Compliance Management 
Description of practices used to identify environmental and social risks 
along the supply chain, and how they are implemented and monitored
Identiﬁcation and Management of Environmental and 
Social Risks of Suppliers 
Description of practices to promote green consumption and advocate 
green products
JD.com Single Day Grand Promotion Leads 
Sustainable Consumption
Product Responsibility
General disclosure of product responsibility  
Product Responsibility and Content Management 
Description of practices to respond to complaints and problems
Respond to Complaints, Enquires and Requests
Description of practices to protect intellectual property
Intellectual Property Protection 
Description of quality assurance process           
All-Round Product Quality and Safety Guarantee
Description of consumer data protection and privacy policies, and how 
they are implemented and monitored
Information Security Compliance 
Anti-corruption
General disclosure of anti-corruption 
Anti-Corruption and Integrity Compliance 
Filed and investigated corruption cases in the reporting period
Table 4: 2021 Social Key Performance 
Description of preventive measures and whistle blowing procedures, and 
how they are implemented and monitored
Anti-Corruption and Integrity Compliance 
Description of anti-corruption training provided to staﬀ
Anti-Corruption and Integrity Compliance 
Community Investment
General disclosure of community investment 
Public Welfare Concept and Policy 
Focus areas of contribution
The Focus Area of Philanthropic Eﬀorts 
Resources contributed (e.g., Money or time) to the focus area
Table 4: 2021 Social Key Performance 


2021 JD.com Environmental, Social and Governance Report
About the Report
105
106
GRI Standards Content Index 
Number
Category
Reporting Section
101
Foundation
Report Proﬁle
102
General disclosure
Overview
103
Management Approach
ESG Governance Structure
Materiality Assessment and Stakeholder Engagement
Sustainable Development Strategic Framework
Compliance Governance to Achieve More Sustainable and Steady 
Development and Growth
Thematic Report on Climate-related Financial Information Disclosures
201
Economic Performance
Message from Chairman of Board of Directors
202
Market Presence
Employee Training and Talent Development
Employee Beneﬁts
Survival Safeguard
203
Indirect Economic Impacts
Promoting High-quality Development
Promote Inclusive Development of the Society.
204
Procurement Practices
All-round Product Quality and Safety Guarantee
Supplier Management
Green Packaging
Thematic Report on Climate-related Financial Information Disclosures
205
Anti-corruption
Anti-Corruption and Integrity Compliance
206
Anti-competitive Behavior
Competition Compliance
301
Materials
Green Packaging
302
Energy
Safeguarding the Natural Environment 
Thematic Report on Climate-related Financial Information Disclosures
Table 1: 2021 Environmental Key Performance
Table 3: 2021 Green Oﬃce Operation Performance
303
Water and Eﬄuents  
Green Oﬃce
Green Warehousing
Table 1: 2021 Environmental Key Performance
304
Biodiversity
Safeguarding the Natural Environment 
Animal Protection
305
Emissions
Green Operation
Green Transportation
JD.com Single Day Grand Promotion Leads Sustainable Consumption 
Thematic Report on Climate-related Financial Information Disclosures
Table 1: 2021 Environmental Key Performance
Table 3: 2021 Green Oﬃce Operation Performance
306
Sewage and wastes
Green Warehousing
Table 1: 2021 Environmental Key Performance
307
Environmental Compliance  
Identiﬁcation and Management of Environmental and Social Risks of 
Suppliers
Thematic Report on Climate-related Financial Information Disclosures
308
Supplier Environmental
Identiﬁcation and Management of Environmental and Social Risks of 
Suppliers
401
Employment
High-quality Employment
Employee Beneﬁts
Table 4: 2021 Social Key Performance
402
Labor/Management Relations
Human Resource Compliance Management
Internal Communication Mechanism of Employees
403
Occupational Health and Safety
Employment and Labor Standards
Internal Communication Mechanism of Employees
Occupational Health and Safety
Table 4: 2021 Social Key Performance
404
Training and Education
Employee Training and Talent Development 
Table 4: 2021 Social Key Performance
405
Diversity and Equal Opportunity
Cultivating Talents
Table 4: 2021 Social Key Performance
406
Non-discrimination
Employment and Labor Standards
407
Freedom of Association and 
Collective Bargaining
Internal Communication Mechanism of Employees
408
Child Labor
Employment and Labor Standards
409
Forced or Compulsory Labor
Employment and Labor Standards
410
Security Practices
Occupational Health and Safety
412
Human Rights Assessment  
Employment and Labor Standards
413
Local Communities
Promoting Inclusive Development of The Society
414
Supplier Social Assessment               
Supplier Management
415
Public Policy
Public Welfare Concept and Company Policy
416
Customer Health and Safety
All-Round Product Quality and Safety Guarantee
417
Marketing and Labelling     
All-Round Product Quality and Safety Guarantee Content Speciﬁcation 
and Management of Marketing
418
Customer Privacy
Information Security Compliance 
Customer Privacy and Data Security
419
Socioeconomic Compliance
Compliance Governance to Achieve More Sustainable and Steady 
Development and Growth


About the Report
108
2021 JD.com Environmental, Social and Governance Report
107
External Veriﬁcation Statement
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
SGS-CSTC STANDARDS TECHNICAL SERVICES CO., LTD. SHANGHAI 
BRANCH’S REPORT ON SUSTAINABILITY ACTIVITIES IN THE 2021 JD.COM 
ENVIRONMENTAL, SOCIAL AND GOVERNANCE REPORT 
 
NATURE AND SCOPE OF THE ASSURANCE/VERIFICATION 
SGS-CSTC STANDARDS TECHNICAL SERVICES CO., LTD. SHANGHAI BRANCH (thereafter as “SGS”) was 
commissioned by JD.com to conduct independent assurance of the 2021 JD.com Environmental, Social and 
Governance Report ((thereafter as “ESG Report”). Based on the SGS Sustainability Report Assurance 
methodology, SGS performed the remote assurance of the management methodology and data related to the 
HKEX requirements contained within this report at JD.com Headquarters, No. 18 Kechuang 11 Street, Beijing 
Economic-Technological Development Area, Beijing City, P. R. China. Data and information of other sites were 
not assured in this assurance scope.  
 
The information in the 2021 JD.com ESG Report and its presentation are the responsibility of the board and 
related functions. SGS has not been involved in the preparation of any of the material included in the 2021 ESG 
Report. 
 
Our responsibility is to express an opinion on the text, data, graphs and statements within the scope of 
verification with the intention to inform all of JD.com’s stakeholders. 
 
The SGS protocols are based upon internationally recognized guidance, including the reporting principles 
contained within the HKEX listing rules appendix 27 “Environmental, Social and Governance Reporting Guide” 
and the guidance on levels of assurance contained within the AA1000 series of standards and guidance for 
Assurance Providers. 
 
This report has been assured at a moderate level of scrutiny using our protocols for: 
• 
evaluation of content veracity; 
• 
evaluation of the report conformity against the HKEX listing rules appendix 27 “Environmental, Social 
and Governance Reporting Guide”. 
 
The assurance comprised a combination of pre-assurance research, interviews with relevant employees, 
documentation and record review, and validation with external bodies and/or stakeholders where relevant. 
 
Financial data drawn directly from independently audited financial accounts has not been checked back to its 
source as part of this assurance process. 
 
STATEMENT OF INDEPENDENCE AND COMPETENCE 
The SGS Group of companies is the world leader in inspection, testing and verification, operating more than 
2,600 affiliates in more than 140 countries. SGS affirms our independence from JD.com being free from bias 
and conflicts of interest with the organization, its subsidiaries, and stakeholders. 
 
The assurance team was assembled based on their knowledge, experience, and qualifications for this 
assignment, and comprised auditors registered with CSR Lead Assuror, CCAA Registered ISO 9001, ISO 
14001 Auditor, and ISO 45001 Auditor.  
 
VERIFICATION/ ASSURANCE OPINION 
On the basis of the methodology described and the verification work performed, we are satisfied that the 
information and data contained within the 2021 ESG Report verified are reliable and provide a fair and balanced 
representation of JD.com’s sustainability activities in 2021.  
ASSURANCE STATEMENT 
 
We believe that JD.com has chosen an appropriate ESG reporting guide, and information contained within the 
Report can be used by its stakeholders. 
 
CONCLUSIONS, FINDINGS AND RECOMMENDATIONS 
 
In our opinion, the 2021 ESG Report is presented in accordance with the reporting rules and the KPIs 
disclosures of the HKEX listing rules appendix 27 “Environmental, Social and Governance Reporting Guide”. 
 
Reporting Rules 
 
Materiality 
JD.com conducted the methodology for ESG issues materiality research and analysis with documentation, via 
third-party survey and internal analysis to report the ESG materiality issues of concern by stakeholders, which 
could meet the materiality principle requirement.  
 
Quantitative 
JD.com planned the methodology for management approach and performed the statistics and analysis for KPIs, 
some KPIs, referred to the criterions and international general regulations, and reported the disclosures’ impact 
and purpose. Some comparative yearly data could better help stakeholders to evaluate its management 
system’s effectiveness and make decisions. 
 
Balance 
JD.com presented the balance reporting rule in the ESG report and reported environmental, social and 
governance issues truthfully. 
 
Consistency 
JD.com planned the disclosure methodologies with consistency for report content and data statistics at all levels 
in the company. In addition, remarks and interpretations were marked in the ESG report to help stakeholders 
make a clear comparison.  
 
Limitations of assurance 
Due to the impact of the epidemic during audit duration, the assurance team did not verify the original data and 
information in the organization with traceability, and included no further comments for actual case study in the 
ESG report. 
 
The assurance process only involved interviews with the heads of relevant departments and certain employees 
and consultation with relevant documents, and didn’t involve the external stakeholders. 
 
As the financial information in the 2021 financial report has passed the independent assurance, this report 
assurance does not contain traceability and assurance of such financial information. 
 
 
 
Signed: 
 
 
 
 
 
For and on behalf of SGS-CSTC 
David XIN     Director 
Knowledge Department 
16/F Century Yuhui Mansion, No. 73, Fucheng Road, Beijing, China 
April 13, 2022 


2021 JD.com Environmental, Social and Governance Report
109
JD.com Oﬃcial ESG Webpage
Environmental considerations for publication of the report 
Paper: The report is printed on eco-friendly paper. 
Printing Ink: The report is printed with eco-friendly ink to reduce air pollution.




About This Report
Message from Chairman 
of Board of Directors
Board Statement
About JD.com
Annual Honors and 
Awards
Annual Key Performance
Appendix
03
04
05
05
06
07
69
Content
A Pragmatic Attitude 
Paves the Way 
for a Green Future
Environmental Governance 
and Climate Change 
Responses
Green Workplace
Green Retail
Green Logistics
Green Park
27
33
36
40
42
A Pragmatic Approach 
Leads to Shared 
Development 
Outcomes
Human Orientation
A Sustainable Supply Chain
46
57
61
66
A Pragmatic Path 
Promotes 
Good Consumption
Serving Consumers
Giving Back to Communities
A Pragmatic Vision 
Consolidates 
the Foundation of 
Responsibility
01
03
02
04
Corporate Management
Business Responsibility
10
17


3
2023 JD.com, Inc.
Environmental, Social and Governance Report
This report is the Environmental, Social, and Governance Report 2023 (referred to as the "ESG report" or "this 
report") released by JD.com to detail the ESG strategies, management, and practices of JD.com and its major 
subsidiaries included in its annual report.
This report is prepared with reference to the ESG 
Reporting Guide from the Hong Kong Stock Exchange 
(HKEX), the ESG Reporting Guide from the Nasdaq Stock 
Market, the United Nations Sustainable Development 
Goals (SDGs), the GRI Standards issued by the Global 
Sustainability Standards Board (GSSB), the Ten Principles 
of the UN Global Compact, and industry standards issued 
by the Sustainability Accounting Standards Board (SASB). 
Content dealing with climate change is prepared by 
referring to the HKEX Guidelines on Climate Information 
Disclosure, and the framework suggested by the Task 
Force on Climate-related Financial Disclosures (TCFD).
The information and data in this report mainly come 
from the Group's internal data collection system, work 
reports and public information, such as annual reports 
and media releases. Unless specified, the monetary 
amounts shown in this report are all presented in RMB. 
For ease of presentation, "JD.com," "JD," "JD Group," "the 
Group," and "we" all refer to JD. com, Inc. 
This annual report covers the period from January 1, 
2023, to December 31, 2023 (hereinafter referred to 
as the "reporting period"). To make this report more 
comparable and forward-looking, some contents have 
been extended. The disclosure of this report is based on 
the consolidated scope of JD.com, Inc., JD's listed entity 
on the NASDAQ Stock Exchange in the United States.
This report conforms to the principles of "materiality," 
"quantitative," "balance," and "consistency." 
Materiality: We have identified and assessed key ESG issues 
of concern for both internal and external stakeholders of 
the Group. For detailed materiality assessment process and 
results, please refer to "Material Issues."
Balance: This report provides an impartial account of our 
performance in a number of areas, including the environment, 
employees, supply chain, product services, communities, etc.
Quantitative: We have regularly collected data on 
quantitative key indicators including environmental, social, 
and governance categories, and presented summaries and 
disclosures in this report. The calculation method, reference 
standards, and parameters for quantitative ESG data in this 
report have been explained, as detailed in each chapter of 
this report. 
Consistency: The methodology employed in this report is in 
line with that of previous years. Any differences that could 
affect meaningful comparisons with previous studies have 
been duly explained in the relevant chapters.
This report is prepared in both Chinese and English. 
Should there be any discrepancy in meaning between 
the two versions, the Chinese version shall prevail. The 
electronic versions can be accessed on the Group's 
website in the section "Investor Relations."
Reference and Principles 
Source of Information
Reporting Scope
Reporting Principles
Access to Report
About This Report
About This 
Report
Message from Chairman 
of Board of Directors
Board 
Statement
About 
JD.com
Appendix
Annual Honors 
and Awards
Annual Key 
Performance


4
2023 JD.com, Inc.
Environmental, Social and Governance Report
We operate with integrity, strengthening the foundation 
for our business. We are committed to achieving 
success the right way, upholding business ethics and 
ensuring compliance in our operations. Under the 
leadership of the newly established ESG Committee, 
which I chair, we have enhanced our governance of 
ESG-related matters. While providing consumers with 
a diverse selection, fast delivery, superior quality, and 
cost-effective options, we take our responsibility for 
safeguarding user information and privacy seriously, 
ensuring the platform’s safety and stability. We 
vigorously pursue anti-corruption measures and, 
through the "Sunshine Integrity Alliance," collaborate 
with industry peers to foster a trustworthy business 
environment.
Message from Chairman of Board of Directors
Richard Qiangdong Liu
Founder and Chairman of the Board, JD.com
We prioritize environmental protection and champion 
green, sustainable development. Attentive to our 
operational impact on the environment, we endeavor 
to reduce carbon emissions and continuously pursue 
decarbonization in warehousing, transportation, 
packaging materials, and beyond. Leveraging algorithmic 
efficiency, green energy, the application of intelligent 
devices, and recycling initiatives, we strive to cultivate 
a greener logistics network. We also promote DWOP 
(Delivered with Original Package) compliance with 
our upstream and downstream partners and actively 
engage in trade-in and recycling programs to 
encourage participation in the circular economy and 
minimize waste.
We are attentive to the needs of our customers and 
dedicated to enhancing their lives. By continuously 
refining consumer services and addressing feedback, we 
safeguard consumer rights and boost satisfaction. Our 
commitment to leveraging technology for good drives 
our innovation, constantly enhancing the consumer 
experience. Supporting rural revitalization and common 
prosperity, we persistently invest in industrial belts, launch 
initiatives like the "Spring Dawn Plan," and expand direct-
from-source shipping to improve agricultural distribution 
efficiency and sustainably increase farmers' incomes. 
We are also active in philanthropy, providing support 
for flood and disaster relief in Beijing, Tianjin, and Hebei, 
earthquake relief in Jishishan, Gansu, and helping those 
in need through initiatives like the “Starlight Transmission 
Program.”
2023 marks the 20th anniversary of JD.com's 
founding. Reflecting on our journey, we are 
profoundly grateful for our customers’ trust, our 
partners’ support, our employees’ dedication, 
and the opportunities brought by our times. 
This past year, JD.com has further deepened 
its commitment to ESG governance and 
sustainable development, actively creating 
value for customers, partners, and society. We 
have upheld our people-centric philosophy and 
made significant strides in all aspects of our ESG 
initiatives.
At JD.com, we are deeply committed to fostering a 
sustainable ecosystem centered around a people-
first philosophy. Our employees' well-being and personal 
growth take precedence over mere profit. We strive to 
cultivate a workplace environment that is not only fair 
and inclusive but also one where every individual feels 
valued and respected. Our focus extends beyond the 
workplace to ensure our employees enjoy a high quality 
of life. To facilitate their professional development, we 
have implemented a system designed to foster skill 
enhancement and career advancement. Additionally, we 
collaborate closely with our suppliers, incorporating ESG 
standards into our contracts to ensure ethical practices. 
This collaborative approach allows us to collectively strive 
for a sustainable future, while also improving supplier 
management and empowerment.
Looking to the future, we are excited to take a more 
active role in shaping the world around us. To achieve this, 
in early 2024, we have refined our mission to “Making Lives 
Better through Technology.” Driven by our passion for 
technology and our dedication to enhancing lives, we are 
positioned to continue innovating with purpose. Together 
with all stakeholders, we are committed to crafting a 
blueprint for a future that is not only sustainable but also 
thriving, green, and beneficial for everyone.
About This 
Report
Message from Chairman 
of Board of Directors
Board 
Statement
About 
JD.com
Appendix
Annual Honors 
and Awards
Annual Key 
Performance


2023 JD.com, Inc.
Environmental, Social and Governance Report
The Board of Directors ("the Board") of JD.com takes full 
responsibility for the Group's ESG strategies and reports. 
We keep a close watch on the external socio-economic 
macro-environment, corporate development strategies 
and the latest ESG trends, and carry out comprehensive 
ESG assessment on a regular basis, allowing flexible 
adjusts for ESG management mechanisms and timely 
responses to ESG governance risks of all kinds. The 
Board authorizes the ESG Committee to review ESG 
strategies and monitor the progress of ESG work. 
The Strategy Executive Committee (SEC) leads the 
ESG Working Group, develops ESG strategies and 
priorities, continuously incorporates ESG-related risk 
management into daily code of conduct within the 
Group, and coordinates with the ESG leaders of the 
sub-groups and business systems to implement and 
promote ESG-related work.
The ESG Committee under the Board is responsible for 
overseeing ESG matters, and the SEC leads the ESG 
Working Group to provide special reports and progress 
reports to the Board, and to continuously follow 
up on the progress of ESG-related matters. During 
the reporting period, the Board participated in the 
comprehensive and systematic stakeholder surveys and 
special meetings conducted by the Group, identified 
and assessed 23 material issues and priorities, and 
ultimately delivered a matrix of material issues, which is 
fully disclosed in the section of "ESG Governance."
This report provides a detailed disclosure of how 
far JD.com has progressed and achieved in its ESG 
operations during 2023. This report, which underwent 
third-party moderate level of scrutiny (equivalent to 
limited assurance under ISAE 3000), is reviewed and 
approved by the Board.
Board Statement
About JD.com
JD.com adheres to the values of putting 
customers first, innovation, dedication, 
responsibility, gratitude and integrity. 
With the mission of being "powered by 
technology for a better life" and the core 
business philosophy of "low cost, high 
efficiency, quality products, competitive 
prices, and excellent service," JD.com strives 
to become the most trustworthy enterprise 
globally.
JD.com officially began its e-commerce 
business in 2004. In May 2014, JD.com was 
listed on the NASDAQ Stock Exchange 
in the United States, becoming the first 
comprehensive e-commerce company from China to 
successfully go public in the U.S. In June 2020, JD.com 
completed a secondary listing on the Hong Kong 
Stock Exchange, aiming to raise capital to invest in key 
technological supply chain-based innovations, further 
enhance user experience, and improve operational 
efficiency. In early 2017, JD.com began a comprehensive 
technological transformation and has so far invested 
nearly RMB130 billion in technology research and 
development.
JD.com is a leading supply chain-based technology 
and service provider. As a new real economy-based 
enterprise with core features of physical businesses 
and cutting-edge digital technologies and capabilities, 
JD.com leverages "a responsible supply chain" to drive 
the seamless fusion of its product, warehouse, and 
cloud networks. This integration ensures the stability 
and reliability of our supply chain while fostering the 
digital transformation of partners throughout the 
supply chain, enhancing cost efficiency and productivity, 
thereby effectively supporting the high-quality growth of 
the real economy.
About This 
Report
Message from Chairman 
of Board of Directors
Board 
Statement
About 
JD.com
Appendix
Annual Honors 
and Awards
Annual Key 
Performance
5


6
2023 JD.com, Inc.
Environmental, Social and Governance Report
About This 
Report
Message from Chairman 
of Board of Directors
Board 
Statement
About 
JD.com
Appendix
Annual Honors 
and Awards
Annual Key 
Performance
Annual Honors and Awards
Ranked on the Fortune Global 500 List 
for 8 consecutive years, and ranked  
52nd globally in 2023
Ranked again on 
Fortune China's 
Most Admired 
Chinese Companies
Selected for the first time in the
Dow Jones 
Sustainability World 
Index
Selected for the first time 
in the S&P Global 
Sustainability 
Yearbook 2024 and 
received the honor of the 
Industry Mover in the retail 
industry (the only one in the industry)
Won the 2023 Hong Kong Corporate 
Governance and ESG Excellence 
Awards presented by the Chamber of Hong Kong Listed 
Companies and Hong Kong Baptist University
Selected for the
2023 Bloomberg Green
ESG 50 List
Selected for the 2023 
Forbes China ESG 
Innovation Enterprises 
List
Ranked as one of the 
Forbes World's 
Best Employers  
for 6 consecutive years
In February 2024, JD.com won the Gartner Power of the 
Profession
TM Supply Chain Award, becoming the only 
Asian company to receive this award
Selected for the first issue 
of the S&P Global 
Sustainability 
Yearbook (China Edition)
Selected for the 2023 Fortune 
China ESG Influential List
Ranked 1st again in the 
"Top 500 Private 
Companies in 
China 2023" by the All-
China Federation of Industry 
and Commerce
Named to the TIME 100 Most Influential Companies, 
becoming the only Chinese enterprise listed in the industry
ESG Ratings 2023
MSCI ESG Rating 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
A
CDP Climate Change Score
B
S&P Global ESG Score 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
62


7
2023 JD.com, Inc.
Environmental, Social and Governance Report
A Pragmatic Vision Consolidates the 
Foundation of Responsibility
A Pragmatic Attitude Paves the Way for a Green Future
01
02
JD.com took the initiative 
in establishing a green 
supply chain technology 
sharing platform (patent 
pool), promoting the 
application of green and 
low-carbon technologies 
and patents in the 
supply chain field, with the 
first batch of 40 patents  
entering the pool
Number of breaches 
of information 
security and privacy 
protection 
0
In 2023, JD Logistics invested a total of 17.03 million circular plastic bags with an average usage of over 18.3 
times per bag, saving an estimated 294.6 million disposable woven bags
JD Property has 
constructed photovoltaic 
power generation 
systems in 31 logistics 
parks, with a total 
installed capacity 
of 180 MW and an 
average annual power 
generation of 190,000 
MWh
1, replacing thermal 
power and reducing 
carbon emissions
2 by 
189,000 tonnes
A total of 8,290 self-operated new energy vehicles 
for trunk and terminal transportation were put into 
operation, an increase of 2,872 vehicles compared 
with 2022, equivalent to an average annual reduction of 
35,200 tonnes of greenhouse gases
As of December 2023, JD Property's self-invested and self-built 
photovoltaic projects had cumulatively generated 31,700 MWh 
of electricity
Over 100 brands participated in the "Green 
Impact Initiative," with JD.com offering more 
than 3.56 million green and low-carbon 
products
Over 66 million users engaged in low-carbon, sustainable 
consumption on the JD platform, accumulating 122 million green 
orders
A total of 14 parks under JD.com were 
awarded the "Green Warehouse Label," among 
which 9 are Level 1 (3-Star) Green Warehouses, 
and 5 are Level 2 (2-Star) Green Warehouses
More than 15 million old 
household appliances and 
furniture products were 
recycled through trade-in 
programs
Amount of penalties received 
for information security 
vulnerabilities or other 
network security breaches 
0
Percentage of female directors on 
the Board of Directors 
42.9%
JD Group's Commitment to Anti-Corruption 
has been signed by 100% of our employees 
(including full-time employees, interns, 
consultants, and other labor personnel)
100% of employees have completed anti-
corruption, integrity, and compliance training
Annual Key Performance
1This data is estimated based on the effective power generation time of the project being 3 hours per day and the installed capacity.
2The calculation for the carbon reduction as a substitute for coal-fired power generation assumes that 1 kWh of electricity consumes 0.39 kilograms of coal, producing 0.997 kilograms of carbon dioxide.
About This 
Report
Message from Chairman 
of Board of Directors
Board 
Statement
About 
JD.com
Appendix
Annual Honors 
and Awards
Annual Key 
Performance


8
2023 JD.com, Inc.
Environmental, Social and Governance Report
The only enterprise in the industry to be 
awarded the title of “National Advanced 
Collective in Building Harmonious 
Labor Relations”
JD.com's gender equality case 
was selected for the United 
Nations Global Compact 
(UNGC) Case Studies
Occupational health and safety training covers  
all employees (including all outsourced 
employees) 
As of Q4 2023, the best inventory turnover days of self-operated commodities 
30.3 days
The employee training coverage 
reached 100%, with an average 
training duration per employee of 
40.7 hours
Number of product recall incidents due to health and safety 
issues for JD.com's brands
0
In 2023, JD.com's Anti-Fraud Center 
helped users directly prevent 
financial losses amounting to  
RMB 2.354 billion
JD Foundation had donated RMB 122.067 million
Annual employee satisfaction rate: 4.53 out of 5; Employee satisfaction survey responses: over 1.1 million
Collective Contract 
employee coverage rate 
100%
The total number of JD's frontline staff exceeds 
360,000, of which 80% are from rural areas
A Pragmatic Path Promotes Good Consumption
A Pragmatic Approach Leads to Shared Development Outcomes
04
03
The second "Agricultural Specialties Shopping Festival" 
had cumulatively invested RMB 1 billion in cash subsidies 
and traffic resources, supporting the high-quality 
development of over 2,000 agricultural specialty 
industrial zones
About This 
Report
Message from Chairman 
of Board of Directors
Board 
Statement
About 
JD.com
Appendix
Annual Honors 
and Awards
Annual Key 
Performance


2023 JD.com, Inc.
Environmental, Social and Governance Report
A Pragmatic Vision 
Consolidates
the Foundation of 
Responsibility
A Pragmatic Path
Promotes
Good Consumption	
A Pragmatic Attitude
Paves the Way
for a Green Future
A Pragmatic Approach
Leads to Shared
Development Outcomes
9
A Pragmatic Vision 
Consolidates 
the Foundation of 
Responsibility
01
JD.com consistently integrates corporate responsibility into its operations 
with a pragmatic attitude. We are dedicated to establishing a transparent 
and sustainable supply chain system, encouraging suppliers and partners 
to fulfill their social responsibilities through concrete actions. We consistently 
improve corporate governance, uphold business ethics, and ensure 
that our decisions and actions meet high standards of ethics and social 
responsibility.


2023 JD.com, Inc.
Environmental, Social and Governance Report
A Pragmatic Vision 
Consolidates
the Foundation of 
Responsibility
A Pragmatic Path
Promotes
Good Consumption	
A Pragmatic Attitude
Paves the Way
for a Green Future
A Pragmatic Approach
Leads to Shared
Development Outcomes
10
The Board of Directors of JD.com has established an Audit Committee, a Compensation Committee, a Nomination 
Committee, and an ESG Committee to oversee the management of various affairs of the Group. These committees 
conduct professional reviews and provide guidance on the Group's policies, decisions, and strategies. Detailed 
information about the scope of authority of the Board and its committees, as well as the composition and profiles of 
Board members, are available on the Group's website of Investor Relations and the stock exchange's websites.
We underscore the independence, diversity, and expertise of Board of Directors. During nominations, we 
comprehensively consider diverse factors such as gender, age, cultural and educational background, race, skills, 
knowledge, professional experience, and tenure. As of the end of the reporting period, the Board had consisted of 
seven directors, including five independent directors and three female directors. Women make up at least one-third 
of the members in the Compensation Committee, Nomination Committee, and ESG Committee. Our Board members 
bring diverse professional backgrounds, spanning business administration, law, finance, accounting, economics, and 
social sciences, providing comprehensive guidance for the Group's strategic planning and decision-making. Annually, 
we solicit feedback from Board members on the overall performance of the Board through the Board of Directors 
Self-assessment Questionaire.
JD.com consistently improves the board structure, 
risk governance, ESG governance, and compliance 
governance, responding pragmatically to the 
needs and expectations of stakeholders. We work 
together with all parties to achieve the long-term 
goal of building a sustainable supply chain.
Corporate Management
Corporate Governance
Board Structure of JD.com
Board of Directors
Audit 
Committee
Compen-
sation 
Committee
Nomination 
Committee
ESG 
Committee


2023 JD.com, Inc.
Environmental, Social and Governance Report
A Pragmatic Vision 
Consolidates
the Foundation of 
Responsibility
A Pragmatic Path
Promotes
Good Consumption	
A Pragmatic Attitude
Paves the Way
for a Green Future
A Pragmatic Approach
Leads to Shared
Development Outcomes
11
JD.com annually conducts risk identification referencing the COSO
1 risk management framework and responses 
across nine key areas: strategic risk, investment risk, market risk, financial risk, legal compliance risk, operational 
risk (including technological risk), ESG governance risk, reputational risk, and integrity risk. Risk exposure was 
assessed and analyzed via a structured management process. In 2023, the three most significant risks we 
identified and their corresponding responses are as follows:
Risk Identification and Response
Key Risks and Responses for JD.com in 2023
Categories
Impacts on Business
Responses
Information Security 
Risks
User trust and brand image may be adversely 
affected due to the potential for cyber-attacks 
to cause events such as personal information 
and business data leaks or extortion, which can 
harm user rights and interests and business 
operations. 
Strengthen the development of cybersecurity 
technologies and privacy protection, 
promptly conduct security monitoring and 
response, and establish comprehensive 
emergency plans.
Industry Competition 
Risks
China's retail industry, especially online retail, 
is highly competitive. If JD.com fails to compete 
effectively, it may struggle to maintain or 
could lose market share and customers. 
Additionally, emerging technologies may 
intensify competition within the retail sector. 
New business models may also emerge, such 
as those based on new social media platforms 
or social commerce.
Focus on the three core elements of cost, 
efficiency, and experience to consistently 
build unique industry competitiveness, 
providing consumers with an unparalleled 
shopping experience of the utmost in 
selection, speed, quality and value.
Risks of Uncertainty 
in Consumer Market 
The retail industry is highly sensitive to macro-
economic changes. Our revenue and financial 
 
performance largely depend on the economic 
 
conditions in China and globally, as well as 
the specific online retail economic climate.
Closely monitor economic trends in China 
and globally, and research and analyze 
changes in consumer demand in major 
markets such as China. Control operating 
costs by strengthening the logistics 
network, improving comprehensive 
utilization through economies of scale, 
enhancing the integration of the logistics 
network, and leveraging smarter decision-
making to improve operational efficiency.
1 COSO, Committee of Sponsoring Organization of the Treadway Commission.
JD.com views risk governance as a crucial aspect of the Group's sustained and stable development. We 
have established a comprehensive risk governance system, engaging in risk identification and response. Risk 
awareness is also emphasized as a key component of group culture.
JD.com implements a full-chain risk control system, and establishes a comprehensive risk governance framework. 
This framework focuses on four key dimensions: regulatory security, legal security, operational security, and 
information security, ensuring that the Group's risk management efforts are conducted in a structured and orderly 
manner.
Risk Governance
Risk Governance System
Risk Governance Framework of JD.com
We advance digital risk management and provide 
relevant training for business managers, thereby 
quantifying risk compliance and further enhancing the 
efficiency of risk governance. Additionally, we have 
established a sound and transparent risk reward and 
penalty mechanism, implementing a point deduction 
system for safety incidents. The annual internal control 
self-assessment results are incorporated as a significant 
part of the performance evaluation for heads of business 
groups and units. Through a clear reward and penalty 
mechanism, we refine risk management and encourage 
all departments to fulfill risk prevention responsibilities, 
thereby increasing risk awareness and response 
capabilities.
Risk Control Process at JD.com
Transition from a reactive risk management 
approach to a proactive model focused on "early 
identification and warning"
Risk  
detection
Incident 
assessment
Incident 
handling
Effec-
tiveness 
evalua-
tion
  
Overseeing and guiding comprehensive risk 
governance work 
Board of Directors
  
The CCO chairs the Security and Risk Control Committee
  
Appointing a Chief Security Officer to ensure the 
stability, reliability, and security of the Group's digital 
infrastructure and information systems
Security and Risk Control Committee
  
Comprising risk control leaders from various 
systems, managing a wide range of risks
  
Conducting risk assessments at least once a week, 
facilitating communication and decision-making on 
cross-subgroup risks
Working Group for Security and Risk Control
  
In charge of following up risk investigation and 
governance
  
Communicating major risk cases to the management 
and relevant departments through management 
meetings, quarterly business analysis meetings, and 
specialized reports from business units and groups
1-level Departments under the CxO
Early identification 
and warning
Potential hazard 
 
management


2023 JD.com, Inc.
Environmental, Social and Governance Report
A Pragmatic Vision 
Consolidates
the Foundation of 
Responsibility
A Pragmatic Path
Promotes
Good Consumption	
A Pragmatic Attitude
Paves the Way
for a Green Future
A Pragmatic Approach
Leads to Shared
Development Outcomes
12
During the reporting period, to ensure the stable and smooth operation of systems during major promotional events such as "618" and "Double 11," JD.com conducted 
a series of risk assessments and stress tests during technical drills. This process not only promptly and effectively identified and addressed potential risks, but also 
enhanced the Group's overall risk assessment and response capabilities, ensuring the controllability of risks during major events.
JD.com cultivates risk awareness among all employees 
through improving work processes and training, 
establishing a culture of risk management within the 
Group. We have implemented strict review procedures 
for our products and services, incorporated risk prompts 
in self-assessment modules, and conducted detailed 
assessments for key strategic projects on a case-by-
case basis. Additionally, we provide risk management 
training to all relevant stakeholders, including business 
management, e-commerce operators, supporters for 
operation service, and etc. In 2023, we conducted 25 risk 
management training sessions through a combination 
of online and offline approaches, with over 2,900 
participants.
Furthermore, we have established effective risk feedback 
channels and a joint prevention and control mechanism, 
supported by a reliable way to report risk-related 
issues. When a risk is reported, the system directs it to 
the primary responsible department head, who then 
assigns it to the appropriate handler. The entire handling 
process and results are recorded in the system ensuring 
transparency in the process.
Risk Assessment and Stress Testing
Risk Awareness and Culture
Emerging Risks and Responses for JD.com
Moreover, we identify and respond to emerging risks, and have pinpointed the two most significant emerging risks that could impact the Group's development.
Categories
Impacts on Businesses
Responses
Risks Emerging from AI
New technologies such as AI pose technological challenges to security defenses through 
deepfakes, automated attacks, and information pollution.
Enhance the research and protection of AI systems 
security, while leveraging AI technology for security 
innovations to consistently improve capabilities 
related to network and data security.
Geopolitical Risks
The intensifying competition and friction among major global economies may increase 
operational uncertainties, negatively impacting our business operations, expansion, 
and overall performance. Compliance costs may also rise due to adherence to trade 
restrictions and sanctions to avoid penalties for illegal activities, even if unintentional. 
Escalating geopolitical conflicts could also lead to skyrocketing energy prices and social 
unrest, further amplifying these risks.
Closely monitor policy trends and legislative 
developments in relevant countries to proactively 
mitigate risks. Strengthen research on new compliance 
requirements to ensure adherence.
25
Over2,900
Risk management training sessions
Participants
We consistently optimize our system capacity 
assessment and planning framework. This 
includes precise capacity assessments at various 
scales - from application-level, system-level, 
and link-level to full-chain level across single 
machines, clusters, units, single data centers, 
and entire data centers, ensuring the rational 
deployment of services/applications across all 
data centers.
Mature Drill Implementation Mechanism
To enhance the fidelity and efficiency of stress 
testing for large-scale promotional events, we 
have developed a comprehensive and efficient 
stress testing solution. The solution includes 
sustainable iterative improvements covering 
stress test planning, execution, performance 
issue diagnosis, traffic recording and playback, 
problem troubleshooting, and fault diagnosis 
and handling.
Sound Emergency Response Mechanism
For random issues arising from unexpected 
incidents, we have developed a comprehensive 
emergency response mechanism. This includes 
pre-incident planning and drills, real-time issue 
detection, diagnosis, and execution, as well as 
post-incident review and knowledge accumulation. 
By integrating insights from stress tests and 
historical fault experiences, we consistently 
enhance our diagnostic and response capabilities.
Comprehensive System Capacity Assessment


2023 JD.com, Inc.
Environmental, Social and Governance Report
A Pragmatic Vision 
Consolidates
the Foundation of 
Responsibility
A Pragmatic Path
Promotes
Good Consumption	
A Pragmatic Attitude
Paves the Way
for a Green Future
A Pragmatic Approach
Leads to Shared
Development Outcomes
13
JD.com has established a top-down ESG governance structure led by the Board of Directors, integrating ESG 
governance comprehensively into the Group's management system. Compliance management, information security 
and privacy protection, business ethics and anti-corruption, and energy consumption targets are included as ESG 
performance indicators in management evaluations. By linking ESG performance to compensation, we ensure 
sustainable development receives adequate attention and effective management.
ESG Governance Structure of JD.com
ESG Governance
  
ESG Committee oversees Group-related ESG matters, such as environmental 
sustainability, implementation of environmental management policies, improvement 
of environmental performance, business ethics, product safety and service quality, 
employee training and development, diversity and inclusiveness, community support, 
and privacy and data security. 
  
The Committee helps the Board to identify and assess the Group's ESG-related risks 
and opportunities.
  
The Committee guides and reviews the development of the Group's ESG strategies and 
plans, ESG-related practices, and significant public disclosures and reports related to 
ESG matters.
  
Representatives from subsidiaries and business units related to ESG issues leverage 
their deep understanding of the business to drive the Group's overall ESG practices 
and regularly update the ESG working group on the latest progress.
ESG representatives from subsidiaries 
and business units
  
The ESG Working Group aligns ESG requirements and objectives, coordinates with 
ESG leaders across subsidiaries and business units, implements action plans, tracks 
progress, and regularly reports to the SEC.
ESG Working Group
  
The Strategy Execution Committee (SEC) leads the ESG Working Group to develop the 
Group's ESG strategies and priorities.
Strategy Execution Committee (SEC)
ESG Committee
Board of Directors


2023 JD.com, Inc.
Environmental, Social and Governance Report
A Pragmatic Vision 
Consolidates
the Foundation of 
Responsibility
A Pragmatic Path
Promotes
Good Consumption	
A Pragmatic Attitude
Paves the Way
for a Green Future
A Pragmatic Approach
Leads to Shared
Development Outcomes
14
Stakeholder Engagement
JD.com is committed to establishing an open and transparent communication mechanism to ensure active interaction and effective communication with stakeholders. We value the feedback of stakeholders, and carefully listen to their 
concerns and expectations. This ensures that our business decisions and actions fully consider the interests and concerns of all parties, and effectively respond to their expectations and demands.
Stakeholder Engagement Mechanisms
1 The material issues are identified based on the results of JD.com’s ESG materiality analysis, combined with the daily communication with JD.com’s stakeholders.
Consumers
Employees
Shareholders and 
Investors
Government and 
Regulatory Bodies
Partners on the Value 
Chain
Communities and 
Environment
Material Issues
1
Communication
  
Product and service quality
  
Consumer relations
  
Protection of employee rights 
and interests
  
Data security and privacy 
protection
  
Business ethics and anti-
corruption
  
Continuous online and offline 
communication (Apps/websites/
stores)
  
24/7 customer service hotline
  
Daily media communication
  
Social media communication
  
Consumer surveys
  
Product and service quality
  
Consumer relations
  
Protection of employee rights 
and interests
  
Data security and privacy 
protection
  
Business ethics and anti-
corruption
  
Employee development and 
talent training
  
All-staff emails, communication 
meetings, forums, employee 
representative congress, 
training sessions and feedback 
mechanisms
  
Employee service hot-line, 
bigear@jd.com, the Group's 
trade union, the Group's anti-
corruption reporting channels
  
Data security and privacy 
protection
  
Corporate governance
  
Technological innovation and 
accessibility
  
Supplier management
  
Product carbon footprint
  
Diversity, equity and 
inclusiveness
  
Promote high-quality 
employment
  
Employee hiring and rights and 
interests protection
  
Phone calls, meetings and 
company visits
  
Corporate annual reports, 
quarterly reports and 
announcements
  
Roadshow
  
Daily communication on 
sustainable development and 
ESG-related issues
  
Data security and privacy 
protection
  
Employee hiring and rights and 
interests protection
  
Consumer relations
  
Technological innovation and 
accessibility
  
Public welfare and charity
  
Rural revitalization and common 
prosperity
  
Daily reporting, communication 
and policy recommendations
  
Irregular industry forums and 
conferences
  
Field investigation
  
Cooperation agreements signing 
and strategic partnership 
establishment
  
Respond to inquiries for listed 
companies from regulatory bodies
  
Data security and privacy 
protection
  
Product and service quality
  
Business ethics and anti-
corruption
  
Consumer relations
  
Protection of employee rights 
and interests
  
Daily procurement, training, and 
evaluation
  
Irregular industry forums
  
Supplier conferences
  
Regular media communication
  
"Jing Dian" Academy, "Jing Mai" 
Platform
  
Public welfare and charity
  
Occupational health and safety
  
Protection of employee rights 
and interests
  
Employee development and 
talent training
  
Data security and privacy 
protection
  
Intellectual property protection
  
Public welfare programs and 
fund-raising platforms
  
Regular media communication
  
Social media communication
  
CSR forums and activities
  
Volunteer activities
Stakeholders


2023 JD.com, Inc.
Environmental, Social and Governance Report
A Pragmatic Vision 
Consolidates
the Foundation of 
Responsibility
A Pragmatic Path
Promotes
Good Consumption	
A Pragmatic Attitude
Paves the Way
for a Green Future
A Pragmatic Approach
Leads to Shared
Development Outcomes
15
Material Issues
JD.com conducts at least one material issue identification and analysis annually to ensure a comprehensive 
understanding and timely response to important issues related to the Group’s strategy, operations, and ESG goals. 
We systematically survey and analyze internal and external environmental changes and trends regularly. Through 
stakeholder engagement, we understand their concerns and expectations, adjusting the indicators and content of 
material issues accordingly. We distribute ESG stakeholder surveys to internal executives, employees, and external 
stakeholders to gauge their attention to various ESG topics. 23 strategic issues that contribute to sustainable value 
co-creation were ultimately identified and organized into a materiality matrix.
Material Issue Identification Process
Materiality Matrix of JD.com in 2023
Material Issues of JD.com in 2023
Importance to JD.com
High
Low
High
Issues of High Importance
Issues of Moderate Importance
Issues of Low Importance
Importance to Stakeholders
Environmental
Social
Governance
Environmental
17
18
16
19
21
23
22
20
15
13
14
10
1
4
3
6
5
2
8
11
12
7
9
Energy Management
Packaging Management
Climate Change 
Response
Operational Impact on 
the Environment
Product Carbon Footprint
Water Management
Waste Management
Product and Service Quality
Consumer Relations
Occupational Health and Safety
Employee Development and 
Talent Training
Rural Revitalization and 
Common Prosperity
Employee Employment and 
Rights Protection
Philanthropy and Charity
Diversity, Equity and Inclusion
Data Security and Privacy 
Protection
Technological Innovation and 
Accessibility
Business Ethics and Anti-
Corruption
Intellectual Property Protection
Risk Management
Supply Chain Management
Responsible Marketing
Corporate Governance
  
Based on the material issue list of JD.com in 2022, and in accordance with the ESG 
Reporting Guide from the Hong Kong Stock Exchange (HKEX), the ESG Reporting 
Guide 2.0 from the Nasdaq, and with reference to ESG rating standards in 
capital markets, and changes in internal and external environments and industry 
development trends, JD.com sorted, summarized and updated the issues through 
peer benchmarking, media monitoring, and stakeholder communication.
  
In 2023, we identified 23 material issues, with some updates and adjustments 
compared to 2022.
  
Questionnaires: We distributed questionnaires to both internal and external 
stakeholders through a variety of channels, including email and WeChat, 
to collect their opinions and the importance they place on the Group’s ESG 
material issues. A total of 3,221 valid questionnaires were collected.
  
ESG Meetings: We initiated special communications on ESG material issues 
through ESG meetings targeting specific stakeholders.
  
We drew the materiality matrix based on the survey results.
  
Material issues were adjusted and confirmed by the leadership and ESG 
Working Group based on industry trends, peer benchmarking, capital market 
concerns, and the Group’s development strategy.
  
The adjusted materiality matrix was submitted to the Board’s ESG Committee 
for review and confirmation, forming the final version of the matrix.
Identification of 
material issues
Stakeholder 
engagement
Matrix development 
and adjustment
Review of 
materiality matrix
Social
Governance
16
1
2
3
4
5
6
8
11
12
7
9
10
13
14
15
20
17
18
19
21
22
23


2023 JD.com, Inc.
Environmental, Social and Governance Report
A Pragmatic Vision 
Consolidates
the Foundation of 
Responsibility
A Pragmatic Path
Promotes
Good Consumption	
A Pragmatic Attitude
Paves the Way
for a Green Future
A Pragmatic Approach
Leads to Shared
Development Outcomes
16
JD.com upholds the philosophy of "Achieving Success the Right Way" and integrates the concept of "Compliance 
Enables Development" into all business activities. We have established a comprehensive compliance 
management system, starting from "one philosophy," building "Three Lines of Defense" and implementing 
compliance management across "five dimensions." Through comprehensive promotion, joint accountability, and 
targeted rewards, we ensure that all business activities are legal and compliant.
In 2023, amid the growing popularity of large AI models both in China and beyond, we undertook a series of special 
initiatives focused on the compliance of cross-border personal data transfers and data algorithm compliance.
Regarding cross-border personal data transfers, we passed the tiered review by regulators and completed the security 
assessments for the cross-border data transfers of JD Retail’s global shopping and JD Logistics’ cross-border logistics 
businesses. This further improved the Group’s cross-border data transfer evaluation mechanism, ensuring the compliant 
development of our international operations.
Regarding data algorithm compliance, we have developed multiple compliance guidelines and manuals related to 
data algorithms. We have embedded relevant laws and regulations into the business system processes of large 
language model-related applications, promotes the integration of compliance concepts such as data security, personal 
information protection, content security, and trade secret protection into algorithm design and product interactions. This 
enables self-driven compliance assessments within the business. During the reporting period, we have completed the 
filing of JD Mall’s personalized recommendation algorithm and JD Yanxi’s large language model algorithm, advancing the 
Group’s compliance in data algorithms.
To enhance compliance awareness among all employees, during the reporting period, we have conducted group-
wide compliance training and exams online. The training covered courses such as "Integrity Compliance," "Information 
Security," and "Legal Compliance and Trade Secrets," achieving a 100% employee coverage rate. Different versions of 
the courses were developed for professional positions, management positions, and frontline staff to meet the specific 
needs of employees at different levels, ensuring that the compliance training was closely aligned with business needs. 
Additionally, we established a 24/7 online consultation group to promptly address any issues employees encountered 
during their learning. Through the online system, we assigned tasks and set expiration reminders for employees, 
enabling timely monitoring of learning progress and follow-up, thereby improving the efficiency of compliance training.
Compliance Training and Examination for All Employees
Compliance Governance
Compliance Management System of JD.com
Full publicity and implementation
JD.com ensures all employees are fully 
aware of compliance policies through 
promotion and implementation.
Joint accountability
The system of "Accountability Basics 
and Control" and collateral penalties 
are carried out in case of major 
compliance issues.
Targeted Rewards
Employees who excel in compliance 
and those who report violations will 
receive rewards.
Compliance Implementation Mechanism
Legal and regulatory compliance
JD.
 com regards legal compliance as the 
fundamental requirement to achieve its 
business objectives and strictly abides 
by relevant laws, regulations, and rules.
Audit compliance
JD.com strictly adheres to all laws for listed 
companies. The management of the 
Group provides a written statement on 
the effectiveness of internal controls over 
financial reporting in the annual report.
Anti-corruption compliance
JD. com has always maintained a 
"zero tolerance" approach towards 
corruption and is determined to 
create a clean and honest business 
environment.
Transaction risk control
All business units maintain a keen 
awareness of transaction risk management, 
standardize business activity rules, 
enhance business transaction systems, and 
integrate with JD.com’s risk control system 
to accurately identify and intelligently 
counteract transaction risk behaviors.
Information security compliance
JD.com places a high priority on information 
security, ensuring comprehensive coverage 
of information security compliance 
training for all employees to enhance their 
awareness and understanding of basic 
information security principles. The Group 
has sound mechanisms and processes 
in place to respond to system security 
issues, external attacks and compliance 
breaches, safeguarding the confidentiality 
of information and data for the Group, 
employees, and clients. Information 
and data are accessed and used when 
necessary to maintain the security of 
information assets.
Five Dimensions
"Achieving Success the Right Way"
Guided by the philosophy of "Achieving Success the Right Way," JD.com upholds the concept of "Compliance Enables Development." 
We comply with laws and regulations, and foster a culture of integrity and transparency. By leveraging technology and data-driven 
compliance management, we aim to establish a forward-looking, flexible, and efficient compliance system.
One Philosophy
Third line of defense
Each employee is familiar with and 
firmly adheres to JD.com’s compliance 
system by resisting temptations and 
maintaining compliance standards.
These teams promote a compliance 
culture, integrating information technology 
into all necessary aspects of risk and 
compliance management, reducing 
corporate risk, and supporting JD.com’s 
long-term stable development.
By following the compliance system and 
upholding the principle of fairness, justice 
and independence, the supervision and 
audit team oversees the compliance 
practices of each organizational unit, 
investigates and combats corruption, 
and ensures operational compliance.
First line of defense
Second line of defense
Three Lines of Defense
All Employees
Professional Risk Management 
Teams (Legal, Finance, Information 
Security, and Risk Control)
Independent Supervision 
and Audit Team


2023 JD.com, Inc.
Environmental, Social and Governance Report
A Pragmatic Vision 
Consolidates
the Foundation of 
Responsibility
A Pragmatic Path
Promotes
Good Consumption	
A Pragmatic Attitude
Paves the Way
for a Green Future
A Pragmatic Approach
Leads to Shared
Development Outcomes
17
Business Responsibility
JD.com upholds the principle of "undertaking 
substantive, valuable, long-term actions."
We value integrity in business ethics, guarantee 
strict information and privacy protection, and 
leverage outstanding technological innovation 
and proper intellectual property protection, 
staying committed to creating pragmatic, 
beneficial, positive, and long-term impacts for 
society, the environment, and stakeholders.
Since its establishment, JD.com has always adhered 
to the business values of "Honest Operation and 
Achieving Success the Right Way," resolutely opposing 
corruption, bribery, extortion, fraud, monopoly, and unfair 
competition, thereby shaping a corporate culture of 
integrity, incorruptibility, and fair competition.
Business Ethics
JD.com adopts a zero-tolerance policy towards corruption 
and has established "Three Major Measures" for anti-
corruption management as well as a "Three Lines of 
Defense" risk assessment system for anti-corruption and 
integrity. The Board of Directors regularly receives reports 
on anti-corruption and business ethics and assesses 
the overall quality of management's execution to ensure 
issues are handled transparently and proactively. 
The Supervision Department, authorized by JD.com, 
is dedicated to investigating corruption activities. It is 
responsible for conducting irregular self-inspections, 
corruption prevention, investigations, and governance. The 
department reports directly to the CEO on the results of 
corruption investigations, thereby ensuring independence 
and objectivity in the handling and investigation of reports.
System Construction
As of the end of 2023, the Sunshine Integrity Alliance 
had served more than 850 member companies. During 
the year, it released the Analysis Report on the Fraud 
Cases of the Enterprises Employees in the Internet 
Industry and the Guidelines for Evaluating the Maturity 
of Corporate Integrity and Compliance Management. 
In January 2024, the alliance published and distributed 
the Practical Guidelines to Corporate Integrity and 
Compliance, with further efforts to lead and promote 
the co-construction and ecological cooperation of 
corporate internal corruption governance systems.
Building the "Sunshine Integrity Alliance" with Industry Partners
Practical Guidelines to Corporate 
Integrity and Compliance
Analysis Report on the Fraud Cases of 
the Enterprise Employees in the Internet 
Industry
In terms of internal management, JD.com requires all full-
time employees to sign the JD Group Employee Handbook 
and the JD Group's Commitment to Anti-Corruption. 
Interns, consultants, and other temporary personnel 
also need to sign the Commitment to Comply with JD 
Group's Anti-Corruption Regulations, ensuring a 100% 
coverage rate in 2023. In addition, JD.com links employee 
compensation with anti-corruption management 
performance, effectively preventing and managing 
corruption. For employees who violate the JD Group Anti-
Corruption Regulations, JD.com has the right to dismiss 
them and cancel all granted options and stocks.
JD.com conducts unscheduled anti-corruption internal 
audits every year. During the reporting period, JD.com 
concluded 190 internal corruption investigations. Another 
six employee corruption cases (including cases transferred 
over from the preceding years) lawfully transferred 
by JD.com to the judiciary were concluded during the 
reporting period. There were 0 corruption litigation cases 
having JD.com as either the plaintiff or defendant.
In 2023, no insider trading
1 incidents occurred within 
JD.com.
Anti-Corruption Management
1 
The phrase here specifically means insider trading as 
referred to in the Securities Law of the People’s Republic of 
China, the Securities and Futures Ordinance of Hong Kong, 
and the Securities Exchange Act of the United States.


2023 JD.com, Inc.
Environmental, Social and Governance Report
A Pragmatic Vision 
Consolidates
the Foundation of 
Responsibility
A Pragmatic Path
Promotes
Good Consumption	
A Pragmatic Attitude
Paves the Way
for a Green Future
A Pragmatic Approach
Leads to Shared
Development Outcomes
18
JD.com firmly believes that fair competition is the core of the market economy. Monopolistic practices such as forcing 
the "either-or" choice not only limit market competition, harm the legitimate rights and interests of brands, merchants, 
and consumers, but also compromise the innovation and vitality of market development. In 2023, JD.com was not 
subject to any penalties related to anti-monopoly and unfair competition cases.
JD.com prohibits any form of commercial bribery. During the reporting period, we conducted online learning and 
examinations on business ethics and anti-corruption compliance education for all employees, achieving a training 
coverage rate of 100%.
To help partners better understand our integrity and compliance concepts and business transaction 
requirements, we conducted special lectures on integrity and compliance, working together with suppliers to 
maintain a business environment of integrity and fairness.
In 2023, JD.com focused on group corruption by adopting the principle of education as the main approach and 
punishments as supplementary. The combination of the crackdown on a series of cases with the initiative of 
employees to report themselves helped the transition from investigating individual cases to governing similar cases, 
eliminating loopholes while balancing the cost, efficacy, and sensitivity of risk management.
Anti-Monopoly
Building a Culture of Business Ethics
Innovative Practice
On December 29, 2023, Beijing High People’s Court issued a first-instance judgment in the case of JD.com 
versus Zhejiang Tmall Network Co., Ltd., Zhejiang Tmall Technology Co., Ltd., and Alibaba Group Holding 
Limited on a monopoly practice. The court found that they abused their dominant market position 
to implement the "either-or" choice, causing severe damage to JD.com, and the court ordered them 
to compensate JD.com with RMB 1 billion. The court made a fair judgment and it highlights JD.com’s 
determination to maintain market fair competition through the rule of law.
In 2023, JD.com held three integrity and 
compliance lectures for its suppliers and 
partners, with a total of 2,266 participants. 
The lectures covered the right business values 
of integrity, the integrity and compliance 
system and regulatory requirements, typical 
corruption cases, and the channels for 
reporting corruption within JD.com, aiming to 
create a fair and honest business environment 
together with the suppliers.
In October 2023, the Sunshine Integrity Alliance 
held its 6th Enterprise Integrity and Compliance 
Summit at the headquarters of JD.com with the 
theme of "Promoting High-Quality Development 
of Enterprises through Integrity and Compliance." 
Nearly 200 member companies and 300 
corporate representatives were invited to 
discuss corporate integrity and compliance 
governance and explore trends in the high-quality 
development of enterprises.
At the summit, JD.com shared the plan for the 
construction of a system for preventing integrity 
risks, and launched the Initiative on Promoting 
the Construction of Integrity and Compliance 
System for Private Enterprises, advocating 
for the integration of a culture of integrity 
throughout the entire corporate governance 
process.
JD.com Won Lawsuit Against Alibaba for "Either-Or" Choice
Integrity and Compliance 
Presentations for Suppliers and 
Partners
The 6th Enterprise Integrity and 
Compliance Summit
Integrity Risks
Qingyuan Initiative：In 2023, the Supervisory Department fully collaborated with the CFO, the CHO, 
JD Retail, JD Logistics, JD Industrials, and other systems and business areas in launching the initiative. 
We focused on key links such as talent recruitment, business cooperation, and household safety, and 
applied the capabilities of identifying personnel integrity risks and corporate integrity risks. The aim was 
to customize advanced warning strategies for integrity risks in key areas and critical links, expand the 
scope of foreseeing integrity risks, improve the integrity risk prevention and control system of various 
business departments, and secure digital applications and preparation of risk management and control.
Special Initiative on Integrity Risk Management in Key Retail Areas：Focusing on integrity risks in key 
retail areas, we conducted in-depth research on business logic, established a risk identification model, 
and employed JD.com's integrity co-governance system. With these three lines of defense, we created 
a comprehensive approach featuring "Early Warning, Crackdown, and Governance" to achieve the 
transition from managing individual cases to handling similar cases together, eliminating loopholes.
Integrity and Compliance Promotion for Bidding 
and Procurement Partners
JD.com’s Chief Compliance Officer Delivers A 
Speech


2023 JD.com, Inc.
Environmental, Social and Governance Report
A Pragmatic Vision 
Consolidates
the Foundation of 
Responsibility
A Pragmatic Path
Promotes
Good Consumption	
A Pragmatic Attitude
Paves the Way
for a Green Future
A Pragmatic Approach
Leads to Shared
Development Outcomes
19
As a participant of the United Nations Global Compact (UNGC), JD.com continuously improves the development 
of its business ethics system and carries out comprehensive and high-standard anti-corruption and compliance 
management. In 2023, two of our main entities passed the ISO 37001 system certification and obtained 
certificates. We also require our other main entities to benchmark against internationally recognized standards 
and requirements for internal management and self-inspection, advocating for more main entities to undertake 
business ethics certification.
In 2023, JD.com was awarded the Integrity 
and Compliance Innovation Award for 
Private Enterprises by the Judicial Research 
Association of Shanghai Law Society, the 
Criminal Law School of East China University 
of Political Science and Law, and other 
organizations.
Standard Certification and Honors
Reporting Channels and Whistleblower Protection
JD.com provides multiple public reporting channels 
such as telephone, email, letters, and an "Integrity JD" 
QR code to effectively prevent and combat corruption, 
bribery, and other illegal and non-compliant behaviors. 
In 2023, JD.com developed a compliance bot capable of 
automatically replying to employees' questions related 
to anti-corruption, helping employees clarify the definition 
and standards of business ethics compliance, addressing 
inquiries, and providing daily behavior guidelines. 
Additionally, employees can consult on business ethics 
through "JD ME-Integrity JD," where specialists will answer 
their questions.
JD.com adopts a zero-tolerance policy towards corruption 
and deals with it strictly once verified. For objectively valid 
and verified internal violations reported, we will reward 
the whistleblower with a cash prize based on the value of 
the information and the final investigation results of the 
case. In terms of external collaboration, if a supplier bribes 
an internal staff member, and that member reports it 
truthfully and the act is verified, they will receive a reward 
of 50% of the refused amount.
In terms of whistleblower protection, JD.com relies on the 
JD Group Whistle-blower Protection and Reward System 
to fully safeguard the legitimate rights and interests of 
whistleblowers from infringement, strictly implementing 
confidentiality provisions at every stage including report 
acceptance, investigation, and handling. We have 
established a "Special Protection List" for entities or 
individuals who report under their real names, while also 
allowing whistleblowers to report anonymously or under a 
pseudonym. For any personnel who violate confidentiality 
provisions or retaliate against whistleblowers, we will 
deal with them seriously, including pursuing their legal or 
criminal responsibility.
Public reporting channels:
By appointment
Other means deemed appropriate by the whistleblowers
Telephone: 400-601-3618, ext. 4
Email: jiancha@jd.com
Mailing address: Supervision Department, Tower A, Building 
No. 1, JD.com Headquarters, Kechuang 11th Street, Beijing 
Economic and Technological Development Zone
QR code:
ISO 37001 Certificate of Beijing JD Chaohong 
Trade Co., Ltd.
ISO 37001 Certificate of Beijing JD Century 
Information Technology Co., Ltd.
1
2
3
5
4
6


2023 JD.com, Inc.
Environmental, Social and Governance Report
A Pragmatic Vision 
Consolidates
the Foundation of 
Responsibility
A Pragmatic Path
Promotes
Good Consumption	
A Pragmatic Attitude
Paves the Way
for a Green Future
A Pragmatic Approach
Leads to Shared
Development Outcomes
20
To ensure our business operations comply with the latest 
legal regulations and supervisory standards, we have 
developed 52 information security and privacy protection 
systems and norms regarding consumers, customers, 
suppliers, partners, employees, and other relevant entities. 
During the reporting period, we also focused on revising 
13 key information security management systems, 
including the Application Development Security Lifecycle 
Management Regulation of JD Group, the Data and Privacy 
Security Management Regulation of JD Group, and the 
Network Security Management Regulation of JD.com, 
as well as over 30 supporting implementation details to 
effectively safeguard the information security of all business 
lines during the production and operation stages.
JD.com has also formulated management regulations such 
as the Supply Chain Security Management Regulation of 
JD Group and the Third-Party Partner Information Security 
Management Rules of JD Group for third-party partners 
involved in data or system integration, including suppliers. 
These regulations explicitly require cooperating suppliers 
to fulfill their responsibilities and obligations regarding data 
security. They reserve the right to conduct spot checks 
or reviews on the information security management of 
suppliers and other third-party partners under appropriate 
circumstances. By regulating the behavior of partners 
in each stage, JD.com effectively prevents potential 
information security risks.
We have established a three-level information security 
and privacy protection management structure consisting 
of the Security and Risk Control Committee, the Data 
Security and Privacy Compliance Working Group, and 
the Security Execution Working Group, creating a multi-
tiered data security defense system with strict control 
at every level. The Security and Risk Control Committee, 
serving as the highest management body for information 
security and privacy protection, is headed by the Chief 
Compliance Officer (CCO) and includes various technology 
vice presidents as members. It comprehensively oversees 
and guides the work on information security and privacy 
protection and regularly reports to the Board of Directors 
and the Strategy Execution Committee (SEC).
Information Security Management System
 Once every quarter
Security risk management 
status
 Major emergency incidents or 
decisions, etc.
 Regularly report work to the Board of 
Directors and the Strategy Execution 
Committee (SEC)
Working Mechanism of JD.com’s Security and Risk Control Committee
As a new type of enterprise with both physical presence and digital capabilities, JD.com positions itself as a 
guardian of the digital age. We strive to enhance the basic data security management capabilities, improve the 
compliance of secure operations, and effectively avoid information security risks.
Information Security and Privacy Protection
Information Security Compliance
To ensure the effectiveness and reliability of the information security management system, JD.com regularly conducts 
audits on information security policies and systems. A comprehensive risk assessment of potential information security risks 
within JD.com is carried out once every six months, and the information security system is subjected to at least one external 
and at least one internal audit annually. Relying on the dual scrutiny of third-party and internal professional teams, JD.com 
ensures the effective implementation of information security measures, effectively building a solid data security barrier.
Additionally, we have established a comprehensive 
information security monitoring mechanism, continuously 
conducting vulnerability scanning in key areas such as 
network traffic, application systems, infrastructure, and 
source code to identify and address potential security 
risks promptly. We also use the JD Security Response 
Center
1 as a channel to collect vulnerabilities and threat 
intelligence related to our products and continuously 
conduct vulnerability testing through crowdsourced 
security testing. We will immediately initiate the repair 
process if any medium-risk or high-risk security vulnerabilities 
and potential risks are discovered.
1 JD Security Response Center (security.jd.com).
JD.com's Information Security Monitoring System
Regular 
meeting
Quarterly 
report
Ad hoc 
meeting
Report 
to the 
Board of 
Directors
To effectively respond to information security incidents, we have also developed a scientific and efficient security 
emergency response mechanism for different types of security incidents. This involves classifying the severity 
based on their impact and clearly defining the procedures for handling and response, thereby achieving closed-
loop management of security emergency incidents.
24/7 real-time monitoring of networks, logs, and 
traffic
Source code scanning before system releases
Regular full-network asset vulnerability scanning
Number of breaches of information security and 
privacy protection
Amount of penalties received for information 
security vulnerabilities or other network security 
breaches
0
0
2023


2023 JD.com, Inc.
Environmental, Social and Governance Report
A Pragmatic Vision 
Consolidates
the Foundation of 
Responsibility
A Pragmatic Path
Promotes
Good Consumption	
A Pragmatic Attitude
Paves the Way
for a Green Future
A Pragmatic Approach
Leads to Shared
Development Outcomes
21
In 2023, JD.com’s retail, logistics and other core business systems were independently subjected to penetration testing 
by the State Information Center, an external assessment organization, in the course of routine Network Security Level 
Protection Evaluation. By means of real-world attack and defense drills by external agencies, no medium- or high-risk 
security risks and vulnerabilities were found in JD.com’s business systems.
JD.com has continuously carried out information security certification, obtaining multiple authoritative information 
security system certifications both domestically and internationally, covering over 80% of our business. In 2023, JD 
Logistics received the Data Security Management Certification from the China Cybersecurity Review, Certification and 
Market Regulation Big Data Center (CCRC) and the Level 3 Certification of CAICT's Data Security Maturity Model (DSMM), 
becoming the first logistics enterprise in China to obtain such certification in the warehousing and distribution scenario. 
We have worked together with third-party consulting agencies to promote the GDPR
1 compliance process. We have 
completed GDPR security and compliance for our MCA business, thereby guaranteeing data security and adherence 
to regulations for our business in Europe.
1 GDPR, General Data Protection Regulation.
JD.com's External Information Security Audit in 2023
Information Security System Certifications Obtained by Various Entities under JD.com
Data Security 
Management Maturity 
(DSMM) Level 3 
Certification
ISO 27001
Information Security 
Management System 
Certification
ISO 27701
Privacy Information 
Management System 
Certification
ISO 27799
Personal Health 
Information Security 
Management System 
Certification
CCRC
Data Security 
Management 
Certification
Information System Security 
Protection Level 3 Certification
App Security 
Certificate
App Information 
Security Certificate
●
 
 
The CAICT 
conducted 
vulnerability 
scanning 
on JD.com's 
system.
●
 
 
The State Information 
Center conducted 
penetration testing.
●
 
 
The National Computer Network 
Emergency Response Technical 
Team (CNCERT) conducted privacy 
compliance technical inspections.
●
 
 
The National Computer Virus Emergency Response Center (CVERC) 
conducted security vulnerability scanning and privacy compliance 
technical inspection.


2023 JD.com, Inc.
Environmental, Social and Governance Report
A Pragmatic Vision 
Consolidates
the Foundation of 
Responsibility
A Pragmatic Path
Promotes
Good Consumption	
A Pragmatic Attitude
Paves the Way
for a Green Future
A Pragmatic Approach
Leads to Shared
Development Outcomes
22
JD.com also conducts regular information security 
emergency simulation tests and drills. We work to 
understand the security status of internal systems 
through practical exercises, conduct an in-depth 
analysis of identified issues, and make corresponding 
adjustments and optimizations to the information 
security defense system based on the analysis results 
to test and enhance the ability to respond to sudden 
information security incidents. In 2023, JD.com held 
24 internal and external information security drills, 
involving key areas and dimensions such as security 
system stability exercises during major promotions, 
real-world attack and defense exercises, phishing 
exercises, account security red-blue confrontations, 
and data penetration confrontations, improving our 
comprehensive capabilities to protect information 
security. 
JD.com also actively participated in and promoted the 
standard setting in the field of information security 
and privacy protection. By conducting in-depth 
cooperation with industry peers, experts, scholars, and 
regulatory bodies together, we explore and research 
new technologies, new methods, and new standards 
for information security and privacy protection, 
empowering the development of information security. 
In September 2023, JD.com held a multi-dimensional cybersecurity publicity week event through a 
combination of online and offline interactive methods. This not only effectively enhanced the employees' 
knowledge base on information security but also greatly increased their enthusiasm and proactivity in 
participation, strengthening the information security defenses together with the employees.
JD.com's Cybersecurity Publicity Week
JD.com organized the first offline interactive 
experience event, with interesting and engaging 
games to convey to employees' information security 
and privacy protection awareness, including data 
classification and grading protection, anti-phishing, 
secure office practices, secure meetings, and privacy 
protection knowledge, along with the concept of 
"I am the primary person responsible for security." 
More than 1,000 employees participated in the event 
offline.
■   Offline Interactive Exhibition
We updated themes daily for the online knowledge 
Q&A interactive activities, covering various topics 
such as cybersecurity, data security, anti-phishing, 
office security, and trade secrets. A total of 17,195 
employees participated in the online interactions.
■   Online Interaction on Security Knowledge
■   Publicity Through Activities
JD.com conducted an information security perception 
survey among employees and collected 7,013 
questionnaires. We carried out a detailed analysis and 
organization of the collected questionnaires to gain 
an in-depth understanding of employees' perceptions 
and views on information security, providing strong 
support for further optimization of the information 
security management system.
■   Employee Security Perception Survey
JD.com's Offline Cybersecurity Interactive Exhibition
7,013
Questionnaires collected from information 
security perception survey
Through the all-staff push on JD ME, posting on the 
major announcement board of the office software, 
carousel images, and other means, we promoted 
Cybersecurity Week.
Online promotion: 
We produced posters on daily office, phishing 
prevention, trade secret protection, and 
Cybersecurity Week, as well as launched 
promotional videos, covering more than 40,000 
employees with offline promotions.
Offline promotion:
To further enhance awareness of information security, 
JD.com conducts annual information security and 
privacy protection promotion and training activities 
for all employees, including full-time employees, 
interns, and other labor personnel, as well as suppliers, 
contractors, and other partners. This is supplemented 
by a corresponding examination mechanism to ensure 
that each participant can fully understand and master 
information security knowledge. We also carry out precise 
and efficient training courses according to the different 
responsibilities and work scenarios of our employees. 
During the reporting period, JD.com's information 
security training introduced four new training scenarios: 
onboarding for outsourced staff, onboarding for frontline 
couriers, JAVA security development, and application for 
access to the logistics big data platform.
In 2023, JD.com conducted a total of 93 special training 
sessions on information security and privacy protection, 
covering all management levels, ordinary employees, and 
frontline workers. The special training and examination 
totaled 445,000 hours, with approximately 1.2 million 
training examinations complemeted, and a coverage of 
100%.
Building a Culture of Information Security
100%
Special training sessions on information 
security and privacy protection 
with an examination coverage of


2023 JD.com, Inc.
Environmental, Social and Governance Report
A Pragmatic Vision 
Consolidates
the Foundation of 
Responsibility
A Pragmatic Path
Promotes
Good Consumption	
A Pragmatic Attitude
Paves the Way
for a Green Future
A Pragmatic Approach
Leads to Shared
Development Outcomes
23
Personal Information and Privacy Protection
Based on a comprehensive security and privacy 
management system, JD.com implements the 
corporate responsibility to protect user personal 
privacy. We strictly control the work of internal 
information security and privacy protection and 
incorporate it into the employee performance 
evaluation system. Once an employee is found to 
violate relevant policies, disciplinary actions such as 
email reminders, warnings, demerits, or dismissal will 
be taken according to the severity of the breaches. 
If an employee is suspected of violating national 
laws and regulations, we will immediately initiate 
legal proceedings and pursue legal responsibilities 
according to the law.
JD.com has also established a comprehensive and 
efficient privacy impact assessment mechanism. 
Any business activities or R&D testing involving users' 
personal information must undergo strict privacy 
impact assessments and regular audits, which produce 
professional and easy-to-understand inspection 
reports. This provides clear compliance guidelines for 
business teams, comprehensively enhancing privacy 
compliance supervision and detection capabilities. 
In 2023, JD.com conducted in-depth Data Protection 
Impact Assessments (DPIA) for all product systems at 
the initial development/iteration process. According to 
standards such as ISO 27001, JD.com made progress 
in rectifying information security issues identified during 
internal and external audit processes.
JD.com's User Privacy Protection Mechanism
■  
Collect personal information based on product and service processes, follow the 
principles of minimum data permissions and necessity, and inform users of the nature 
and purpose of the collected information.
■  
Provide users with the right to access, correct, and delete personal data, as well as to 
cancel their accounts.
■  
Establish a data classification and grading system, data security management 
specifications, data security development regulation, and other management 
mechanisms to ensure the confidentiality of personal information.
■  
Combine the provided services and legal regulations to determine a retention period 
of no less than three years from the date when the transaction is completed. If the 
retention period expires, users' personal information will be deleted or anonymized 
according to applicable legal requirements.
■  
Except for necessary scenarios such as completing transactions and providing services, we 
will not share users' personal information with any other companies or organizations.
■  
Sign data protection agreements with suppliers and other third-party partners, inform 
users in detail about the purposes of entrusting, sharing, and transferring information, 
and clarify the responsibilities, obligations, and requirements of both parties in 
protecting user data.
■  
Require third-party partners to carry out at least one internal information security and 
privacy protection audit annually and actively cooperate with JD.com's information 
security audit work, reserving the right to spot-check or review the information security 
management of these partners under appropriate circumstances.
Collection
Storage
Third-party 
data man-
agement
Technological Innovation
JD.com regards technological innovation as the engine for 
promoting sustainable development of the enterprise and 
stays committed to improving the quality of life for more people 
powered by technological innovation.
In 2023, considering the rapidly changing market environment 
and the growing user demand, we focused our primary research 
on digital supply chains and AI large language models, making 
significant progress. We also actively applied our innovative 
achievements, allowing more merchants to enjoy a more efficient 
digital supply chain and more users to enjoy better shopping 
experiences.
In 2024, JD.com won the Process or 
Technology Innovation of the Year 
award in the Gartner Power of the 
Profession Supply Chain Award
1, 
becoming the only Asian company to 
receive this award.
Digital and Intelligent Supply Chain
JD.com is committed to creating a more efficient 
supply chain through multi-party collaboration, 
combining the best practices of a large number of 
leading enterprises and the valuable experience of 
JD.com's supply chain development. This effort helps 
businesses transcend the data silos in traditional 
business management models and build a secure, 
stable, and digital supply chain system covering 
points, lines, and networks in and out of the system.
By leveraging the digital, intelligent, and scalable 
supply chain infrastructure, JD.com has achieved a 
globally unparalleled inventory turnover of 30.3 days 
for its over 10 million SKUs of self-operated goods. 
After optimizing supply chain costs and efficiency, 
we empower brands and vendors to achieve greater 
cost savings and operational efficiency. Throughout 
the 2024 JD.com Chinese Lunar New Year Shopping 
Festival, our intelligent supply chain system generated 
more than 620,000 daily recommendations for supply 
chain actions such as restocking and inventory 
reallocations, thereby empowering brands and 
vendors to more accurately forecast demands, guide 
productions, and arrange inventories.
The TaiPu digital supply chain solution provided by 
JD Industrials has covered a wide customer base in 
China's industrial supply chain technology and service 
market, which has served about 6,900 key enterprises 
and more than 2.6 million small and medium-sized 
enterprises. Key customers include about 50% of 
Fortune China 500 companies and over 40% of the 
Fortune Global 500 companies operating in China
2.
1 
Gartner Power of the Profession Supply Chain Award has been held for ten years as a renowned award around the 
world for measuring the innovative capabilities of enterprise supply chains.
2 
The data comes from the prospectus submitted to the Hong Kong Stock Exchange by JD Industrials in 2022, and the 
relevant data for 2023 has not been compiled yet.


2023 JD.com, Inc.
Environmental, Social and Governance Report
A Pragmatic Vision 
Consolidates
the Foundation of 
Responsibility
A Pragmatic Path
Promotes
Good Consumption	
A Pragmatic Attitude
Paves the Way
for a Green Future
A Pragmatic Approach
Leads to Shared
Development Outcomes
24
Employee Training on Innovation
JD.com focuses on cultivating employees' innovative abilities, regarding employees as an important driving force 
for corporate technological innovation. We provide employees with diverse innovative training opportunities, 
helping them improve their professional skills and broaden their horizons, thereby providing a sustained drive for 
the innovative development of the enterprise.
On July 13, 2023, during the 2023 JD Global Tech Explorer Conference & JD Cloud Summit, JD.com officially 
launched the ChatRhino Large Language Model. Compared with general large models, ChatRhino 
integrates 70% general data and 30% native digital supply chain data, boasting advantages of "higher 
industrial attributes, stronger generalization capabilities, and more security guarantees," capable of 
solving practical problems in multiple real-world industry scenarios.
As of the end of the reporting period, JD.com had built a complete toolchain for the ChatRhino Large 
Language Model, including the ChatRhino AI development computing platform, vector database, and three 
sets of upgraded infrastructure. Among them, the ChatRhino AI development computing platform integrates 
not only an industry knowledge base but also JD.com's own experience in retail, logistics, finance, health, and 
other industries. Through more than 100 training and inference optimization tools, it can quickly transform 
general models into professional ones, providing customized solutions for the customer's large language 
model development and industry application development.
JD.com's Technology Traning Camp is a technology-
sharing platform tailor-made for JD Industrials 
employees, aimed at enhancing their understanding 
of various industrial technologies, fostering a 
continuous learning mindset, and creating a learning-
oriented organization. In 2023, the camp held a total 
of 11 technical training sessions, with 706 participants 
in total. The training covered various technical fields 
including algorithms, front-end, back-end, product, 
and testing, with topics shared including ChatGPT, 
AI, programmers' analysis, front-end performance 
optimization, and other cutting-edge industry content.
JD's ChatRhino Large Language Model
JD.com's Technology Training Camp
11
706
Technical training sessions held by JD.com’s 
Technology Training Camp in 2023
Cumulative enrollments
AI Large Language Model
In 2023, JD.com continued to explore technical innovation 
and the application of AI large language models 
in business domains. Through profound technical 
applications in large language models, Natural Language 
Processing (NLP), Computer Vision (CV), etc., we have 
significantly enhanced the effectiveness of our AI large 
language models in multiple scenarios. In addition, retail 
technology witnesseses continuous innovation, applying 
AIGC to advertising creative generation, customer service 
scenarios and supply chain management to further 
improve supply chain efficiency and user experience.
In 2023, the AIGC application “Jingyan” was launched. 
Through innovative technologies such as feedback-based 
prompt optimization, session segmentation, alignment 
enhancement of human preference instructions, and 
flexible multi-path retrieval, it consistently innovates to 
deliver an efficient and convenient shopping experience 
for users.
E-commerce creative materials contain a large amount of 
intuitive information about products. Excellent materials 
capture consumer attention swiftly and foster an 
emotional bond. Nevertheless, current creative efforts are 
largely manually crafted, constrained by efficiency and 
cost. The technology team at JD Retail has harnessed 
AIGC to pioneer advancements in image creation, 
copywriting, and integrated text-image content, thereby 
automating the production of high-caliber advertising 
creativities.
JD Retail’s Jiushu Algorithm Middle Office has introduced a 
holistic solution set for large language model applications, 
which is anchored by an application framework that 
integrates the ReAct framework, Instruction Tuning (SFT), 
and Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG) technologies. 
It supports large language models in acquiring domain-
specific knowledge, enhancing their autonomous 
decision-making capabilities, and improving the accuracy 
of information processing. This integrated approach 
facilitates business professionals to streamline the fine-
tuning, deployment, and application of large language 
models, ensuring implementation in business scenarios.
By the end of the reporting period, JD.com had completed 
the implementation of large language models in intelligent 
shopping guides, supporting the understanding and 
exploration of users' industrial product needs through 
conversations. This approach provides more accurate 
guidance and recommendations to users, improving the 
user experience while promoting an increase in conversion 
rates. Yanxi Digital People have been deployed in 
live broadcast studios, driving the conversion of live 
broadcasts during leisure time to increase by 30%.
Meanwhile, JD.com's algorithm team, based on the 
open-source GLM series of large language models from 
Tsinghua University, performed highly efficient parameter 
tuning, achieving better performance in the identification 
of key product information scenarios than the general 
large language models GPT3.5, realizing deep mining of 
commodity information in industrial vertical domains. In the 
scenario of identical product recognition, the recognition 
capability saw a significant increase, with the identification 
accuracy rate reaching over 90% and the recall rate 
reaching 55%. In the scenario of business opportunity 
sourcing, the business opportunity matching accuracy rate 
reaches 90% and the recall rate reaches 87%.


2023 JD.com, Inc.
Environmental, Social and Governance Report
A Pragmatic Vision 
Consolidates
the Foundation of 
Responsibility
A Pragmatic Path
Promotes
Good Consumption	
A Pragmatic Attitude
Paves the Way
for a Green Future
A Pragmatic Approach
Leads to Shared
Development Outcomes
25
JD.com proposes the concept of closely integrating asset accumulation with value realization in its intellectual 
property strategy, focusing more on qualitative improvement based on quantitative accumulation of intellectual 
property rights. In 2023, through perfecting the system for cultivating high-value patents, we strengthened the 
ability to write, review, and defend key cases, established a management mechanism for patent application 
situations and benefit data, and achieved full process coverage of the high-value patent work system. In 2023, 
our patent “A Method and System for Controlling Multiple Types of Equipment” won the First Prize of Beijing 
Invention Patent Award, and the Group continued to explore breakthroughs in the operation of patent value. We 
implemented four cases of patent open licensing, initiated and established the Green Supply Chain Technology 
Sharing Platform, built a green and low-carbon supply chain technology patent pool, and promoted the 
transformation and application of patent technology across the entire industry. 
Intellectual Property Protection
In December 2023, JD.com took the lead and joined hands with BOE and Lenovo to launch and 
establish a green supply chain technology-sharing platform (patent pool). The platform initially 
included 40 patents, aiming to promote low-carbon operations. By leveraging the supply chain's 
reach and the platform's influence, it seeks to encourage the application of green and low-carbon 
technologies and patents in the supply chain field, and motivate upstream and downstream 
enterprises to actively embrace low-carbon ideas.
JD.com Takes the Lead in Launching and Establishing a Green Supply Chain 
Technology-Sharing Platform
In addition, we focus on cultivating our employees' 
awareness of intellectual property rights and 
continuously carry out related publicity and training 
activities to enhance their legal awareness and 
professional competence in this area. In 2023, we 
conducted nearly 150 training sessions on various 
intellectual property-related topics, including patent 
mining and protection, trademark protection, 
compliance with trade secrets, and risk prevention 
of intellectual property rights. These sessions 
cumulatively covered nearly 4,000 participants, 
targeting roles and scenarios such as R&D, brand 
management, sales operations, and new employees. 
We also provide inventors with substantial patent 
bonuses as an incentive, encouraging technical R&D 
personnel to actively file patent applications.
Intellectual Property Training
In terms of intellectual property risk prevention, we have 
firmly established awareness of intellectual property 
infringement risks among all employees through 
publicity and training, enhanced the concept of risk 
prevention, and strengthened collaboration between 
the intellectual property management department 
and other departments such as R&D, marketing, and 
human resources through the implementation and 
monitoring of the intellectual property management 
system. We provide timely professional intelligence 
analysis for R&D projects and product identification, 
ensuring the effective operation of our intellectual 
property risk management system. We also apply for 
government projects to seek external resource support. 
We participated in Beijing's pilot program of intellectual 
property insurance, which provides resource support 
for JD.com's "going global" initiative through insurance, 
expert consultation, and FTO (Freedom to Operate) 
analysis, effectively reducing the pressure of potential 
intellectual disputes we may face in expanding our 
business overseas.
JD.com's Key Data on Accumulated 
Intellectual Property (as of the end of 2023)
8,209
22,677
Number of authorized patents at 
home and abroad
Number of patent applications


26
2023 JD.com, Inc.
Environmental, Social and Governance Report
A Pragmatic Path
Promotes
Good Consumption	
A Pragmatic Attitude
Paves the Way
for a Green Future
A Pragmatic Approach
Leads to Shared
Development Outcomes
A Pragmatic Vision
Consolidates
the Foundation of 
Responsibility
A Pragmatic Attitude 
Paves the Way 
for a Green Future
02
JD.com is acutely aware of the profound impact that environment and 
climate can have on business activities. In operations, warehousing, 
packaging, transportation, consumption, and other scenarios, we pursue 
efficiency and environmental protection. With a pragmatic attitude, we 
advance the application of clean energy and energy-saving technologies, 
committing to a green, low-carbon, and recyclable model. We also 
conduct traceability of raw materials, support ecosystem protection, 
continuously practice food conservation, and actively create a healthy 
and green development model, building a sustainable future together 
with our partners.


27
2023 JD.com, Inc.
Environmental, Social and Governance Report
A Pragmatic Path
Promotes
Good Consumption	
A Pragmatic Attitude
Paves the Way
for a Green Future
A Pragmatic Approach
Leads to Shared
Development Outcomes
A Pragmatic Vision
Consolidates
the Foundation of 
Responsibility
JD.com actively supports the national strategies 
for "carbon peaking" and "carbon neutrality" 
as well as the 1.5 degrees Celsius temperature 
control target set by the Paris Agreement. By 
following the IFRS S2 Climate-related Disclosures 
and the TCFD framework, JD.com integrates 
climate change issues into its governance 
structure. The Group considers policies, industry, 
and market trends comprehensively, identifies 
and analyzes climate change risks and 
opportunities, continuously strengthens climate 
risk management, transitions to green operations, 
and contributes to sustainable development.
Environmental 
Governance and 
Climate Change 
Responses
Governance Structure
Governance
1 
See the introduction of the Chief Financial Officer, Ian Su 
Shan, at https://ir.jd.com/management.
Board of Directors
With the support of the ESG Committee, the Board of Directors oversees JD.com's performance and practices in 
environmental and climate aspects.
Strategic Execution 
Committee (SEC)
JD.com's SEC member and Chief Financial Officer serves as the Chief Climate Officer;
The SEC leads the ESG Working Group in researching and developing the Group's climate-related strategies and priorities.
ESG Working 
Group
Coordinating the daily management and implementation related to climate risks and opportunities;
Carrying out the identification and assessment of climate-related risks and opportunities;
Reporting on climate-related issues to the Board of Directors. In 2023, the ESG Working Group reported to the Board of Directors 
once, covering topics such as climate-related disclosure requirements and the overall plan for climate-related matters.
The CFO line of JD.com is responsible for the environmental-
related assessments, establishment of environmental 
metrics and targets, and oversight and guidance of 
environmental management in the subsidiaries. The CFO 
also serves as the Chief Climate Officer
1, regularly reporting 
to the Board's ESG Committee on the implementation 
and performance of environmental management policies. 
In 2023, there were no events within JD.com that had a 
significant impact on the environment.
We engaged a third-party organization in the reporting 
year to assess and analyze the energy consumption 
and emissions of the Group as a whole and each of its 
sub-groups in conjunction with the results of the carbon 
inventory and benchmarking against the industry, and 
put forward a number of emission reduction analysis 
proposals as reference for the subsequent energy 
conservation and emission reduction work.
In 2023, multiple subsidiaries of JD.com received several 
leading domestic and international environmental 
management system certifications, including ISO 14001.


28
2023 JD.com, Inc.
Environmental, Social and Governance Report
A Pragmatic Path
Promotes
Good Consumption	
A Pragmatic Attitude
Paves the Way
for a Green Future
A Pragmatic Approach
Leads to Shared
Development Outcomes
A Pragmatic Vision
Consolidates
the Foundation of 
Responsibility
Forecast of Macro-Environmental Situation JD.com May Face in Different Climate Scenarios
SSP1  
(Low emission scenario under strict climate policies)
SSP3  
(High emission scenario without climate policies)
Nature
1
 
Mean temperature: The temperature will rise 
by 1.6 ℃ by 2040 when compared with the pre-
industrial era, and by 2.0℃ by 2100;
 
Sea level: The sea level will rise by 0.1 meters in 
2040 and by 0.4 meters in 2100;
 
Extreme weather: Its frequency and intensity will 
increase to a certain extent;
 
Rainfall: As temperatures rise between 1.5 and 
2.0 ℃, global agriculture and ecology will suffer 
from more intense droughts, with an increase in 
precipitation intensity of 10.5% to 14%.
 
Mean temperature: The temperature will rise 
by 1.6℃ by 2040 when compared with the pre-
industrial era, and by 3.9℃ by 2100;
 
Sea level: The sea level will rise by 0.1 meters in 
2040 and by 0.6 meters in 2100;
 
Extreme weather: Its frequency and intensity will 
increase greatly;
 
Rainfall: As temperatures rise between 2.0 and 
4.0℃, global agriculture and ecology will suffer 
from more intense droughts, with an increase in 
precipitation intensity of 14.0% to 30.2%.
Socio-
economic 
environment
 
Global climate policy: Major countries and regions 
worldwide announce the carbon neutrality path 
(including China's goals of "carbon peaking" and 
"carbon neutrality"), and strictly implement the 
goals;
 
Global business model: Transitioning rapidly from 
an economy based on fossil fuels to one driven 
by renewable energy sources;
 
China's greenhouse gas emissions: Emissions per 
unit of GDP will decrease by 18% in 2025 from the 
2020 level, and by more than 65% in 2030 from 
the 2005 level
2;
 
China's carbon prices: Carbon prices are 
expected to reach RMB 79/tonne and RMB 191/
tonne by 2025 and 2030 respectively (without 
total emission control)
3;
 
China's energy structure: The proportion of non-
fossil fuels in one-time energy consumption will 
reach 20% in 2025 and 25% in 2030
4;
 
Global climate policy: Some countries and 
regions lack carbon neutrality goals, and have 
no detailed short-term actions and goals;
 
Global business model: The profit-driven 
business model fails to properly consider the 
environmental and social impacts, and there 
are no obvious changes in the renewable 
energy portfolio;
 
China's greenhouse gas emissions: In 2030, 
greenhouse gas emissions will rise by 38% from 
the 2021 level;
 
China's carbon prices: In 2025 and 2030, carbon 
prices are expected to remain the same as in 
2021, at RMB 38.50–62.29/tonne
5;
 
China's energy structure: The proportion of non-
fossil fuels in primary energy consumption is the 
same as that in 2020, about 16%;
SSP1  
(Low emission scenario under strict climate policies)
SSP3  
(High emission scenario without climate policies)
 
Socio-
economic 
environment
 
China's new energy vehicles: By 2025, the sales of 
new NEVs will reach about 20% of the total
6; By 2030, 
the proportion of newly used clean energy-powered 
vehicles will reach around 40% that year
7;
 
China's consumer attitudes: By 2025, the market 
share of green and low-carbon products will 
significantly increase; by 2030, green consumption 
become the mainstream trend, and the public will 
actively choose green and low-carbon products
8.
 
China's new energy vehicles: The proportion 
of total sales of NEVs remains the same as in 
2021, at 11.25%
9;
 
China's consumer attitudes: Green consumption 
is not yet mainstream, and the market for green 
and low-carbon products is relatively small.
 
 
Climate Risk 
Manifestation
 
The socio-economic environment is relatively 
severe, with the risks of climate change mainly 
manifesting as transition risks.
 
The natural ecological environment is relatively 
severe, with the risks of climate change mainly 
manifesting as physical risks.
1 
Source: The Sixth Assessment Report from Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) Working Group I (WGI)  
and CMIP6 Climate Model.
2 
Source: Progress on the Implementation of China's Nationally Determined Contributions (2022).
3 
Source: The 2023 China Carbon Market Long-term Price Forecast Report issued by Refinitiv.
4 
Source: National Development and Reform Commission's Outline on the 14th Five Year Plan.
5 
Source: Shanghai Environment and Energy Exchange released annual transaction data of China's national carbon 
market.
6 
Source: The Development Plan for the NEV Industry (2021-2035) issued by the Ministry of State in 2020.
7 
Source: Implementation Plan for Carbon Peaking in the Industrial Sector issued by the Ministry of Industry and 
Information Technology in 2022.
8 
Source: Implementation Plan for Promoting Green Consumption issued by the National Development and Reform 
Commission and other departments in 2022.
9 Source: China’s new energy vehicle parc released by People's Daily in 2022.
We adopted the Shared Socioeconomic Pathways (SSPs) recommended by the Intergovernmental Panel on 
Climate Change (IPCC) to carry out a climate scenario analysis on the external macro-environment of our business 
operations, including ecology, economy, and society, using the SSP1 and SSP3 for 2025 and 2030 respectively.
Strategy


29
2023 JD.com, Inc.
Environmental, Social and Governance Report
A Pragmatic Path
Promotes
Good Consumption	
A Pragmatic Attitude
Paves the Way
for a Green Future
A Pragmatic Approach
Leads to Shared
Development Outcomes
A Pragmatic Vision
Consolidates
the Foundation of 
Responsibility
Potential Impacts of Climate Change Risks/Opportunities on JD.com's Business and 
Response Measures
Risk/ 
Opportunity 
Classification
Risk Description
Response Measures
Impact 
Period
Acute Physical Risks
Flood 
Rainstorm
Operation
 
Servers, power systems, and other 
critical facilities are damaged, affecting 
website access, order processing, and 
other business function, the cost of 
infrastructure maintenance increases;
 
Employees' attendance and work 
efficiency may be affected, which will 
potentially increase medical expenses 
and human resources costs.
Supply chain
 
The normal operation of logistics 
infrastructure and the planning of 
logistics networks may be affected, 
which will result in negative impacts on 
goods transportation, cargo delivery, 
and sales operations.
 
Increase investment in infrastructure and 
establish emergency response mechanisms 
to address the impact of sudden weather 
events on business continuity;
 
The "sponge city" design has been adopted in 
the construction of headquarters Buildings No. 
2 and No. 3 in Beijing, and the headquarters 
office building in southwest regions to alleviate 
the pressure on municipal rainwater drainage;
 
Conduct regular disaster emergency drills 
and establish a dedicated team for follow-
up;
 
Issue advance warnings of the potential 
impacts of weather events. For example, 
Dada worked with "Moji Weather" to 
promptly push weather warnings to the rider 
end, resulting in a 9.4% month-on-month 
decrease in traffic accidents;
 
Establish a benefits system that includes 
commercial insurance and introduce annual 
physical examinations, and add additional 
supplemental medical insurance for frontline 
employees.
M, L
Heat waves/
Cold waves
Operation
 
Electronic devices may stop working 
due to overheating or low temperatures, 
increasing the cost of equipment 
maintenance and replacement;
 
Rising temperatures and other climate 
changes may exacerbate the spread 
of infectious diseases
2, affecting the 
health and safety of employees.
Supply chain
 
Improper temperature control can affect 
the quality and freshness of cold chain 
goods, impacting customer satisfaction 
and business revenue.
 
Deploy emergency equipment in infrastructure 
such as data centers and intelligent industrial 
parks, including snow clearing and anti-
freezing tools for snowstorm weather, ensuring 
the normal operation of the infrastructure;
 
Provide sick leave, work-related injury leave, 
and other welfare leave, set up a VPN-based 
remote office framework, and offer online 
meeting tools, helping reduce the risk of 
disease transmission;
 
For commodities whose sales can be easily 
affected by extreme weather, timely inventory 
adjustment should be conducted according 
to weather changes to avoid stock-outs and 
overstocking, while cold storage capacity 
should be increased to ensure food freshness.
S, M, L
Risk/ 
Opportunity 
Classification
Risk Description
Response Measures
Impact 
Period
Frequent 
extreme 
weather 
events
Operation
 
Frequent extreme disasters nationwide 
may have different degrees of impact 
on the construction and operational 
stability of office buildings, intelligent 
industrial parks, data centers, 
photovoltaic industrial parks, and other 
structures, leading to increased costs 
for maintaining infrastructure such as 
warehouses and data centers.
 
JD.com's data centers and intelligent 
industrial parks have comprehensive 
emergency response plans for unexpected 
weather events such as typhoons, lightning, 
heavy rain, high temperatures, and 
snowfalls. These plans include but are not 
limited to measures like wind protection 
for typhoons, flood prevention during 
heavy rain, snow clearing and anti-freezing 
during snowstorms, and lightning detection 
during thunderstorms to ensure the normal 
operation of the infrastructure.
M, L
Chronic Pysical Risks
Air pollution
Operation
 
Long-term emissions from stationary 
and mobile sources may lead to air 
pollution, which manifests as problems 
such as smog and dusty weather, 
increasing the risk of cardiovascular 
and respiratory diseases
3, and 
affecting employee health.
 
Promote the development of remote 
working and online meeting systems to 
reduce the adverse effects on employees' 
health due to outdoor commuting in 
polluted weather.
M, L
Drought
Water 
scarcity
Biodiversity 
loss
Consumer/User
 
Climate change leads to problems 
such as drought and scarcity of water 
resources, exacerbating the food 
security crisis. Issues like unstable 
food supply and quality safety may 
affect retail operations, increasing 
the costs associated with production, 
quality control, and consumer rights 
and interests protection.
 
For primary products including agriculture 
and forestry products, formulate annual 
procurement plans to ensure supply for at 
least a year;
 
Establish management processes such 
as spot checks and quality inspections 
of goods, promptly remove substandard 
products from shelves, help ensure food 
quality, and provide consumers with safe 
and reliable food.
L
1 Impact period including short-term (S, within 2 years), medium-term (M, 2-5 years), and long-term (L, more than 5 years).
2 
Source: WHO, Global health community calls for urgent action on climate and health at COP28.
3 
Source: Vanke School of Public Health, Tsinghua University, Health Risks from Climate Change and How We Respond.
1


30
2023 JD.com, Inc.
Environmental, Social and Governance Report
A Pragmatic Path
Promotes
Good Consumption	
A Pragmatic Attitude
Paves the Way
for a Green Future
A Pragmatic Approach
Leads to Shared
Development Outcomes
A Pragmatic Vision
Consolidates
the Foundation of 
Responsibility
Risk/ 
Opportunity 
Classification
Risk Description
Response Measures
Impact 
Period
Transition Risks
Regulatory 
and legal 
risks
Operation
 
If JD.com does not implement the 
climate-related laws and regulations as 
required, it will lead to compliance risks, 
as well as the risk of restrictions and 
pressure from external stakeholders.
Supply chain
 
China continues to improve supply 
chain-related policies and regulations 
regarding the development of green 
transportation, green packaging, and 
green parks, including national policies 
like the 14th Five-Year Plan for Green 
Transportation Development
1 and 
the Action Plan for Further Promoting 
the Green Transformation of Express 
Packaging
2. These policies have a 
continuous impact on JD.com's core 
business. If supply chain management 
is not conducted as required, there 
will be compliance risks, which could 
lead to obstacles or interruptions in 
cooperation.
 
Leverage big data to optimize path planning, 
warehousing and transportation networks 
in real-time, thus reducing the number of 
vehicles in transit and improving the return 
vehicle's full load rate. Shift some of the goods' 
transportation from road to rail and implement 
a green transportation model;
 
Develop new energy vehicles. In 2023, we 
have invested a total of 8,290 self-operated 
NEVs on the highway in the trunk line and 
terminal transportation links, an increase of 
2,872 compared to 2022, equivalent to an 
average annual reduction of 35,200 tonnes of 
greenhouse gases;
 
JD Logistics and its partners issued a DWOP
3 
 
statement, and released the DWOP certification 
standard, working together with upstream 
and downstream partners to promote the 
environmentally friendly packaging model;
 
Develop photovoltaic power generation 
industrial parks. As of December 31, 2023, the 
cumulative photovoltaic power generation of JD 
Property's parks had reached 88,977.52 MWh;
 
JD Property has developed the Intelligent 
Management Center (IMC) digital operation 
platform, which enables the supervision and 
empowerment of daily operation management, 
energy conservation, and emission reduction.
S, M, L
Market 
risks
Investment and financing
 
The National Financial Regulatory 
Administration issued the Guidelines 
for Green Finance in Banking and 
Insurance
4, requiring financial institutions 
to strengthen support for green, low-
carbon, and circular economies. If 
JD.com fails to pay timely attention to 
climate-related risks, it will affect its 
attractiveness in the capital market, 
leading to an increase in financing costs.
 
Develop a green financing framework, 
systematically showcasing the principles and 
processes of green financing for sustainable 
development projects. In 2021, JD.com signed 
a five-year green syndicated loan of USD 2 
billion for the first time.
S, M
Reputational 
risks
Operation
 
CDP
5 and other capital market ratings 
directly reflect the effectiveness of climate 
change-related management, and the 
rating results affect stakeholders' trust in 
JD.com and their investment decisions.
 
Continue to complete capital market 
questionnaires such as CDP and CSA, and 
carry out the disclosure of ESG-related 
information, helping relevant parties 
to timely understand the management 
progress of JD.com's climate-related work.
S, M, L
1 
Source: Notice of the Ministry of Transport on Issuing the 14th Five-Year Plan for Green Transportation Development.
2 
Source: Action Plan for Further Promoting the Green Transformation of Express Packaging issued by the National 
Development and Reform Commission.
3 
DWOP, or Delivered with Original Package, refers to the integrated structure of e-commerce product packaging and 
express delivery packaging, which reduces the packaging form of e-commerce products in the shipping process.
4 
Source: National Financial Regulatory Administration, Guidelines for Green Finance in Banking and Insurance.
5 CDP, or Carbon Disclosure Project, is a global platform for environmental data disclosure and rating certification.
Risk/ 
Opportunity 
Classification
Risk Description
Response Measures
Impact 
Period
Climate Change Transformation Opportunities
Green 
products 
and 
services
Consumer/User
 
The increase in environmental awareness 
has gradually shifted market preferences 
towards green products and services. 
If JD.com can grasp these market 
preferences in time, it will have a better 
chance to gain favor in the market.
 
Launch the "Green Impact Initiative," open 
consumer carbon accounts and low-carbon 
consumption zones, and continue to provide 
consumers with green products. In 2023, more 
than 100 brands participated in the initiative, 
and the JD platform offered more than 3.56 
million green and low-carbon products;
 
The retail business should actively take 
advantage of the opportunity provided by 
consumer policy subsidies by carrying out green 
home appliance sales nationwide. JD.com 
vigorously promotes the trade-in business. In 
2023, JD Five Star had sold over 580,000 green 
and smart subsidized appliances.
S, M, L
Providing 
energy-
saving and 
carbon-
reduction 
services for 
enterprises 
through 
digital 
intelligence
Operation
 
As policies related to energy conservation 
and environmental protection continue 
to be introduced, governments and 
businesses are increasingly valuing 
sustainable development and brand 
image, leading to a gradual increase 
in the demand for energy-saving and 
carbon-reduction services.
 
JD Industrials makes use of digital capabilities, 
providing energy consumption monitoring and 
carbon emission monitoring management 
services. By reflecting the current status of 
energy consumption and carbon emissions 
in real-time and accurately predicting carbon 
emission trends, it helps to formulate practical 
carbon reduction pathways, assisting 
enterprises and governments in precisely 
achieving dual carbon management;
 
JD Industrials assists the government and 
academic institutions in establishing dual-
carbon laboratories, leveraging industrial 
internet solutions and product capabilities. It 
integrates a new type of industry-education 
integration innovation center that combines 
dual-carbon management and intelligent 
manufacturing, providing talent support 
services for the green development of the 
industry.
M, L


31
2023 JD.com, Inc.
Environmental, Social and Governance Report
A Pragmatic Path
Promotes
Good Consumption	
A Pragmatic Attitude
Paves the Way
for a Green Future
A Pragmatic Approach
Leads to Shared
Development Outcomes
A Pragmatic Vision
Consolidates
the Foundation of 
Responsibility
JD.com's Metrics and Targets on Issues Related to Climate Change
Metrics and Targets
Primary 
Metrics
Secondary Metrics
Metrics Description
Target Setting
Carbon 
inventory 
and 
emission 
reduction 
targets
Conduct a comprehensive 
greenhouse gas emissions 
inventory
 
Determine the boundaries and scope 
of carbon emissions and conduct a 
comprehensive inventory
 
In 2023, for the first time, a third 
party was hired to conduct a 
carbon inventory for JD.com, 
improving the quality of carbon 
data, with plans to promote the 
setting of carbon targets
Establish the carbon 
emission reduction targets 
at the group level
 
Establish and announce the carbon 
emission reduction targets at the group 
level
Strengthen 
climate 
governance
Establish a climate 
governance framework
 
Strengthen the focus and management 
of climate-related issues based on the 
existing ESG governance structure
 
Management structure: the Board of 
Directors and the SEC will cooperate in 
supervision and management, and the 
ESG Working Group will coordinate the 
implementation of climate targets in 
each subsidiary and business unit
 
Appoint the Chief Financial Officer 
(CFO) as the Chief Climate Officer, 
leading climate-related work 
(achieved)
Promote 
carbon 
emission 
reduction in 
all business 
scenarios
Low-carbon 
operations
Low-carbon 
office
 
Strengthen the intelligent operation and 
maintenance (O&M) management of 
energy use for office space
 
Improve the use of energy-saving facilities
 
Timely shut down energy-consuming 
equipment
 
Encourage remote work
 
Encourage employees' green  
commuting
 
2023 office headquarters 
(excluding Building No. 2) energy 
saving rate of 3% (achieved)
 
Targets for waste reduction and 
water use efficiency are currently 
being developed
JD.com has incorporated climate risk into its risk management system.
Our management process is as follows:
Risk Management
 
Benchmark against the TCFD framework for the classification of climate risks 
and opportunities and conduct a thorough analysis
 
Screen the current risk points based on macro-policies, industry policies, and 
regulatory requirements
Risk 
identification
 
Identify climate-related physical and transition risks that have a substantial 
impact on the Group's business by considering the possibility of occurrence 
and the degree of impact
Risk 
assessment
 
Select key climate risks based on literature, regulatory agencies, investors, 
stock exchanges, and other stakeholders' expectations of the Group's role in 
climate change, and the impact of climate change on its business
Risk ranking
 
Develop plans and measures to strengthen the responses to the  climate 
risks identified in the assessment
Risk response


32
2023 JD.com, Inc.
Environmental, Social and Governance Report
A Pragmatic Path
Promotes
Good Consumption	
A Pragmatic Attitude
Paves the Way
for a Green Future
A Pragmatic Approach
Leads to Shared
Development Outcomes
A Pragmatic Vision
Consolidates
the Foundation of 
Responsibility
Primary 
Metrics
Secondary Metrics
Metrics Description
Target Setting
Promote 
carbon 
emission 
reduction in 
all business 
scenarios
Low-carbon 
operations
Low-carbon 
data center
 
Use natural energy
 
Use clean energy, including energy 
recovery and large-scale distributed 
photovoltaic power generation system
 
Energy storage and cold storage
 
Architectural layout and design for low 
energy consumption
 
O&M management platform
 
Develop emergency response plans to 
enhance our resilience to climate change 
and our ability to deal with extreme 
weather conditions
 
PUE continues to be improved on the 
basis of 1.1
 
Infrastructure energy consumption 
continues to decline
 
Climate resilience continues to 
improve
Expand the 
financing 
scale of 
low-carbon 
projects
 
Based on the published framework, 
principles, and processes of green 
finance, continuously identify low-carbon 
projects and expand the influence and 
scale of green finance
 
Identify more projects with low 
carbon competitiveness and expand 
the scale of green financing
Low-carbon 
supply 
chain
Low-carbon 
transporta-
tion
 
Use of new energy vehicles
 
Fully apply digital smart technology 
and optimize route, storage, and 
transportation network planning
 
Optimize transportation structure and 
energy efficiency
 
Keep increasing the proportion of 
NEVs, strengthen energy consumption 
management in transportation
Low-carbon 
logistics 
parks
 
Energy substitution: maximize the use 
of renewable power, such as distributed 
photovoltaic and efficient energy 
storage
 
Efficient operation: automated operation 
and electrification of park energy 
consumption
 
Online O&M system of the solution to 
carbon neutrality in intelligent logistics 
parks
 
Develop carbon-neutral park 
construction (JD.com's "Asia No. 1" 
Xi'an Intelligent Industrial Park has 
become the first certified "carbon 
neutral" industrial park in China's 
logistics industry)
 
Gradually increase photovoltaic 
power generation capacity (In 2023, JD 
Property's self-invested and self-built 
photovoltaic power plants successively 
connected to the grid, generating 36 
MW of electricity, and are currently 
undergoing the application process 
for distributed photovoltaic green 
certificates)
Primary 
Metrics
Secondary Metrics
Metrics Description
Target Setting
Promote 
carbon 
emission 
reduction in 
all business 
scenarios
Low-carbon 
supply 
chain
Low-carbon 
packaging
 
Promote reusable packaging
 
Implement packaging reduction
 
Carry out green packaging R&D and 
innovation
 
Application of digital intelligence 
technology
 
Upstream and downstream 
collaboration to practice green 
packaging use
 
Reusable packaging sharing and 
recycling public system
 
Continuously promote upstream 
and downstream partners to 
implement the DWOP plan
Suppliers' 
collaborative 
effort in car-
bon emission 
reduction
 
Promote joint participation of suppliers 
in setting carbon reduction targets and 
response plans
 
Facilitate the use of NEVs by third-
party outsourcing transportation 
suppliers, strengthen the ledger 
recording of energy consumption, 
mileage and other data, and work 
together with suppliers and partners 
to build low-carbon logistics
Participate 
in emission 
reduction 
actions 
across the 
entire value 
chain
Promote 
low-carbon 
consumption
 
Participate in the formulation of national 
low-carbon product standards
 
Expand the supply of low-carbon products
 
Strengthen low-carbon consumption and 
lifestyle campaigns
 
Continuously expand the supply of 
low-carbon products, and create 
corresponding incentive plans for 
green consumption to stimulate 
the participation of consumers in 
mitigating emissions
Promote 
industrial 
low-carbon 
development
 
As digital industry development becomes 
a trend, modern information technologies 
such as big data, cloud computing, and 
AI continue to evolve. Digital intelligence 
technology is being deeply integrated 
into traditional industries, aiding the 
improvement of production and 
service efficiency and promoting the 
transformation of production methods 
and consumer habits toward a more 
sustainable, energy-efficient, and circular 
economy. This will in turn facilitate the 
low-carbon transition of high-emission 
industries
 
JD.com will continue to explore 
new business and profit models 
by technologically empowering the 
low-carbon transition of traditional 
industrial enterprises
Information 
disclosure
Conduct annual  
climate-related information 
disclosure
 
Conduct annual review and disclosure of 
climate-related risks and opportunities
 
Conduct disclosure and reporting of 
climate targets and achievements
 
JD.com has continued to release TCFD 
reports and disclose environment-
related performance in its annual ESG 
report since 2022 (achieved)


33
2023 JD.com, Inc.
Environmental, Social and Governance Report
A Pragmatic Path
Promotes
Good Consumption	
A Pragmatic Attitude
Paves the Way
for a Green Future
A Pragmatic Approach
Leads to Shared
Development Outcomes
A Pragmatic Vision
Consolidates
the Foundation of 
Responsibility
JD.com has introduced IBMS, an intelligent building 
management system to track energy usage data in 
real time and assess the energy consumption level 
in office spaces. This enables the identification and 
pinpointing of areas with high-energy consumption, 
allowing for timely responses and actions to enhance 
workplace operational efficiency continuously. 
In addition, we use eco-friendly materials in the 
workplace, post reminder signs including "Turn off 
Lights Before You Leave" in the workplace, and 
actively participate in global environmental activities 
such as "Earth Hour," making efforts to promote 
the green transformation of the workplace. In 2023, 
the overall power savings of JD.com's headquarters 
(Beijing and Southwest headquarters) reached 
1,685,086.04kWh, with an energy saving rate of 3%
1, 
achieving the annual power saving target.
Office Space
Energy Saving Goal and Progress of 
Each Workplace in 2023
JD.com actively looks for ways to save energy 
and reduce emissions by focusing on areas 
like energy conservation, waste recycling and 
treatment, as well as water management, by 
integrating environment-friendly practices into 
its operations.
Green Workplace
JD.com encourages the development of digital 
office platforms, consistently works on enhancing 
energy efficiency and makes significant attempts 
to minimize energy wastage by implementing eco-
friendly practices like electronic offices, sustainable 
transportation, and reducing energy usage.
Improving Energy Efficiency
1 The data excludes Building No.2 of JD.com Headquarters in Beijing. 
2 In 2023, the regional self-built workplace only includes the Southwest Headquarters in Chengdu. 
Energy Saving Measures in the Workplace in 2023
In April 2023, in response to World Earth 
Day, JD.com launched a public welfare 
initiative called Cycle of Everything. 
Through book recycling, book exchange, 
and science popularization and education 
activities on garbage classification, JD.com 
vigorously promoted the concepts of 
energy conservation, emission reduction, 
and recycling, effectively raising employees' 
awareness of green and low-carbon 
lifestyles. The initiative attracted over 2,000 
employees and contributed JD's strengths to 
safeguarding the Earth.
JD.com Launched "World Earth 
Day" Related Activities
"Cycle of Everything" Public Welfare Initiative
Annual Target
Headquarters workplace
Regional workplace
2
3% reduction 
in electricity 
consumption 
compared to the 
previous year
5% reduction 
in electricity 
consumption 
compared to the 
previous year
3% reduction 
in electricity 
consumption 
compared to the 
previous year
10.23% reduction in 
electricity consumption 
compared to the 
previous year
Equipment 
renovation and 
upgrading
Publicity and 
advocacy
Digitized 
management
Eco-friendly 
materials
 
Upgraded the lighting system and optimized the security inspection process, keeping only emergency 
lighting on unless it is necessary to turn on other lights to reduce power waste;
 
Cut off the power for electrical equipment in public areas at a fixed time to avoid unnecessary energy 
consumption during non-working hours;
 
Upgraded the technology and optimized the configuration of the heating system to improve heating 
efficiency and reduce energy consumption; 
 
Set the air conditioning temperature uniformly according to national recommended standards and actual 
weather conditions.
 
Posted reminder signs including "Turn off Lights Before You Leave" to raise employees' energy-saving 
awareness;
 
Encourage employees to bring their own water bottles for meetings to reduce the use of disposable 
paper cups; 
 
Participated in the Earth Hour event, saving 8,900 kWh of electricity. 
 
Launched IBMS system: Adjust the setting of electrical panels according to the orientation and 
characteristics of different buildings to maximize energy utilization efficiency;
 
Formulated the "333 Principles for Meetings": Specified resources to be consumed during the meetings, 
stipulated that no more than 3 slides of PPT should be used for important decisions; meetings should last 
no more than 30 minutes, and no more than 3 decision-making discussions should be conducted on the 
same topic.
 
Workplaces in Beijing, Chengdu, and Shenzhen: carbon neutral printing paper has been used in all offices.
Progress 


34
2023 JD.com, Inc.
Environmental, Social and Governance Report
A Pragmatic Path
Promotes
Good Consumption	
A Pragmatic Attitude
Paves the Way
for a Green Future
A Pragmatic Approach
Leads to Shared
Development Outcomes
A Pragmatic Vision
Consolidates
the Foundation of 
Responsibility
Following the principle of "Sponge City" in its workplace 
construction, JD.com has designed rainwater collection 
and drainage systems for its regional headquarters 
parks. It has also arranged permeable pavement, 
sunken greenbelt, rainwater gardens, and roof greening 
to enhance the comprehensive utilization of rainwater 
and promotes rainwater recycling, while reducing the 
load on municipal drainage systems and enhancing the 
city's capability to respond to heavy rainfall.
We have established a sewage treatment station 
in Building No.1 at JD.com headquarters, where the 
sewage can be treated and converted into reclaimed 
water for reuse to reduce the use of fresh water. 
In the JD.com Building No.3 project, we ensure the 
recycling efficiency through the rainwater treatment 
process and clearly mark the reclaimed rainwater on 
relevant facilities to prevent people from drinking it 
by mistake. By increasing the proportion of recycled 
water, JD.com has significantly reduced the use of 
fresh water, reduced wastewater discharge, and 
reduced water consumption from the source.
Water Conservation Measures of JD.com in 2023
JD.com takes water management seriously. It actively 
responds to and implements the International Decade 
for Action onWater for Sustainable Development 
(2018-2028) proposed by UN-Water and abides by 
national regulations to strengthen water recycling 
while making continuous efforts to improve water 
efficiency in the workplace. All the devices selected 
for JD.com's workplaces comply with the Standard 
for Domestic Water Saving Devices (CJ164-2002). 
And it further reduces water consumption through 
upgrading and optimization of equipment and 
technology.
JD.com actively responds to the national 14th Five-
Year Plan for the Development of Urban Domestic 
Waste Classification and Treatment Facilities. It carries 
out waste management and orderly recycles waste 
based on the principles of reducing the generation 
of solid waste, reusing solid waste, and reducing 
damage caused by solid waste. JD.com advocates 
and implements garbage classification. Based on the 
wastage, JD.com reuses some of the waste to minimize 
waste emissions. The wastes generated in JD.com's 
workplaces are handed over to qualified institutions 
designated by the government or transported to the 
waste treatment plants designated by the government 
for treatment.
Water Management
Waste Management
 
Adjusted the water flow of the faucets in the restrooms in the headquarters office buildings. 
 
Installed direct drinking water equipment in the workplaces.
 
Used sensor-equipped faucets and water-saving toilets to reduce water consumption in the 
restrooms.
 
Adopted efficient water-saving equipment, such as automatic sprinkler and drip irrigation systems, 
and implemented intelligent water management through soil humidity sensors and automatic 
rainwater shutdown devices on rainy days.
 
Selected drought resistant plants to reduce the needs for permanent irrigation and achieve water 
saving through greenery.
 
Carried out water-saving publicity activities, posted water-saving reminders and set up publicity 
signs in operating and office areas. 


35
2023 JD.com, Inc.
Environmental, Social and Governance Report
A Pragmatic Path
Promotes
Good Consumption	
A Pragmatic Attitude
Paves the Way
for a Green Future
A Pragmatic Approach
Leads to Shared
Development Outcomes
A Pragmatic Vision
Consolidates
the Foundation of 
Responsibility
JD.com has established a comprehensive remote 
work system, including a VPN-based telecommuting 
architecture and security accreditation systems, to 
ensure that employees can work efficiently in a safe 
environment. In addition, JD.com has created its own 
online conference platform called Joymeeting. This 
platform is extensively utilized for different purposes 
like supplier conferences and remote interviews. JD.com 
encourages its employees to enhance communication 
and interaction with vendors and users through JD 
Dong Dong. In 2023, JD.com employees logged in to 
work remotely for a total of 15,543,387 times, and held 
18,169,935 online meetings through Joymeeting, with 
a total attendance of 33,401,689 and a total time of 
23,104,437 hours; and we conducted 3,846,223 online 
meetings through JD Dong Dong, with a total time of 
1,516,573 hours.
In terms of document management, JD utilizes online 
collaborative tools to reduce needs for physical space, 
encourages the use of electronic filling, and improves 
file transfer efficiency through cloud services to reduce 
energy consumption and carbon emissions. Meanwhile, 
JD.com promotes electronic signatures, simplifies the 
signing process of personnel documents, and reduces 
the use of paper and mail. In 2023, JD.com filed 2,910,232 
electronic files online, signed 2,564,589 personnel 
documents online, and issued over 3.6 billion e-invoices.
JD.com actively promotes ways of green commuting. It 
formulated internal policies such as JD.com Regulations 
on Management of Self-owned Vehicles, Regulations on 
Shuttle Bus Ride Management of JD.com, and Regulations 
on Transportation Reimbursement Management of 
JD.com. It makes continuous efforts to increase the 
number of new energy vehicles at the headquarters, 
renovates bicycle sheds to improve the convenience 
of employees riding bicycles to and from work, thereby 
encouraging more employees to choose environment-
friendly ways of travelling. In 2023, there were 36 new 
energy shuttle buses and 14 new natural gas vehicles 
in the workplace in Beijing, and 50 fuel vehicles were 
reduced.
In addition, we have established strong partnerships 
with ride-hailing service platforms to offer employees 
with carpooling services for their daily commuting. By 
reducing idle driving, optimizing route, and using clean 
energy vehicles, we are able to effectively reduce 
carbon emissions during travel. In 2023, employees in 
JD.com made 231,313 carpooling orders.
Electronic Offices and Green Commuting
15,543,387
2,910,232
231,313
18,169,935
36
Total times of employees logging in to work remotely
JD.com’s electronic files online
JD.com’s carpooling orders
Online meetings held through Joymeeting
New energy shuttle buses added 
in the workplace in Beijing
35


36
2023 JD.com, Inc.
Environmental, Social and Governance Report
A Pragmatic Path
Promotes
Good Consumption	
A Pragmatic Attitude
Paves the Way
for a Green Future
A Pragmatic Approach
Leads to Shared
Development Outcomes
A Pragmatic Vision
Consolidates
the Foundation of 
Responsibility
JD's stores promptly clean up the domestic wastes, and send the wastes to professional processing institutions 
to be treated.
JD.com makes continuous efforts to improve the 
sustainable development performance of its retail 
business and its energy management system. 
It selects energy-saving equipment and green 
building materials to reduce energy consumption 
during operations. We vigorously promote green 
and low-carbon products, reduce food loss, carry 
out biodiversity conservation, and integrate 
sustainable concepts into the entire business 
lifecycle, including upstream and downstream of 
the value chain.
Green Retail
The extraction and production of raw materials may have 
negative impacts on the ecological environment, such as 
resource depletion, water pollution, and land degradation. 
JD actively seeks cooperation with suppliers with pollution-
free production conditions to promote the operation of 
pollution-free goods. In addition, JD prefers to choose 
products that have undergone sustainable management 
and sustainability certification while purchasing raw 
materials, including sustainability-certified seafood, paper, 
palm oil, leather, and cotton. JD is committed to reducing 
the impact of the supply chain on marine ecology, soil 
quality, and atmospheric environment from the source by 
purchasing responsible raw materials.
JD.com actively promotes the traceability of raw 
materials such as seafood, meat, and dairy produce 
among products sold by businesses such as Huaguan 
Supermarkets, 7FRESH, and JD's private label brands. 
We strictly inspect quarantine certificates, customs 
declarations of imported meat products and production 
qualifications of plants that split and repackage 
the goods to verify supplier compliance and ensure 
that raw material sources are legally compliant and 
environmentally friendly. We promote cooperation with 
local farmers and cooperatives in retail business, and 
implement the "model of direct supply from origin."
Traceability of Raw Materials
JD.com has comprehensively promoted energy management during the operation of its stores, including Huaguan 
Supermarkets and 7FRESH. This initiative focuses on improving energy efficiency and conservation to boost the 
competitiveness of its stores in terms of environmental protection.
Green Operations of Stores
Installing energy-saving lights
 Replaced all non-LED lights by durable LED lights with low energy consumption.
Energy-saving cold chain
 
Variable Voltage and Variable Frequency (VVVF) was introduced to the cold chain piston units in existing 
stores, significantly improving energy efficiency; 
 
In the design of new stores, VVVF configuration has been added to the piston units and vortex units, so 
that the equipment can automatically adjust the working speed of the compressor according to actual 
refrigeration needs, improving the system's response speed and operational stability.
Intelligent lighting
 Optimized lighting control system for existing stores; 
 
The new stores are designed with configuration for zone control and time-phased control to realize 
targeted energy management and achieve the effects of energy saving and emission reduction;  
 
In 2023, Five Star installed intelligent control systems for public area lighting in 22 stores in Shanghai, 
Suzhou, Xi'an, Chengdu, Hefei, Tangshan, Nanjing, and other areas, with a total investment of RMB 
450,000. The annual power savings were 756,876 kWh, with an average power saving rate of about 22%.
In the future, JD.com will continue to cooperate with raw material suppliers who are qualified for sustainable 
production and procurement to reduce the impact of raw material extraction and production on agriculture, 
animal husbandry, and fishery resources, and increase the proportion of sustainability-certified products in 
purchased products, providing consumers with more diversified and high-quality environment-friendly products.
30%
Among the vegetables and fruits sold by 
Huaguan Supermarket, the proportion 
of products purchased directly from the 
place of origin is approximately
156tonnes
Three self-operated milk products 
sold in 7FRESH could be traced back 
to their origin, totaling


37
2023 JD.com, Inc.
Environmental, Social and Governance Report
A Pragmatic Path
Promotes
Good Consumption	
A Pragmatic Attitude
Paves the Way
for a Green Future
A Pragmatic Approach
Leads to Shared
Development Outcomes
A Pragmatic Vision
Consolidates
the Foundation of 
Responsibility
In April 2023, JD.com, in collaboration with 
Magnum, a Brand of Wall's, launched the 
"Magnum × Green Impact Initiative Sustainable 
Co-Branded Combination." The cocoa beans 
used for the combination are selected from 
sustainable farms certified by the Rainforest 
Alliance and produced in factories using green 
power. The overall packaging can be recycled.
JD.com initiated a trade-in
1 service for home appliances as far back as 2016, expanding to home furnishings in 2023. 
By the end of the reporting period, JD.com's trade-in services have extended to over 200 categories, with a growing 
number of consumers opting to trade in their home appliances and furnishings on JD.com. Data shows that in 2023 
alone, JD.com recycled over 15 million units of disused home appliances and furnishings through trade-ins.
To provide users with a better service experience, JD.com has provided Three Free Services and Four Regardless-
ofs in the trade in policy, namely free door-to-door service, free disassembly, and free transportation of disused 
appliances; regardless of channel through which the disused appliances were purchased, regardless of brand, 
regardless of when the disused appliances were purchased, and regardless of product condition. In addition, 
taking advantage of its advantages in logistics, JD.com provides consumers with hassle-free integrated services for 
applicances of different categories, including delivering new applicances, dismantling old ones, and installing new 
ones, which reduces the service procedure into one or two door-to-door visits, which used to require multiple visits.
JD.com actively aligns with national policies by "promoting green and intelligent home appliance consumption" through 
the sale of efficient and energy-saving green products. JD.com collaborates with consumers to cultivate a low-carbon 
Recycling Through Trade-in Programs 
Sustainable Green Packaging
1 
JD carries out a trade-in program for home appliances, providing subsidies and trade-in value of old devices to users, and offering free services such as 
dismantling and transporting old appliances. For 3C products, JD provides door-to-door recycling services.
In 2022, JD Retail introduced the "Green Impact 
Initiative" in partnership with 100 Fortune 500 brands, 
aiming to advocate for responsible and sustainable 
consumption. It establishes personal carbon accounts 
for consumers, recording their life footprints, and 
providing bonus points in the form of carbon energy 
as an incentive. After purchasing green products on 
the platform and participating in trade-ins, consumers 
can obtain carbon energy that can be redeemed for 
exclusive rights in their carbon accounts. In 2023, the 
"Green Impact Initiative" established a sustainable 
consumption zone to facilitate the identification 
of high-quality, healthy, and environment-friendly 
products. It has provided over 3.56 million low-carbon 
and environment-friendly products and labeled them 
as green products, covering more than 30 related 
qualifications both domestically and internationally, 
such as carbon neutrality and carbon reduction 
products, products with environment-friendly and 
plastic reducing packaging, organic and sustainable 
agricultural products, low energy consumption 
products, new energy vehicle products, and some 
other products that are friendly to biodiversity and 
climate change. Throughout the year, more than 66 
million users engaged in low-carbon and sustainable 
consumption on the JD.com, with a total of 122 million 
green orders.
Advocating Green Consumption
JD.com Joins Hands with Magnum, a Brand of Wall's to Launch Sustainable 
Co-Branded Combination
122million
over 200 categories
over15 million units
Green orders from low-carbon and 
sustainable consumption on the JD.com
JD.com’s trade-in services have extended to
Trade-in home appliances and furnishings on JD.com
By the end of the reporting period
In 2023
In 2023, Five Star, in collaboration with SUPER PLANTS, 
launched the Qingsong Revitalization initiative, providing 
creative activities and incentives to further promote the 
popularization of green consumption and environmental 
awareness.
JD.com carefully checks the goods returned by users in 
the scenario of JD.com's self-operated business, among 
which the sales-qualified products with high usage value 
will be sold directly to customers through channels such 
as the JD Spare Parts Warehouse Main Station.
lifestyle by selling efficient and energy-saving green 
products and carrying out trade-in initiatives. JD.com 
recycles home appliances and furnishings, and 3C 
appliances (computer, communication and consumer 
products), and improves waste recycling rate and 
resource recycling efficiency through incentives such 
as trade-in initiatives. JD.com tests the quality of the 
recycled 3C products and upgrades them for second-
hand sales, encouraging the full utilization of resources. 
While ensuring that waste disposal meets regulatory 
requirements, it enhances the conversion and reuse of 
wastes.


38
2023 JD.com, Inc.
Environmental, Social and Governance Report
A Pragmatic Path
Promotes
Good Consumption	
A Pragmatic Attitude
Paves the Way
for a Green Future
A Pragmatic Approach
Leads to Shared
Development Outcomes
A Pragmatic Vision
Consolidates
the Foundation of 
Responsibility
Trade-in Activity of Five Star Appliances Store
Five Star Continued to Carry out the Trade-In Program 
Five Star systematically promoted the trade-in service of home appliances. It is committed to providing 
a policy of Three Free Services and Four Regardless-ofs and makes continuous efforts to simplify 
consumer engagement process. In 2023, it recycled over 81,000 disused large home appliances such 
as televisions, refrigerators, washing machines, air conditioners, and kitchenware, and was awarded 
the titles of 2023 Leading Enterprise in Home Appliance Aftersales Service and 2023 Benchmark Unit for 
the Trade-in Trend of Home Appliances to Benefit People by the China National Household Electronic 
Appliances Service & Maintenance Association.
JD.com Provided Trade-in Service During 11.11 Sales Event 
In 2023, JD.com provided trade-in service during the "11.11" sales event, covering over 90% of self-
operated home appliances and over 50 categories of home furnishings. By simplifying the operation 
process, directly reducing the purchase price of new appliances, and not limiting the brand or age of the 
trade-ins, JD.com promoted the trend of trade-in on the consumer end and assisted in waste recycling 
and utilization. During the event, the transaction volume of home appliances and furnishings under the 
trade-in program increased by more than 13 times year-on-year, and the transaction volume of 3C 
digital products under the trade-in program increased by 3 times year-on-year.
Measures to Reduce Food Loss and Waste
JD.com works closely with upstream and downstream 
parties across the supply chain to take measures to 
conserve food and reduce loss in procurement, storage, 
processing, sales, and other links. Food loss and waste 
will be measured through log-keeping, making records, 
and other methods, and integrates food management 
to all links. JD.com encourages its employees to reduce 
Food Management
 
Selected fresh food products based on actual demands and needs to improve the accuracy of order, preventing 
waste and excess;
 
Strictly followed the standards for receiving goods in the warehouse, frequently checked shelf life, and ensured that 
products are organized for first-in, first-out (FIFO) inventory management;
 
Ensured that cold storage maintains the appropriate temperature, and worked with our supply chain partners to 
improve the transportation of products to maximize the freshness of food products and avoid transportation losses;
 
Processed fresh foods in line with standards to prevent any losses that may result from substandard processing 
operations;
 
Provided clear explanations regarding proper product storage and shelf life;
 
Established discount and promotion management regulations and early warning mechanism for best-by products, 
reduced prices in advance based on the expiration date of the food, and created a designated special area for 
discounted best-by products; offered these products at lower prices to attract more consumers and reduce waste 
caused by expired food;
 
Placed visible signs for reducing food waste in the dining area, and reminded consumers to order the right amount 
of food to encourage consumers to reduce food waste and cultivate a culture of food conservation among our 
consumers.
 
Collaborated with our suppliers and agreed to a frequency of 1-2 deliveries per week, reducing the amount of 
expired and damaged goods caused by overstocking;
 
Required our external catering suppliers to adjust their serving sizes by providing both large and small portion 
packages to cater to employees with different appetites, reducing food waste caused by excessive portions;
 
Labeled the calorie of each food item, installed a weight scale in the cafeteria, and displayed food-saving 
slogans to encourage employees to eat moderately and healthily;
 
Carried out "Clean Your Plate" campaigns and rewarded those who demonstrate positively to incentivize saving behavior.
food waste through education and incentives, and plans 
to distribute surplus food to organizations and groups 
in need via recycling, donations, and other means to 
help allocate food resources more reasonably, reduce 
food production pressure, and contribute to ecological 
and environmental protection while protecting food 
resources.
Reducing food loss and waste in stores
Reducing food loss and waste generated in canteens


39
2023 JD.com, Inc.
Environmental, Social and Governance Report
A Pragmatic Path
Promotes
Good Consumption	
A Pragmatic Attitude
Paves the Way
for a Green Future
A Pragmatic Approach
Leads to Shared
Development Outcomes
A Pragmatic Vision
Consolidates
the Foundation of 
Responsibility
JD.com strictly prohibits the illegal trade of wild animals on 
its platform and swiftly removes any products associated 
with nationally-protected species of animals and plants or 
those banned by laws and regulations. JD.com maintains 
a zero-tolerance stance towards such activities. We have 
also organized a specialized squad to strictly review 
and screen all products on our platform using manual 
inspections and technical strategies to ensure that there is 
no sale or circulation of illegal wildlife products or hunting 
tools on our platform. 
In addition, we collaborate with other stakeholders such 
as businesses, governments, and non-governmental 
organizations to explore methods and channels for 
biodiversity conservation. JD.com is a member of the 
Working Group on Preventing and Combating Illegal 
Wildlife Trading. We share with other members of the 
group the measures we have taken and the results we 
have achieved in preventing the illegal trading of wildlife 
and the sale of banned hunting gear online to jointly 
address the challenges of illegal wildlife trading online. 
Biodiversity Conservation
In 2023, JD.com teamed up with the China Green Foundation to 
jointly promote a public welfare tree planting program, injecting 
new impetus into driving green development and building a green 
future together. Based on the number of orders under the trade-in 
program of mobile phones, computers, digital products, and home 
appliances on the JD.com platform from August to December 2022, 
this program contributed to the cause of greening Ningxia through 
public welfare donations. The funds raised by JD.com have been 
fully used for planting goji berry trees in Ningxia during the spring 
planting period of 2023. Goji berry trees, as a plant with ecological 
benefits, not only improve soil quality but also effectively prevent 
land desertification, which has a positive impact on the ecological 
and environmental improvement in Ningxia.
Achievements of Public Welfare Forests
JD Retail Launched a Public Welfare Tree 
Planting Program to Assist in Greening Ningxia


40
2023 JD.com, Inc.
Environmental, Social and Governance Report
A Pragmatic Path
Promotes
Good Consumption	
A Pragmatic Attitude
Paves the Way
for a Green Future
A Pragmatic Approach
Leads to Shared
Development Outcomes
A Pragmatic Vision
Consolidates
the Foundation of 
Responsibility
In response to the development trend of green 
packaging, JD.com keeps revising the Regulations 
on the Management of Recyclable Transfer Bags, 
regulating the full process management of recyclable 
transfer bags, covering application, use, circulation, 
cost control, disposal and other links, effectively 
improving the use efficiency of flexible bulk bags. 
In 2023, JD Logistics invested a total of 17.03 million 
recyclable transfer bags, with an average usage of 
more than 18.3 times per bag, saving 294.6 million 
disposable woven bags.
JD.com uses biodegradable plastic packaging and 
recyclable non-woven fabric bags in many places 
including Beijing, Shanghai, and Hainan, gradually 
improving the quality and performance of packaging 
bags, promoting packaging reduction, reuse, recycling, 
and biodegradation. As of 2023, JD Logistics has 
implemented carbon reduction measures in packaging, 
resulting in a reduction of approximately 69,515 tonnes 
of greenhouse gases. Environmentally friendly packaging 
bags have been used in 100% of the stores of 7FRESH, a 
subsidiary of JD Group. Dada has achieved a proportion 
of 93.9% of biodegradable plastic packaging in its plastic 
packaging. Furthermore, JD.com is committed to large-
scale and regular use of reusable thermal insulation 
boxes.
To further improve the use efficiency of environment-
friendly packaging materials, Dada Group, a subsidiary 
of JD.com, conducted packaging training for all vendors, 
providing them with detailed explanations of the logic to 
use the packaging material and conducting packaging 
training for them. In 2023, JD Daojia saw business growth, 
while the number of packaging bags used significantly 
decreased, which reflects JD.com's achievements in 
implementing sustainable packaging solutions.
Green Packaging
Environment-friendly Packaging Materials
Since 2017, JD.com, as the pioneer in building a "green 
supply chain" in the industry, has been working on the 
"Green Stream Initiative," focusing on green warehousing, 
transportation, packaging, technology, and other 
aspects of the entire supply chain, promoting the 
establishment of multiple industry innovations and 
standards, and becoming an important benchmark for 
carbon abatement in the industry. We have established 
a packaging carbon emission system, continuously 
reducing carbon emissions caused by packaging 
through three paths: reduction and optimization, reuse, 
and degradation. We have carried out core projects 
including X series cardboard boxes, PP insulation boxes, 
recyclable boxes, and degradable waterproof bags.
Since the launch of the industry's first Delivered with Original Package (DWOP) certification standard, JD Logistics 
has been closely cooperating with upstream and downstream suppliers to promote the DWOP model, significantly 
reducing the use of disposable packaging in the industry. In addition, we use environment-friendly and recyclable 
materials, and avoid using expandable polystyrene (EPS) and packaging materials with excessive heavy metal 
and harmful substance residues. We also require that the packaging void ratio should not exceed 20%, which 
can reduce more than 2 billion disposable packaging bags commonly used in the industry per year, effectively 
promoting the construction of a green supply chain. In 2023, 100% of JD's 7FRESH stores started to use non-woven 
fabric reusable bags and fully biodegradable bags.
Reduced Packaging
JD.com is committed to reducing the use of 
packaging materials through optimization, 
substitution, and recycling, while continuously 
improving their utilization rate. We attach 
great importance to energy conservation and 
emission reduction during transportation. We 
increased the proportion of new energy vehicles, 
and improved transportation efficiency through 
intelligent route planning, centralized cargo 
distribution, and other methods to reduce 
empty-loaded rate and energy consumption, 
promoting the sustainable development of 
logistics business.
Green Logistics
Use of Packaging Materials and Carbon Reduction by JD Logistics in 2023
Category
Project Name
Usage 
Carbon Reduction in 2023
Packaging 
reduction
X series 
cardboard 
boxes
It's estimated that 
110 million X series 
cardboard boxes were 
used. 
Equivalent reduction: 
Approximately 1,719 
tonnes of greenhouse 
gases.
Reuse
Insulated 
boxes
It is estimated that 
71.65 million foam 
boxes were saved 
annually.
Equivalent reduction: 
Approximately 40,627 
tonnes of greenhouse 
gases.
Packaging 
reduction
Substitutes of 
recyclable ice 
plates
Substitute disposable 
ice bags and dry 
ice with recyclable 
ice plates, saving 
approximately 100,000 
tonnes of dry ice. 
Equivalent reduction: 
Approximately 27,170 
tonnes of greenhouse 
gases.
Degrada-
tion
Degradable 
plastic bags
Biodegradable 
packaging bags have 
been gradually used 
in some provinces and 
cities, with an annual 
usage of 22.19 million. 
/


41
2023 JD.com, Inc.
Environmental, Social and Governance Report
A Pragmatic Path
Promotes
Good Consumption	
A Pragmatic Attitude
Paves the Way
for a Green Future
A Pragmatic Approach
Leads to Shared
Development Outcomes
A Pragmatic Vision
Consolidates
the Foundation of 
Responsibility
JD.com gives priority to using recyclable materials for 
packaging solutions. JD.com extracts reusable parts 
and transforms them into packaging materials. JD.com 
has put in place reuse standards for cardboard boxes 
and plastic packaging. The packaging that meets 
the standards will be recycled, and put it back into 
the logistics chain, thereby increasing the proportion 
of recyclable packaging. In 2023, we used recycled 
cardboard boxes for packaging in a large number of 
orders, effectively reducing packaging costs.
Packaging Recycling and Reusing
Use of Green Packaging Materials by JD 
Logistics in 2023
The proportion of environment-
friendly and renewable packaging 
materials
90%
Reduced usage of disposable 
foam boxes
10,748 tonnes
Usage of recyclable boxes
997,000
Number of uses of recyclable boxes
71.62 million times
Green Transportation
JD.com is committed to constructing its fleet of new energy vehicles (NEVs). It lessens the carbon footprint generated by the logistics process by substituting traditional 
vehicles with NEVs including hydrogen fuel cell heavy-duty trucks nationwide and expanding the scale of multimodal transportation. As of the end of 2023, we have invested a 
total of 8,290 self-operated NEVs on the highway in the trunk line and terminal transportation links, an increase of 2,872 compared to 2022, equivalent to an average annual 
reduction of 35,200 tonnes of greenhouse gases.
In addition, we actively explore the application of battery switching technology for NEVs and hydrogen energy vehicle technology. By scaling up the use of hydrogen energy 
vehicles, electric logistics vehicles, battery switching vehicles, electric traction vehicles, methanol light trucks and LNG clean energy logistics vehicles, etc., we continue to 
promote the green and low-carbon transformation and intelligent upgrading of the logistics industry, making significant contributions to achieving carbon reduction targets in 
the transportation sector. We have used dozens of hydrogen energy powered heavy-duty trucks as logistics vehicles, and some transportation has achieved net zero carbon 
emissions. As of the end of the year, we have saved a total of 74,000 liters of diesel. JD.com's Dada express service uses two-wheeled electric vehicles as delivery tools, with 
instant delivery mileage exceeding 2.2 billion kilometers this year, which is equivalent to reducing the greenhouse gas generated by fuel delivery vehicles by about 600,000 
tonnes in the same mileage.
A JD.com's Hydrogen-Powered Logistics Truck


42
2023 JD.com, Inc.
Environmental, Social and Governance Report
A Pragmatic Path
Promotes
Good Consumption	
A Pragmatic Attitude
Paves the Way
for a Green Future
A Pragmatic Approach
Leads to Shared
Development Outcomes
A Pragmatic Vision
Consolidates
the Foundation of 
Responsibility
JD.com increases the consumption and supply of renewable 
energy, reduces GHG emissions, and improves energy 
efficiency by implementing an efficient energy management 
system, adopting advanced energy-saving technologies 
and equipment, and promoting green building standards. 
We also further optimize the energy structure by introducing 
renewable energy solutions, such as installing photovoltaic 
power generation systems.
JD.com actively promotes the application level of renewable 
energy in the park, and continuously optimizes the resource 
utilization efficiency in operations by setting up charging 
stations and photovoltaic (PV) power stations in the park, 
while complying with relevant national laws, regulations 
and industry standards. JD.com has laid out over 800 
charging stations in 147 logistics parks across the country, 
providing a convenient charging network for new energy 
electric vehicles and effectively improving the utilization 
rate of renewable energy. The roof of JD Warehouse is 
combined with PV power stations, and the park prioritizes 
the use of green electricity generated by solar energy. 
If the generated green electricity is more than what is 
needed, the rest will be uploaded to the public grid and 
be sold to the electricity market, continuously supporting 
carbon reduction goals. In 2023, JD Property has built PV 
power generation systems in 31 logistics parks, with a 
total installed capacity of 180 MW and an average annual 
JD.com integrates the concept and practices of 
environmental protection into the construction 
of its industrial parks, continuously improving 
the proportion of clean energy used in its parks 
and strengthening the retrieving, recycling, and 
reuse of wastes. It is committed to creating a 
benchmark green park and providing a solid 
foundation for development of the industry.
Green Certifications Related to the Parks
After undergoing on-site evaluations organized by the 
China Association of Warehousing and Distribution, 
according to the industry standard Green Warehouses 
Requirements and Evaluation (SB/T 11164-2016), 
JD.com's 14 parks have been awarded the "Green 
Warehouse Identification," including 9 first level (three-
star) green warehouses and 5 second level (two-star) 
green warehouses.
1 
This data is estimated based on the effective power generation time of the project being 3 hours per day and the 
installed capacity. 
2 
The calculation for the carbon reduction as a substitute for coal-fired power generation assumes that 1 kWh of 
electricity consumes 0.39 kilograms of coal, producing 0.997 kilograms of carbon dioxide.
3 MWp：Megawatt (MW), is the unit of power; MWp represents the peak output power.
Green Park 
Improving Energy Efficiency
The JINGDONG Intelligent Logistics Park • UK Venus 
Preston Connect 6 project in the UK has successfully 
obtained the BREEAM Excellent certification for its 
efficient energy utilization and environment-friendly 
design philosophy.
power generation of 190,000 MWh
1 which reduces carbon 
emissions by 189,000 tonnes compared to the equivalent 
thermal power
2.
JD.com incorporates the principles of green, low-
carbon, and sustainable development into the entire 
lifecycle of the parks spanning from development and 
design to construction, and operations management. 
JD.com relentlessly explores and implements energy 
conservation measures in both new and existing parks. 
In 2023, in accordance with the Assessment Standard 
for Green Building of the Ministry of Housing and Urban-
Rural Development of the People's Republic of China, JD 
Logistics has a total of 18 logistics parks containing green 
buildings, 18 logistics parks adopting sponge city designs, 
and 13 parks using prefabricated building models.
In 2023, JD Property made more efforts to strengthen the energy efficiency management of "Asia No.1" 
Intelligent Industrial Parks in Baqiao District of Xi'an, and Daxing District of Beijing. By continuously 
optimizing the tools for monitoring real-time energy consumption and carbon emission data, we use 
advanced sensor technology to accurately monitor the electricity, water resources, and natural gas 
usage in the parks in real time. In addition, we have developed the JDCMS carbon data collection 
platform, which involves logistics parks across the country. The collection scope includes purchased 
electricity, natural gas, purchased heat, and water consumption. It has improved the monitoring 
efficiency of carbon emissions in the parks and achieved comprehensive control of energy consumption 
and environmental impact.
JD.com Continuously Optimizes Its Carbon Emission Monitoring Platform
In 2023, JD Industrials teamed up with a new energy company under the State Power Investment 
Corporation (SPIC) to jointly promote a county-level distributed PV project, covering Shandong 
Province, Hebei Province, Tianjin, and Hainan Province, with a total installed capacity of 400MWp
3, 
serving over 10,000 household PV stations. The project relies on the JD Industrial Internet Platform, 
which is a MIIT- certified cross-industry and cross-domain industrial platform, to update county-level 
distributed PV platforms operated and maintained in the digital and intelligent way, integrating JD's 
advantageous resources in the supply chain of industrial products, warehousing and distribution, 
and offline service network to achieve flat, intelligent, and refined organizational management. 
We try to establish an integrated control and management system for project development and 
construction, intelligent operation and maintenance and asset operation by sharing spare parts, 
warehouses, and professional operation and maintenance personnel, to help customers achieve the 
objectives of reducing costs, improving efficiency, securing and increasing power generation, and 
conducting safe and compliant production and operation.
JD Industrials and a SPIC's New Energy Company that Focuses on County-
level Distributed Comprehensive Smart Energy Solutions Entered into an 
Agreement for a Distributed PV Project with Digital and Intelligent Operation 
and Maintenance 


43
2023 JD.com, Inc.
Environmental, Social and Governance Report
A Pragmatic Path
Promotes
Good Consumption	
A Pragmatic Attitude
Paves the Way
for a Green Future
A Pragmatic Approach
Leads to Shared
Development Outcomes
A Pragmatic Vision
Consolidates
the Foundation of 
Responsibility
JD.com has developed internal policies and processing procedures for construction waste management and emission control, clarifying the requirements for resource 
conservation and environment-friendly green construction. JD.com attaches great importance to the sorting, recycling, treatment, and reuse of waste, and arrange dedicated 
personnel to be responsible for the sorting, recycling and statistics of waste generated throughout the construction process, ensuring a recycling rate of 75%. JD.com works 
together with construction parties to control and improve internal construction management ever since contract signing and vigorously promote waste reduction and 
reuse. In 2023, JD.com set the goal of minimizing pollutant emissions during the construction period. Through internal publicity, supplier cooperation and training, as well as 
cooperation with government, social organizations, and professional institutions, we aim to enhance the waste reduction awareness of all relevant parties, thus achieving 
comprehensive control of waste. 
Waste Management
Construction-related Waste Management Initiatives by JD.com 
JD.com prioritizes green, low-carbon, environment-friendly and energy-saving products in material procurement, actively promotes the application of modern prefabricated 
building technology and green landscaping, formulates and implements green construction standards, and improves construction efficiency, in a bid to reduce waste 
generation from the source.
Non-construction 
Waste Management
Set up garbage bins and storage 
points and appoint dedicated 
personnel to regularly transfer the 
waste to the disposal sites to avoid 
mixing it with construction waste.
Metal wastes are sorted and handed 
over to qualified recycling companies.
Waste that can't be recycled will 
be first considered to be utilized as 
a resource in such ways as waste 
decomposition and compost- making 
with organic waste to minimize the 
impact on the natural environment.
Construction Waste 
Management
Make comprehensive utilization 
of construction waste generated 
during construction, such as 
recycling and washing mortar 
and concrete, or using them as 
recycled aggregate.
Promptly remove construction 
waste and spoil to reduce land 
occupation and air pollution.
Unload construction waste to the 
disposal locations designated by 
the municipal authorities.
Publicity and 
Education
Educate the workers and conduct 
special inspections regularly to 
ensure effective implementation 
of the systems. 
Dust Control
Implement closed construction, as 
well measures such as constructing 
enclosures, covering earthwork, regularly 
watering, and washing vehicles are taken 
to prevent dust emissions.
Provide hard paving for the haul roads 
and regularly sprinkle water to control 
dust.
Adopt enclosed vehicles for transporting 
construction waste and ensure that they 
are not overloaded to prevent waste 
falling from the vehicles and dust raising.


44
2023 JD.com, Inc.
Environmental, Social and Governance Report
A Pragmatic Path
Promotes
Good Consumption	
A Pragmatic Attitude
Paves the Way
for a Green Future
A Pragmatic Approach
Leads to Shared
Development Outcomes
A Pragmatic Vision
Consolidates
the Foundation of 
Responsibility
JD.com has proposed biodiversity-related requirements 
to itself, suppliers, partners, and other stakeholders, 
adhering to the United Nations Sustainable Development 
Goals (UNSDGs), the "Kunming-Montreal Global 
Biodiversity Framework" (GBF) to the Convention on 
Biological Diversity (CBD) and other biodiversity-related 
laws and regulations, including Land Administration Law 
of the People's Republic of China. 
We actively promote biodiversity assessment and 
integrate the concept of biodiversity conservation into 
our own activities including land development, greening 
configuration, and construction. Meanwhile, JD prohibits 
business activities of upstream and downstream parties 
across the supply chain in key biodiversity conservation 
areas to avoid, reduce, restore, and offset the impact of 
value chain activities on biodiversity, in a bid to achieve 
no net loss of biodiversity.
Biodiversity and Forest Protection
Purse green construction practices to reduce the 
impact on the surroundings, thereby protecting the 
living environment of animals and plants.
      
Regulate the general contracting unit, strengthen 
management during the construction process, and 
reduce damage to the natural environment.
      
Work within enclosed construction sites to prevent 
the impact of dust on plants.
      
Implement the cleaner accountability system; bring 
the garbage together and send it to the locations 
designated by the local environmental authorities.
      
Reasonably arrange temporary facilities to 
protect surrounding greenery based on the actual 
conditions of the construction site. 
Reasonable Greening 
Configuration
Under the Code for the Design of Public Park 
(GB 51992-2016) and other guidelines in parks, 
reasonably grow plants and design the landscape 
to provide food, shelter, and places to reproduce 
themselves and survive for wildlife, and improve 
the richness of species.
      
Following the site-species matching principle, 
give preference to the plants that are suitable 
for the local soil and climate conditions, ensuring 
a favorable ecological environment for plants to 
grow.
      
Organically combine different forms and types 
of plants based on their different botanical and 
biological characteristics and the ecological 
requirements and create multi-level landscape 
ecological communities of trees, shrubs, and 
grasses through multi-layer planting and natural 
grouping, and other methods.
      
Adopt urban public green spaces and invest 
in the construction of green spaces and the 
planting of flowers, trees and other plants to 
improve urban natural spaces and protect 
animals, plants, and microbial populations living 
in the city. In 2023, we adopted a total of 54,300 
square meters of green spaces around JD 
headquarters, with a greening rate of over 65%.
Measures Adopted to Promote 
Biodiversity during Construction
Using a location-based approach, we conduct 
due diligence and ecological assessments on the 
self-operated developed sites and the vicinity, 
investigate the geological, hydrological, climatic 
and other natural conditions, and integrate 
biodiversity risks into the risk management process 
of the entire group.
      
Analyze key biodiversity elements including animal 
and plant habitats, and ecological red lines; 
identify key habitats, and evaluate the potential 
impact of development behavior on the ecological 
habitats, examining water source protection 
areas, soil environment, endangered animals and 
plants, and other ecological indicators. Based on 
the evaluation results, timely improve and adjust 
the plans and develop biodiversity conservation 
measures to ensure sustainable development.
      
Hire a professional consulting company to 
prepare a soil and water conservation plan 
report, based on which we carry out monitoring 
to prevent soil erosion caused by development 
activities.
Green Construction
Through ecological planning and design, imitate 
natural hydrological cycles, construct depressed 
green and rain gardens, and increase urban 
ecological patches, to provide a wider range of 
habitats for living things.
      
Implement green roof. For example, green the 
energy and environmental roof of JD Partner 
Building and the roofs of other structures, to 
reduce rainwater loss and improve the micro 
environment of the roof.
      
Choose drought and flood resistant species 
to ensure healthy growth of plants during the 
rainy season and at normal times, and achieve 
the rainwater detention, retention and storage 
capacity of a "sponge city."
      
Construct pervious pavements for sidewalks, 
function spaces, and parking lots above 
ground within the sites to reduce surface runoff 
during rainfall.
JD.com upholds strict adherence to the laws and regulations, 
particularly the Forest Law of the People's Republic of 
China, concerning forest ecological protection. The 
Group enforces stringent forest protection policies 
across all its business operations, prohibiting any form of 
deforestation to maintain the integrity and sustainability 
of forest resources. In terms of our logistics packaging 
materials and office paper, we continued to use office 
paper certified by the Forest Stewardship Council (FSC) 
to reinforce our efforts towards forest protection and 
to mitigate the risks of deforestation. In 2023, JD.com's 
development of construction land did not have any 
negative impact on the original trees or surrounding 
forests of the plots. 
In August 2023, JD Logistics jointly launched the "Panda Backyard Program" with JD Foundation, The Amity Foundation, and Qingye Ecology. This program aims to 
raise ambient temperature control equipment, equipment and materials required for cleaning and epidemic prevention and disinfection for the giant panda rescue 
base, to assist the park in efficiently carrying out inspection management and material transportation, and to provide support for scientific research activities 
such as wildlife investigation and monitoring within the park and in surrounding mountainous areas. We have delivered the first batch of ice cubes and fruits to the 
base to alleviate the discomfort caused by the heat and enhance the capabilities of the base to provide medical assistance. In addition, JDL Express has launched 
supporting public welfare activities to encourage public participation, allowing consumers to contribute to the protection of the giant pandas in their daily lives.
JD Logistics Launched the "Panda Backyard Program"


45
2023 JD.com, Inc.
Environmental, Social and Governance Report
A Pragmatic Vision
Consolidates
the Foundation of 
Responsibility
A Pragmatic Path
Promotes
Good Consumption	
A Pragmatic Attitude
Paves the Way
for a Green Future
A Pragmatic Approach
Leads to Shared
Development Outcomes
A Pragmatic Approach 
Leads to Shared 
Development Outcomes
03
JD.com actively embodies the principle of "boosting the real economy 
by leveraging JD's identity as a real economy enterprise" by integrating 
digital intelligence with the real economy. We have created a strong 
employment model for physical businesses that values both scale 
and quality, enabling our staff to evolve from mere jobholders to 
passionate professionals. Moreover, we utilize our comprehensive 
end-to-end supply chain capabilities to offer digital logistics solutions, 
driving innovation and sustainability across industries and among our 
business partners.


46
2023 JD.com, Inc.
Environmental, Social and Governance Report
A Pragmatic Vision
Consolidates
the Foundation of 
Responsibility
A Pragmatic Path
Promotes
Good Consumption	
A Pragmatic Attitude
Paves the Way
for a Green Future
A Pragmatic Approach
Leads to Shared
Development Outcomes
As a new type of real economy-based enterprise, 
JD.com relies on digital intelligence-based social supply 
chain infrastructure to upgrade offline physical business 
forms. We offer technology and services to brand 
manufacturers, offline stores, micro, small and medium-
sized enterprises, as well as new farmers. Our aim is to 
constantly create new growth opportunities for them, 
fostering the advancement of real economy-based 
sectors, and enhance our societal impact by maximizing 
our contributions.
JD.com continues to promote more stable and larger-
scale high-quality employment. We provide competitive 
compensation packages, rapid growth paths, and vast 
development opportunities for college graduates. We have 
also created dedicated growth programs for interns. By 
university-enterprise cooperation, we have collaborated 
with educational institutions, including universities and 
vocational colleges to create a benchmark for industry-
education integration. We carry out vocational skills 
training to bridge the digital talent gap and create more 
employment opportunities for skilled individuals.
By utilizing our digital intelligence-based supply chain 
capabilities, we support new farmers in improving 
quality and increasing income, while helping to create 
more employment opportunities for local households 
in their respective regions. Over the past three years, 
JD.com has continuously driven the industrialization, 
branding, and digitalization of agricultural products 
across various regions through the rural revitalization 
"Benfu Plan," also known as the "Prosperous Villages 
Initiative." Our supply chain has driven the upstream and 
downstream industries to achieve stable employment 
and high-quality employment across the industry.
During the reporting period, JD.com launched the 
"Spring Dawn Plan" for all merchants, introducing 
a rapid natural person registration channel, and 
a "zero-cost trial operation" initiative. Focusing on 
new and high-quality merchants, JD.com upgraded 
the traffic ecosystem. We empowered merchants to 
reduce costs and boost efficiency with our whole-
scene and whole-chain service capabilities.
More Traffic
Support with tens of billions of traffic
Double traffic incentive for new merchants
Reward in advertising funds
Free "New Store Welcome Kit"
Full display of high-star stores on the search page
"Dark Horse Merchant Growth Competition"
Faster Operation
1-minute registration at fastest
70% reduction in qualification materials
Improve product launch efficiency by 30%
Growth tool empowerment
Better Service
Product source recommendation
Official merchant community guidance
Comprehensive JD Logistics and third-party 
logistics services
Enjoy corresponding interest-free purchases for 
new customers based on merchant categories
More Cost-effective
"Zero-cost Trial Operation" without an 
expiration date
Technical service fee rate 0%
Tiered margin standards
Join the "Factory Store" for free
Free access to intelligent customer service
Monthly service subscription card
Human Orientation
The success of a business is rooted in the foundation 
of its human resources. JD.com understands that 
its employees are pivotal to driving innovation and 
growth. We fully respect and safeguard the legal 
rights and interests of our employees. We have 
established a fair, transparent, and competitive 
compensation and incentive system. Our ongoing 
efforts continuously improve our training and 
promotion processes, and foster a diverse, equal, 
safe, and healthy workplace. At the same time, we 
provide diversified employment opportunities and 
strive to cultivate a thriving talent ecosystem to 
create maximum social value.
Quality Employment Promotion
"Spring Dawn Plan" Measures to Assist Merchants in Upgrading
over 360,000
Number of JD.com’s frontline employees
80%
Proportion of frontline employees 
coming from rural areas


47
2023 JD.com, Inc.
Environmental, Social and Governance Report
A Pragmatic Vision
Consolidates
the Foundation of 
Responsibility
A Pragmatic Path
Promotes
Good Consumption	
A Pragmatic Attitude
Paves the Way
for a Green Future
A Pragmatic Approach
Leads to Shared
Development Outcomes
JD.com's "National Advanced 
Collective in Building Harmonious 
Labor Relations" Plaque
During the reporting period, JD Logistics officially launched the "10,000-Person Recruitment Plan," focusing on supply chain, operations, management, and 
sales. Through recruitment programs like "Boss Recruitment Drive" and "Youth Cadre Class," JD Logistics has recruited over 20,000 new employees by the first 
half of 2024. This plan will prioritize the recruitment of grassroots managers, reserve management talents, and frontline operators, enhancing the professional 
capabilities of JD Logistics' talent pool. Additionally, it will promote high-quality employment for its employees in compensation, talent development, and welfare 
benefits.
In promoting youth employment, JD Logistics has recruited tens of thousands of college graduates through its "Rising Star" program. Combined with the newly 
launched "Youth Cadre Class" recruitment initiative, it has further provided more local job opportunities for job seekers and promoted logistics openness and 
regional business development. In 2023, the maximum year-end bonus for frontline Boss-level employees at JD Logistics reached 23 times their basic salary, 
and the average compensation of frontline employees across various teams doubled.
At the first national conference for recognizing and exchanging experiences on advanced collectives and 
individuals in building harmonious labor relations, JD.com was distinguished as the sole recipient of "National 
Advanced Collective in Building Harmonious Labor Relations" within the industry. This recognition celebrates 
JD.com's exceptional efforts in fostering positive labor relations, enhancing employment quality, and meeting its 
social responsibilities. Its accomplishments have earned national acclaim and endorsements.
At the same time, as the only corporate representative invited to speak at the conference, the responsible 
person from JD.com shared the relevant practices and experiences, working together with all sectors of society to 
advance the quality of harmonious labor relations.
JD Logistics Launches a "10,000-Person Recruitment Plan"
JD.com Wins the Title of "National Advanced Collective in Building Harmonious Labor Relations"


48
2023 JD.com, Inc.
Environmental, Social and Governance Report
A Pragmatic Vision
Consolidates
the Foundation of 
Responsibility
A Pragmatic Path
Promotes
Good Consumption	
A Pragmatic Attitude
Paves the Way
for a Green Future
A Pragmatic Approach
Leads to Shared
Development Outcomes
JD.com adheres to principles of openness, equity, and diversity in its hiring practices, explicitly outlines standards 
of employee conduct and strictly prohibiting any discrimination, harassment, or inappropriate behavior based on 
gender, age, ethnicity, region, religion, physical condition, etc. We regularly monitor and evaluate the gender pay gap, 
implement the principle of equal pay for equal work, and collaborate with employees to foster a positive, harmonious, 
and enjoyable work environment.
JD.com has established dedicated channels such as the 400-customer service hotline and bigear@jd.com to receive 
complaints and reports of workplace harassment. We have clear guidelines for handling workplace harassment, 
including principles, timeframes, responsibilities, and procedures. Depending on the severity of an incident, we impose 
varying disciplinary measures. Additionally, those who abuse the complaint channels, falsely accuse or trap others, 
or fail to actively handle sexual harassment cases will also be seriously dealt with. We are committed to building a 
diverse workplace culture and regularly conduct training related to anti-sexual harassment, including behaviors and 
manifestations of sexual harassment, guidelines and initiatives for responding to sexual harassment in the workplace. 
In 2023, all employees of JD.com have received this kind of training.
1 Women at Work: Chinese Companies Taking on Gender Equality | UN Global Compact.
2 
The data is from non-frontline employees directly managed by JD.com (excluding Deppon, Kuayue-Express and Five 
Star). The data reflects the difference between the mean or median pay or bonus of all male employees and all female 
employees within the scope.
JD.com's Diverse Employee Composition
JD.com Promotes Gender Pay Equality
2
Diversity, Equity and Inclusion
JD.com's gender equality initiatives and practices were 
proudly included in the United Nations Global Compact 
(UNGC) report titled Women at Work: Chinese Companies 
Taking on Gender Equality | UN Global Compact
1. As the 
first UNGC report focusing on the practices of Chinese 
companies in promoting gender equality, it features 
case studies and stories of female employees from eight 
Chinese companies. The report highlights three key areas 
including equal workplace opportunities, safe and healthy 
working environments, and family-friendly workplaces. It 
offers valuable practical references for Chinese and global 
companies and provides a feasible roadmap for businesses 
to support gender equality.
JD.com's Gender Equality Case Study Included in the Case 
Set of the United Nations Global Compact (UNGC)
JD.com's Case Study Included in the 
Special Report by the UNGC
Employees Participate in Yoga Classes
Mean gender pay 
gap in percentage
Number of employees with disabilities
Number of minorities employees
Share of women in total workforce
13.9%
2.3%
10.8%
-0.2%
Median gender pay 
gap in percentage
Mean gender bonus 
gap in percentage
Median gender bonus 
gap in percentage
4,067
32,888
21.0%


49
2023 JD.com, Inc.
Environmental, Social and Governance Report
A Pragmatic Vision
Consolidates
the Foundation of 
Responsibility
A Pragmatic Path
Promotes
Good Consumption	
A Pragmatic Attitude
Paves the Way
for a Green Future
A Pragmatic Approach
Leads to Shared
Development Outcomes
JD.com has established a compensation structure that combines fixed salaries with short-, medium, and long-term 
incentives, aligning with industry trends and market conditions. We continuously optimize our compensation and incentive 
system to ensure both internal fairness and external competitiveness. To implement our "contributor-oriented" incentives, 
we consider various aspects of employee performance, such as job roles, professional skills, and business conduct 
compliance, and have implemented a performance-based variable compensation mechanism for all employees.
We have established a multi-dimensional performance evaluation mechanism to undertake strategies upward 
and implement performance goals downward. By combining qualitative and quantitative assessment methods, 
we set evaluation cycles of monthly, quarterly, semi-annual, and annual reviews based on job nature, and 
coordinate the assessment of individual employee and team performance. Managers shall maintain close 
communication and collaboration with employees to provide them with precise guidance and support, thereby 
ensuring the efficiency and scientificity of organizational performance management.
Adhering to the management philosophy of "long-termism" and "openness and fluidity," JD.com establishes a 
career development path of vertical promotion and horizontal professional expansion and constructs a talent 
team with a reasonable hierarchical structure. For vertical talent development, JD.com has established an 
open and transparent promotion mechanism, taking "value contribution" as the core requirement and "ability 
improvement" as the necessary conditions. We regularly carry out employee promotion activities every year, 
attracting employees to take root in their professions, create value, and develop their abilities. For horizontal 
talent expansion, JD.com emphasizes and fosters the broadening of skills across related fields for talents already 
established in their primary fields, providing employees with expansive career growth opportunities.
In 2023, we enhanced our employee promotion system to bolster incentives for outstanding performers. During 
the nomination phase, we revised the criteria to safeguard the fair progression of young talent and mandated 
that managers publicly disclose promotion nominations and their rationale within their departments, ensuring 
transparency. In the assessment phase, the Human Resources team assumes an impartial role, advocating for team 
development and cultural stewardship in managerial promotion reviews. In the promotion announcement phase, we 
standardized complaint channels and handling procedures, implementing multiple measures to protect employees' 
rights. To guide employee growth and development more scientifically and reasonably, we have also continued to 
refine our 360 questionnaires, enhancing their accuracy in reflecting employees' abilities, potential, and development 
needs through improvements in questionnaire structure, summary reports, and empowerment materials.
JD.com prioritizes the comprehensive development of its employees as a key organizational strategy. By 
establishing a holistic and multi-dimensional development path and training system, we promote a deep 
integration of individual career growth with our strategic objectives. This approach empowers our employees to 
realize their self-value, while injecting a constant flow of power for the Group's long-term development.
To ensure that employees' wages adequately meet their basic living needs such as food and clothing, we focus on 
the overall salary level while assessing the living standards and wage criteria for employees in different regions. 
We provide compensation higher than the local minimum wage standard in strict accordance with national laws 
and regulations as well as relevant regional regulations.
JD Logistics boasts a large number of logistics staff including delivery couriers and warehouse sorting staff, and 
their salary level is among the top in the industry. Furthermore, we continuously refine our equity incentive policies 
to incentivize key employees. We regularly conduct performance evaluations for employees participating in the 
stock ownership plan and incorporate differentiated sustainability indicators based on their job standards. We 
offer benefits such as incentive stocks and stock options to eligible employees, sharing our growth and success.
JD.com has achieved the goal of "gradually increasing 
the employees' average annual revenue from a 
14-month salary to a 16-month salary" by July 1, 2023. 
In 2023, the total expenditure of JD.com on human 
resources (including its own employees and external 
personnel) amounted to RMB 104.7 billion.
Deepening the Talent Development System
JD.com's Performance Evaluation System
Employee Compensation and Incentives
Employee Training and Development
RMB104.7billion
Total expenditure of JD.com on 
human resources (including its own 
employees and external personnel)
JD.com's customer service has evolved into the largest self-operated customer service team in 
the industry. It includes the "Sunshine Angel" team, comprised of nearly a hundred individuals with 
disabilities, for whom JD.com has set up special areas such as independent office space, a separate 
dining area, caring dormitories, and accessible restrooms. Additionally, we provide regular team-
building activities, psychological counseling sessions, and other tailored benefits for this team.
In addition to providing the "social insurance and housing provident fund" for all employees, JD.com 
has also established a multi-dimensional welfare and talent development system. Since February 
1, 2024, more than 20,000 frontline customer service employees at JD.com have seen their average 
annual salaries increase by over 30%, showing our recognition and encouragement of their hard 
work and dedication.
The Average Salary of All Frontline Customer Service Employees at JD.com 
Increases by over 30%
Setting Performance 
Goals
Performance 
Evaluation
Performance Feedback 
and Improvement
Application of 
Performance Results


50
2023 JD.com, Inc.
Environmental, Social and Governance Report
A Pragmatic Vision
Consolidates
the Foundation of 
Responsibility
A Pragmatic Path
Promotes
Good Consumption	
A Pragmatic Attitude
Paves the Way
for a Green Future
A Pragmatic Approach
Leads to Shared
Development Outcomes
JD.com consistently enhances its employee training system to align with its strategic objectives and the 
developmental requirements of its employees. We have created a comprehensive, systematic, and practical 
training initiative focusing on general competencies, leadership skills, professional growth, and the cultivation of 
the next generation of professionals.
Diversified Talent Training
JD.com Training System
Program
Target Audience and Training Content
Training Courses
General 
competen-
cies
For all employees
Enhancing employees' general workplace 
literacy in cognition, communication, and 
efficiency
JDX series: JDTalk (Perception - Innovation-Change), 
JDVoice (Experience - Inheritance - Sharing), JDTech 
(Technology - Product - Applied Research)
CareerUp JD.com professionalism series: Reshape 
Your Career Mindset with a Canvas, Structured 
Thinking, Seven ‘Stars' Linked by a ‘String' - 
Systematic Problem solving Mind Training
Leadership 
skills
For on-the-job managers and high-potential 
management talent
Effectively enhancing managers' coordination 
and management abilities, and helping 
them grasp our business philosophy and 
management methods systematically and 
solve complex business and management 
issues
Pengyuan Class, Zhiyuan Class, Pinnacle 
Program, Pilot, Rising Wave and other 
programs
Profession-
al develop-
ment
For all employees
Formulating and developing professional 
development training courses by establishing 
committees for professional channels of 
technology, products and functions
Learning Map
Next gen-
eration of 
profession-
als
For fresh graduates from campus 
recruitment
Assisting fresh graduates in quickly 
integrating into us and transitioning from 
a campus to a professional setting
"Say Hello to JD.com - JD.com's New Employee 
Onboarding Training" Star Class
Group Photo of "Pengyuan Class" Training
Group Photo of General Competencies Training
For newly promoted or transferred executives at the director level, JD.com regularly launches the 
"Pengyuan Class" for training on leadership skills annually.
The "Pengyuan Class" training program integrates online learning, face-to-face intensive sessions, case 
studies, and hot topic discussions to deliver a multifaceted training approach. It concentrates on JD.com's 
managerial culture, team development, and performance-driven leadership. The program aims to bolster 
managers' work ethos, leadership skills, and self-efficacy, aiding them in quickly adapting to their new roles 
and excelling in their positions. In 2023, JD.com organized four sessions of the "Pengyuan Class" training, 
assisting nearly 400 managers in gaining a comprehensive understanding of leadership skills.
JD.com’s professional literacy series training is a 
specialized talent development program aimed 
at young talents and it is divided into cognitive 
breakthrough, communication and expression, 
and efficient work, providing young talents 
with a systematic and comprehensive learning 
path. In 2023, 19 professional literacy training 
sessions were held at JD.com headquarters, 
as well as in Nanjing, Suqian, and Southwest 
offices, accumulating 30 courses. The training 
program covered 1,293 key employees from 
JDSTAR, JD Logistics Rising Star, and Customer 
Service Future Star.
"Pengyuan Class" - Training on Leadership Skills
"General Competencies" - Professional Literacy Series Training
JD.com's CEO is Delivering Lectures to 
the Participants of the "Pengyuan Class"


51
2023 JD.com, Inc.
Environmental, Social and Governance Report
A Pragmatic Vision
Consolidates
the Foundation of 
Responsibility
A Pragmatic Path
Promotes
Good Consumption	
A Pragmatic Attitude
Paves the Way
for a Green Future
A Pragmatic Approach
Leads to Shared
Development Outcomes
During the reporting period
As of the end of the reporting period
Since 2014, we have offered all employees 
(including full-time, part-time, and contractor 
employees) the opportunity for continuing 
education through programs such as "I'm 
Attending College at JD.com" and "I'm 
Pursuing a Master's Degree at JD.com," and 
have provided a support policy of interest-
free loans for continuing education to 
assist employees in furthering their studies. 
By the end of the reporting period, nearly 
5,000 employees of JD.com had enrolled in 
these programs, and more than 2,000 had 
obtained academic certificates.
JD.com adheres to the philosophy of "placing the well-being of employees 
ahead of the interests of the enterprise," prioritizing employee development 
over business success. We strive to protect the legitimate rights and interests 
of our employees, establish an equal and smooth communication mechanism, 
create a multi-scenario welfare system for employee care, and enhance 
employees' happiness and sense of belonging in all aspects.
In our internal policies such as the JD.com Human Rights Policy, we explicitly outline 
standards for employee recruitment and employment, firmly opposing and 
prohibiting any child labor and forced labor. We also mandate that our suppliers 
and partners comply with relevant laws, regulations, and clauses regarding the 
rights and interests of employees. Throughout the recruitment and hiring process, 
we strictly verify the authenticity and validity of potential employees' information, 
ensuring that they are at least 16 years old and meet the employment conditions, 
such as the requirements of the Sunlight Integrity Alliance list. Should any violation 
of these standards be detected, JD.com will promptly launch an investigation, 
enact corrective actions, and handle the matter with the utmost seriousness in line 
with legal regulations and related policies. As of the end of the reporting period, 
JD.com had no incidents of employment discrimination, child labor, or forced labor.
We have actively drafted and championed the signing of the JD.com Collective 
Agreement, upholding the principles of freedom of association and the right to 
collective bargaining for our employees. Annually, we stage Staff Representative 
Meetings to guarantee that our employees are granted their democratic 
entitlements, including the rights to information, participation, expression, and 
oversight, as mandated by law. Throughout 2023, we conducted six of these 
meetings, resulting in the endorsement of seven policy documents impacting the 
entire workforce, as well as the approval of three critical issues. In conjunction 
with our administrative department, the trade union organized three rounds of 
Employee Service Opinion Communication Sessions, ensuring that employees 
were consulted in advance and that staff representatives had ample opportunity 
to engage in discussions concerning rules, regulations, and significant matters that 
affect employee rights.
In addition, we have implemented human rights due diligence across the entire Group to identify 
potential human rights risks in our operations and business-related activities. We conduct in-depth 
evaluations of the nature and severity of these risks and formulate specific risk mitigation and 
remediation measures, ensuring a prompt and efficient response to any human rights concerns 
that may arise. During the reporting period, JD.com carried out human rights due diligence for 
all employees, protecting employees’ rights of equal remuneration, freedom of association and 
etc., reviewing and preventing risks and issues related to child labor, forced labor, harassment 
and discrimination, unequal pay, and other aspects. We took remedial actions against individuals 
confirmed to have violated relevant requirements, including but not limited to requiring apologies, 
demotions, dismissals, cancellation of granted equity and restricted stock, etc. Instances suspected of 
constituting illegal or criminal activity were referred to the appropriate legal authorities while providing 
humanistic care and psychological assistance to victims to help ease their distress and suffering.
JD.com's Human Rights Due Diligence Framework
1 The data excludes Deppon and Kuayue-Express.
Protection of Employees' Rights and Interests
100%
JD.com’s Trade Union 
Committee members
15
Chairperson 
1
Vice-chairpersons
3
Average training time per employee was 
40.7hours
Total hours of employee training were 
20,971,781.7
Amount invested in talent development 
training per employee was
RMB118.1
Employee Rights and Care
JD.com’s collective contract 
coverage rate  
100%
1
JD.com's Degree Certification Program
JD.com has collaborated with the Open University of China 
and Beijing Foreign Studies University for university-enterprise 
cooperation. Employees who meet the universities' requirements 
can apply to participate in programs such as upgrading from an 
associate's degree to a bachelor's degree through this program.
JD.com has collaborated with the Renmin Business School 
for university-enterprise cooperation. Those eligible 
employees with equivalent academic competence can 
apply to enroll in the part-time master's degree courses 
through this program.
I'm Attending College at JD.com
I'm Pursuing a Master's Degree at JD.com
Policies and 
commitment statements 
for the protection of 
human rights
Producing human rights due 
diligence reports
Implementing mitigation and 
remediation measures and regularly 
reviewing key human rights issues
Identifying potential 
human rights issues in 
the value chain
Assessing the 
impact of risks
of employees were trained


52
2023 JD.com, Inc.
Environmental, Social and Governance Report
A Pragmatic Vision
Consolidates
the Foundation of 
Responsibility
A Pragmatic Path
Promotes
Good Consumption	
A Pragmatic Attitude
Paves the Way
for a Green Future
A Pragmatic Approach
Leads to Shared
Development Outcomes
JD.com is committed to enhancing the benefits system based on the universality of all employees, oriented to 
tilt scarce resources to core talents and improve the benefits of frontline employees. In addition to providing all 
employees with statutory benefits such as social insurance and housing provident fund, we have also established 
a multi-scenario employee welfare system that includes commercial insurance and annual health check-ups. 
In alignment with legal requirements and job realities, we provide a comprehensive suite of welfare leave benefits, including 
statutory holidays, sick leave, annual leave, marital leave, bereavement leave, maternity leave, paternity leave, lactation 
leave, prenatal check-up leave, and leave for work-related injuries. Employees with children can also enjoy paid leave for 
events such as parent-teacher meetings. Furthermore, we arrange flexible working hours for some employees according 
to the characteristics of their positions, and arrange for employees to work from home when necessary, providing a flexible 
and humane working model.
Satisfaction Evaluation Criteria of Different Position Sequences in JD.com
Employee Benefits and Care
JD.com Employee Benefits System of "Three Pillars and Multiple Scenarios"
JD.com Employee Benefits System
Build a "Three Pillars" approach and offer diverse employee benefits tailored to "Multiple Scenarios," which prioritizes not 
just employees' physical and mental wellbeing, but also professional development and family satisfaction.
Employee benefit policies are based on the universality of all employees , oriented to tilt scarce resources to core talents and 
improve the benefits of frontline employees.
An Integrated Benefit Platform
An integrated tool for managing benefits systematically provides one-stop services, such as benefits distribution, a benefit board, 
policy documents and online processing, for employees to process benefit-related affairs.
Physical and mental 
health
Mandated Benefits
Supplement Benefits
Featured Benefits
Basic necessities 
of life
A happy family
Leave benefits
Policy benefits
Culture care
● 
Commercial 
insurance
● 
Medical check-ups
● 
Fitness centers
● 
Outdoors fitness 
areas
● 
Health counseling 
room
● 
EAP psychological 
counseling services
● 
Meal subsidies
● 
Dinner on 
workdays
● 
Commuting for 
overtime
● 
Shuttle buses
● 
Welfare housing
● 
Welfare coupons
● 
JD.com merchant 
discounts
● 
Housing security 
fund
● 
Assistance fund
● 
Children's 
playground
● 
Childcare centers
● 
Kindergarten
● 
Education
● 
Annual leave
● 
Paid maternity 
leave
● 
Paid sick leave
● 
Half-pay sick leave
● 
Other statutory 
holidays
● 
Seniority reward
● 
Reward on values
● 
519 Veterans' Day
● 
JD.com's family gift
● 
Team building
● 
New Year in JD.com
● 
Social insurance
● 
Housing fund
● 
Residence permit
● 
Overseas 
graduates 
settlement
● 
Graduates 
settlement
● 
Talent introduction
● 
Talent programs
JD.com complies with the local 
and national requirements by 
providing basic benefits.
JD.com provides supplement 
benefits featured by the 
Business Group Business Unit 
(BGBU).
JD.com provides benefits featured 
by and representative of itself.
Multiple Scenarios
Three Pillars
To foster a culture of openness and transparency, JD.com conducts quarterly employee satisfaction surveys 
for all staff members. The survey is designed based on the characteristics and requirements of different job 
positions, encompassing multiple dimensions such as job satisfaction, recognition of work value, stress levels, and 
challenges. This strategy is employed to better understand the voices of employees and thereby improve their 
work experience. In 2023, we engaged both office and frontline employees in these surveys
1. The annual survey 
results yielded an average score of 4.53, with office employees scoring 4.55 and frontline employees scoring 4.50.
Strategic objectives
Structural 
responsibilities
Talent development
System and process
Support and tools
Compensation 
incentives
Cultural  
atmosphere
Management personnel
Staff dedication
Employee vitality
Work standards 
Equipment 
environment
Personal 
development
Compensation 
incentives 
Team management 
Cultural atmosphere
Staff dedication
Issue Resolution Timeliness of Frontline Employees
Respond within 24 hours
Close the problem-resolution 
hoop within 3 working days
Resolve complex incidents 
within 7 working days
For JD.com office employees
For frontline logistics employees 
(excluding Kuayue-Express, Deppon, and 
international logistics)
We encourage employees to actively voice their reasonable demands and suggestions and have established 
multi-dimensional communication channels, including a dedicated 400 hotline, bigear@jd.com, employee forums, 
and Staff Representative Meetings. We categorize and prioritize employee feedback based on the nature and 
urgency of the issues and have implemented a tiered system of problem-solving solutions and processes. We 
also implement practical and efficient improvement actions to ensure that every piece of feedback has a clear 
action plan and prompt response. Additionally, for our overseas employees, we have set up dedicated email 
addresses—jdw_radar@jd.com and globalhrssc@jd.com—to collect their opinions, which are then followed up on 
and addressed by JD.com or the local Human Resources Department.
Employee Communication Mechanism
1 A 5-point rating scale has been adopted in the employee satisfaction survey of JD.com, with 5 indicating the highest score.


53
2023 JD.com, Inc.
Environmental, Social and Governance Report
A Pragmatic Vision
Consolidates
the Foundation of 
Responsibility
A Pragmatic Path
Promotes
Good Consumption	
A Pragmatic Attitude
Paves the Way
for a Green Future
A Pragmatic Approach
Leads to Shared
Development Outcomes
We are dedicated to safeguarding the rights and well-being of female employees, offering specialized amenities 
such as mother and baby rooms, distinct employee identification, and dedicated parking spots. Adhering to national 
and local legal requirements, we ensure that employees on maternity leave receive a minimum of 158 days of leave, 
with appropriate salary and benefits during the period of maternity leave. Fathers are eligible for at least 10-30 
days of paternity leave, supported by appropriate documentation. Employees with childcare duties have 5-10 days 
of parenting leave each year. For couples who are both JD.com employees, the parenting leave can be transferred 
between them, allowing for adequate time to recuperate and enjoy precious family moments.
     JD.com's Family Gift
By the end of the reporting period, JD.com has teamed 
up with numerous museums to produce over 5 million 
"JD.com's Family Gifts." These gifts convey enduring 
companionship while actively championing traditional 
Chinese culture. The JD.com 2024 Spring Festival Family 
Gifts are 100% supported by JD.com's robust supply 
chain, covering every stage from design, product 
selection, and production to distribution, ensuring that 
the gifts and blessings reach every JD.com employee.
 JD.com's Benefit System for Female Employees
     The Frontline Employee Day
On April 8, 2023, JD.com commemorated its eighth annual 
"Frontline Employee Day." Frontline in warehousing, 
logistics, customer service, after-sales and other 
frontline employees, JD.com provides industry-leading 
compensation packages to these employees, with 
over 60% securing stable employment in their local 
communities. Through the "I'm Attending College at 
JD.com" program, approximately 5,000 employees 
have had the opportunity to pursue higher education, 
while 22,000 have earned professional courier skill 
certification. These achievements exemplify a high-quality 
development from mere employment to a culture of 
professional dedication and professional fulfillment.
JD.com is dedicated to fostering prosperity among its 
frontline employees by generating ample opportunities 
for success and nurturing a versatile and inclusive 
atmosphere for their professional growth. While 
enhancing the sense of honor and fulfillment for all 
frontline employees, we also use this as a call to action for 
society to show more respect and support for grassroots 
employees.
Employee Care Activities under Multiple Scenarios
Annual medical checkups, tailored to age, marital status, etc., for female employees
Additional commercial maternity insurance up to RMB 5,000
Baby-care facilities with private rooms equipped with sofas, refrigerators, lockers and other facilities
Childcare center and children's playground at JD.com headquarters
Pregnant employees enjoy rights such as priority queuing and parking
Various convenient services and facilities, such as hair dryers, sanitary napkins, and special seats for 
pregnant women on shuttle buses
JD.com's Workplace Environment


54
2023 JD.com, Inc.
Environmental, Social and Governance Report
A Pragmatic Vision
Consolidates
the Foundation of 
Responsibility
A Pragmatic Path
Promotes
Good Consumption	
A Pragmatic Attitude
Paves the Way
for a Green Future
A Pragmatic Approach
Leads to Shared
Development Outcomes
     Housing Security Fund
As of the end of the reporting period, 77% of the applicants for JD.com's housing security fund are frontline 
employees, marking a notable rise from previous figures.
     JD.com Love Assistance Fund
JD.com Love Assistance Fund was established in 2010, specializing in relieving the urgent needs 
of employees in the event of sudden accidents or illnesses, and has accumulated an investment 
of more than RMB 110 million. JD.com is committed to growing its "Child Support" program, which 
is one pillar of the JD.com Love Assistance Fund and offers financial aid for the education of 
employees' children who have lost their parents due to illness or accidents. This support continues 
until the children complete their university studies. By the end of the reporting period, this initiative 
has supported 57 families, with 82 children benefiting from the compassionate assistance fund.
     New Year in JD.com
In the Spring Festival of 2024, JD Logistics carried out the "Spring 
Festival Delivery" project for the 12th consecutive year. JD Logistics 
continues to provide the workers with allowances and benefits 
valued over RMB 500 million through a series of welfare projects 
such as "New Year in JD.com," higher than the national legal criteria, 
including legal overtime pay, subsidy for children's Spring Festival 
reunion and Spring Festival red envelopes. In addition, JD Logistics 
carefully arranges the Spring Festival atmosphere and holds a 
series of cultural care activities, such as distributing traditional 
couplets, making dumplings, hosting reunion dinners, and giving 
gift packages, so that employees can feel the warmth of "home" 
even if they are away during the holidays.
JD.com is committed to fostering a healthy work-life balance for its employees by organizing a range of sports 
events and activities to enrich the recreational life of employees. We have established 11 employee clubs with 
tens of thousands of employees participating since their inception to accommodate a wide array of interests. 
During the reporting period, JD.com hosted a variety of events, including basketball, badminton, and soccer 
tournaments, aiming to enhance employees' personal lives, facilitate interactions among colleagues, and boost 
team unity and employee engagement.
In 2023, JD.com orchestrated a series of spring and autumn cultural and recreational events, offering over 
500,000 employees a platform to showcase their talents and unwind. In the spring season, we featured a 
group-wide photography competition, which identified 50 exceptional entries for cultural dissemination, 
capturing cherished moments of JD.com employees. In the autumn, JD.com celebrated a robust sports 
season, hosting a total of 134 competitive events, including 15 basketball matches, 93 badminton matches, 
2 swimming events, and 24 chess and card games, engaging the participation of 2,441 employees.
Organizing Cultural and Entertainment Activities for Employees
JD Logistics' Spring Festival Care 
Event Site
Group Photo of JD.com's Cultural and Entertainment Activities
As a leading-edge new type of real economy-based enterprise, JD.com has extensive experience in 
integrating digital technology with the real economy, always intertwining its development with the 
growth of its employees.
     JD.com Youth City
In May 2023, the "JD.com Youth City" project was officially launched, with total investment expected 
to exceed RMB 6 billion. The project will provide nearly 4,000 fully furnished employee apartments, 
ready for immediate occupation. The complex will include amenities such as a kindergarten, cinema, 
basketball gym, swimming pool, and commercial street, covering a gross floor area of over 300,000 
square meters, creating a vibrant living and working community for employees.
Empowering Employees to Enjoy a Fulfilling Career and a Stable Livelihood
Panoramic Rendering of JD.com Youth City
Panoramic Rendering of the Kindergarten of 
JD.com Youth City


55
2023 JD.com, Inc.
Environmental, Social and Governance Report
A Pragmatic Vision
Consolidates
the Foundation of 
Responsibility
A Pragmatic Path
Promotes
Good Consumption	
A Pragmatic Attitude
Paves the Way
for a Green Future
A Pragmatic Approach
Leads to Shared
Development Outcomes
To enhance employee awareness and emergency 
preparedness regarding OHS, JD.com has put in place a 
comprehensive holistic strategy. For personal protection, 
we issue high-visibility, reflective uniforms to our frontline 
employees and provide job-specific personal protective 
equipment. To safeguard production equipment, we 
outfit work areas with protective gear, safety signage, 
and outfit machinery with guards and anti-injury 
devices. We foster a culture of safety through diverse 
health and safety promotion activities, including "Safety 
and Health Cup" competitions and "Safety Production 
Month" events, along with regular training and drills. Our 
comprehensive approach extends to regular health 
and safety training and assessments for all positions. 
In 2023, JD.com ensured that all its employees received 
the OHS training, including those from outsourcing 
partners.
By the end of the reporting period, JD Retail and JD 
Industrials obtained the ISO 45001 Occupational 
Health and Safety Management System Certification.
JD Retail's Occupational Health and Safety Management 
System Certification
OHS Training Cases of JD.com in 2023 (Partial)
Training Type
Training Content
First Aid Training for 
Employees
Training on CPR and AED equipment application
Psychology Health
Training on anxiety alleviation and the top ten tips for psychology health by 
professional psychologists
Safe Production
Professional lectures on fire safety knowledge
Emergency response and evacuation drills for fires/earthquakes
Firefighting safety skills competition
Safety knowledge contest
Job Safety
Improve the safety mindset of terminal distribution staff and emphasize common 
concerns for secure driving practices
Standard safety operating procedures and safe operation of equipment within 
the warehouse
Safety precautions for working at heights on steel structures, the proper use of 
electricity on construction sites, the safe hoisting of steel components and other 
construction projects safety
JD.com adheres stringently to domestic and international 
occupational health and safety standards and 
regulations. We regularly review and optimize our 
internal policies, drawing on recommendations from 
employee representatives and real-world insights. The 
health and safety of every employee are paramount in 
our production and operational practices. We enforce 
compliance with occupational health and safety laws and 
norms among our suppliers and partners and integrate 
these standards into our procurement and contractual 
processes, thereby providing our employees with robust 
safety protections.
We have established an Occupational Health and 
Safety (OHS) Committee as the highest governing body 
for OHS, chaired by the Chief Human Resources Officer 
(CHO), with the CEOs of each business unit serving as 
key committee members. To ensure comprehensive 
oversight, we have established specialized OHS working 
groups and execution teams within each unit, creating a 
tiered structure for effective management of health and 
safety concerns. The OHS Committee coordinates and 
makes decisions on OHS strategic planning, approving 
and promoting the development, implementation, 
and changes of OHS policies. It is also tasked with 
constructing and reinforcing OHS risk management 
mechanisms, ensuring effective supervision and 
Occupational Health and Safety
execution of OHS management activities, and 
regularly reporting to the Board of Directors on the 
advancements and achievements in OHS management.
We are dedicated to enhancing our OHS management 
system and pursuing certifications for our various 
business lines, clearly defining the responsibilities for 
work safety within each line. The OHS Committee guides 
each line to establish quantifiable health and safety 
targets, and periodically reviews and evaluates the 
progress of these targets, which are also integrated 
into the performance metrics of our management team 
to guarantee their diligent execution and achievement.
To enhance our response capability for emergencies, 
we established a special emergency rescue team that 
designs comprehensive and specific plans for different 
safety scenarios. These plans ensure that every staff 
member understands their tasks and the proper 
procedures to follow in an emergency. Moreover, we 
regularly identify and inspect potential safety risks 
in line with our operational realities, assessing their 
degree of impact on safety issues and categorizing 
them into different grades, in order to develop targeted 
preventive and control measures and solutions. In 2023, 
our internal safety audit revealed no safety incidents 
within the Group.


56
2023 JD.com, Inc.
Environmental, Social and Governance Report
A Pragmatic Vision
Consolidates
the Foundation of 
Responsibility
A Pragmatic Path
Promotes
Good Consumption	
A Pragmatic Attitude
Paves the Way
for a Green Future
A Pragmatic Approach
Leads to Shared
Development Outcomes
We also attach great importance to the food health of our 
employees through a collaborative effort with restaurant 
suppliers and the COFCO Nutrition and Health Research 
Institute. Together, we have developed healthy and 
nutritious meal options, offering over 200 kinds of iodine-
free, low-fat, low-sodium, and high-fiber meals to meet 
employees' demands for healthy diet. To ensure our food 
safety measures are up to international standards, we 
have implemented the SGS-HM
1 certification program, a 
globally respected food safety accreditation. This initiative 
has raised our food safety management standards, 
with comprehensive on-site audits and sample checks 
covering 10 key kitchen modules and 177 clauses. During 
the reporting period, JD.com became the first internet 
company to secure the HM certification, and we have 
also extended this achievement to nine of our catering 
suppliers, marking a significant transition from solely 
inspecting final products to monitoring and ensuring 
safety throughout the entire food preparation process.
In addition, while fully protecting employee privacy, JD.com has partnered with external professional third-party companies 
to launch an Employee Assistance Program (EAP) for employee welfare. All current employees can make appointments 
through the "JD ME" app to receive systematic and long-term psychological counseling services upon psychological 
assessments and advice from professionals. In 2023, we enhanced our psychological health support systems by 
implementing upgrades, broadening our resource pool, and hosting various events, all aimed at delivering a diverse array 
of psychological counseling and wellness programs that cater to unique needs and experiences of our employees.
1 The full name is Societe Generale de Surveillance-Hygiene Monitored Program, which is the food safety, health management, supervision and certification program promoted by SGS globally.
JD.com's SGS-HM Certificates (Partial)
JD.com's Psychological Health Operation Optimization Dimensions
 Upgrade and iterate operational mechanisms
 Upgrade and remodel the EAP psychological counseling room
 Upgrade the privacy protection system
In 2023, JD.com initiated a comprehensive first aid training initiative for core workplace staff. We 
invited Red Cross experts to deepen employees' comprehension of emergency response and 
strengthen their capacity to manage crises effectively through theoretical education with practical 
operation. Every JD.com employee who engaged in this training successfully concluded the curriculum, 
earning Red Cross-certified first aid proficiency certificates.
JD.com's First Aid Proficiency Certificate Training
First Aid Proficiency Training by the Red Cross
Optimize and transform from system processes to service integration to enhance service efficiency and 
employee experience
Enhance the employee experience by improving the environmental atmosphere to provide a more 
comfortable and serene counseling space for employees
Establish a groundbreaking confidential case management mechanism to forestall potential risk 
incidents effectively through advanced interventions


57
2023 JD.com, Inc.
Environmental, Social and Governance Report
A Pragmatic Vision
Consolidates
the Foundation of 
Responsibility
A Pragmatic Path
Promotes
Good Consumption	
A Pragmatic Attitude
Paves the Way
for a Green Future
A Pragmatic Approach
Leads to Shared
Development Outcomes
JD.com has established clear environmental, social, and 
governance (ESG) requirements for suppliers. We thoroughly 
assess suppliers' performance in environmental protection, 
labor management, and raw material traceability during their 
production and operations. By identifying and preventing 
potential sustainability risks within the supply chain, we aim to 
achieve green and responsible procurement while enhancing 
supply chain resilience. Starting from 2024, JD.com has included 
ESG clauses in its supplier contracts, requiring suppliers to make 
commitments on ESG-related requirements and strictly comply 
with the JD Group Supplier Code of Conduct.
1 PBAT (Polybutylene Adipate Terephthalate) is developed to address the environmental pollution caused by traditional plastics. PBAT is a highly biodegradable material that easily decomposes with the assistance of natural microorganisms and bacteria.
2 PLA (Polylactic Acid) is a food-grade biodegradable material made from natural plant sources such as corn starch through fermentation and polymerization. In recent years, with the increasing awareness of environmental protection and sustainable 
development concepts, PLA has become a highly regarded alternative to conventional plastics.
3 BOPLA is an environmentally friendly, bio-based, and biodegradable material made from polylactic acid (PLA). It is a novel bio-based, biodegradable film material achieved through material and process innovation using biaxial stretching technology.
Under the guidance of China's environmental policies, JD.com 
has formulated the Green Procurement Management. This 
policy mandates green procurement principles and promotes 
environmental awareness, encouraging suppliers to transition 
towards greener practices. In collaboration with partners, we 
aim to build a green supply chain. Moreover, we are phasing 
out traditional logistics packaging materials and plan to use 
recyclable materials throughout the entire supply chain in the 
future.
Environmental Protection
A Sustainable Supply Chain
JD.com positions itself as a "supply chain-based 
technology and service provider," focusing on the 
sustainable development of the supply chain. We 
implement a technology-first strategy, and strengthen 
the business advantage of self-operated logistics, as 
part of the efforts to drive mutual benefits across the 
entire supply chain. By setting regulations, guiding 
values, and innovating technologies, we aim to achieve 
energy-saving and emission reduction goals and help 
suppliers improve their risk management capabilities, 
thereby creating a sustainable ecosystem where we 
partner with the supply chain to flourish together.
Responsible Procurement
Under the guidance of China's plastic restriction order and postal express packaging management 
requirements, JD.com communicated with suppliers and invited multiple external upstream raw 
material suppliers of PBAT
1 and PLA,
2 as well as leading manufacturers in the industry, to participate 
in technical exchanges and research on logistics packaging planning.  Through these efforts, JD.com 
successfully developed degradable waterproof bags and degradable vest bags to serve various 
application scenarios. Additionally, JD.com also invited suppliers to provide design proposals and 
samples for products made from BOPLA,
3 including degradable tape, nano stretch film, and recyclable 
packaging (new insulated boxes). These products underwent small-scale testing and application. 
JD.com has also comprehensively promoted and provided environmentally friendly packaging materials 
to its subsidiaries. Both 7FRESH and Dada have widely adopted degradable vest bags, contributing to 
environmental protection.
JD.com Promotes Degradable Packaging Materials
We require suppliers to comply with the Labor Law of 
the People's Republic of China and other relevant laws 
and regulations, with zero tolerance for malpractices 
such as child labor and forced labor. Suppliers found 
to be in serious violation are immediately blacklisted 
and will never be contracted again.
We review suppliers' occupational health and safety 
management systems, requiring them to fulfill their 
corresponding responsibilities. We prioritize suppliers 
with occupational health and safety certifications in our 
evaluations of major partners. For key categories, we 
require suppliers to establish sound safety responsibility 
systems and safety regulations, implement appropriate 
safety measures, improve safety conditions, and 
develop robust risk prevention mechanisms to ensure 
safe production.
Packaging consumables (including cardboard boxes, 
waterproof bags, etc.) used by JD.com during operations 
are mainly composed of sustainably harvested raw paper 
and polyethylene plastic particles. Manufacturers of raw 
materials strictly comply with national environmental 
protection-related laws, regulations, and standards, and 
have passed our comprehensive supply chain audits. 
In addition, our supplier partners have established 
rigorous inspection processes to ensure that all raw 
materials entering the production line meet the Group's 
standards, thereby guaranteeing the superior quality and 
environmental compliance of the final products.
Labor Standards
Health and Safety
Raw Material Traceability


58
2023 JD.com, Inc.
Environmental, Social and Governance Report
A Pragmatic Vision
Consolidates
the Foundation of 
Responsibility
A Pragmatic Path
Promotes
Good Consumption	
A Pragmatic Attitude
Paves the Way
for a Green Future
A Pragmatic Approach
Leads to Shared
Development Outcomes
JD.com drives supply chain development, enhances 
supplier R&D efficiency, reduces channel costs, and 
shares profits with partners. This approach rationalizes 
resource allocation, accelerates innovation, and 
optimizes profit margins across the entire industrial 
chain and supply chain. By the fourth quarter of 2023, 
the inventory turnover of JD.com's self-operated 
products had reached 30.3 days, placing the Group at 
the forefront globally.
Leveraging supply chain advantages, JD.com focuses 
on expanding smart supply chain service capabilities, 
integrating internal and external ecosystem resources 
and capabilities, and collaborating with upstream 
and downstream partners to build an ecosystem for 
the entire industrial chain, achieving shared prosperity 
and connectivity.
At the "Embrace the New, Create the Future - JD Jing Zao 5
th Anniversary and JD Private Brand 
Partner Conference" held in March 2023, JD.com launched the "New Lighthouse Program." This 
initiative aimed to collaborate with partners to create benchmark products and establish the "Top 
100 Quality Manufacturing Factories" by focusing on user needs, potential markets, and design 
aesthetics.
As part of JD.com's fully intelligent supply chain for industrial products, the "Bu Dao" (a digital 
collaboration platform for suppliers) connects manufacturers, distributors, and agents, establishing 
an integrated supply network that promotes efficient collaboration of social resources. Since its 
launch, "Bu Dao" has rapidly garnered attention from various industrial product brands and channels. 
By the end of the reporting period, "Bu Dao" had linked approximately 5,400 warehouses, covering 
over 900,000 SKUs, and facilitated industrial product procurement orders totaling over RMB10 billion.
JD.com conducts Science-Based Targets initiative (SBTi) training for suppliers under the theme 
"Setting Science-Based Targets, Co-creating a Low-Carbon Supply Chain." This training introduces 
suppliers to the processes and methods for setting science-based carbon targets, encouraging 
them to actively participate in the sustainable supply chain development of JD.com.
JD.com values the ESG performance of suppliers. To 
monitor partners' progress in environmental, social, 
and governance (ESG) practices, we distribute ESG 
questionnaires to suppliers. These questionnaires 
evaluate five key areas: ESG disclosure and awards, 
environmental management, employee management, 
occupational health and safety, and business ethics. 
We also assess the substantive ESG work carried out 
by suppliers. Suppliers who perform exceptionally well 
receive additional points in our supplier performance 
evaluations, thereby increasing their collaboration 
opportunities.
Supplier performance evaluations are based 
on a 5-point scale, with a 0.2-point bonus for 
the following:
- Official and public commitment to sustainability 
initiatives or plans such as the UNGC.
- Publication of corporate social responsibility 
(CSR) or ESG reports.
- Completion of on-site corporate social 
responsibility audits at least at one facility.
- Receipt of external awards or honors related 
to CSR or ESG within the past three years.
We conduct surveys of high-scoring suppliers to gather 
best practices and case studies, sharing these insights 
with average or low-scoring suppliers. We also closely 
monitor improvements in low-scoring suppliers with high 
ESG risks. In 2023, we completed the process of "identifying 
significant suppliers - distributing questionnaires - 
collecting and reviewing ESG questionnaires
1," in which 
we distributed 575 questionnaires, and received 461 
valid responses, achieving a 74.8% response rate from 
significant suppliers.
JD.com is always improving supply chain technology, 
to make it smarter and more efficient. This helps to 
strengthen the entire industrial and supply chain, creating 
an intelligent ecosystem. To lead and empower the 
supply chain, we maintain ongoing communication 
and collaboration with partners, sharing cutting-
edge technologies and concepts. We aim to create 
a responsible supply chain that contributes to high-
quality development and regional coordination in the 
real economy. By the end of the fourth quarter of 2023, 
JD.com’s supply chain infrastructure assets had amounted 
to RMB 153.8 billion, an increase of 16% year-on-year.
1 In 2023, JD.com screened suppliers and distributed questionnaires to those with higher ESG risks to carry out targeted assessments.
Supply Chain Leadership 
Supply Chain Empowerment
New Lighthouse Program
Digital Collaboration Platform for Suppliers – Bu Dao
Supplier ESG Empowerment
Supplier ESG Evaluation
Supply Chain Leadership and Empowerment
JD.com conducting Science-Based Targets initiative (SBTi) training for suppliers


59
2023 JD.com, Inc.
Environmental, Social and Governance Report
A Pragmatic Vision
Consolidates
the Foundation of 
Responsibility
A Pragmatic Path
Promotes
Good Consumption	
A Pragmatic Attitude
Paves the Way
for a Green Future
A Pragmatic Approach
Leads to Shared
Development Outcomes
In September 2023, JD.com conducted online training sessions on sustainable packaging solutions. 
The training aimed to help suppliers understand low-carbon trends in logistics packaging and how to 
better integrate their products with carbon-neutral packaging. The sessions, covering 197 suppliers, 
encouraged suppliers to participate in JD.com's sustainable supply chain initiatives.
Sustainable Packaging Solutions Training
JD.com organizes supplier conferences and training sessions to promote communication and collaboration with 
suppliers. These initiatives help suppliers consistently improve their product quality and management standards, 
ensuring long-term and mutually beneficial partnerships.
JD.com implements a tiered supplier management system, and establishes an all-stage management mechanism, 
including supplier admission, assessment, and exit, to ensure standardized management of suppliers. As of the 
end of the reporting period, we had 4,594 suppliers
1. 
1 
The number of suppliers is based on those registered under the "JD.com" on the Panshi procurement platform and who 
were awarded contracts in 2023. The suppliers' locations are determined based on their registered addresses in the 
business registration system.
In 2023, JD.com established the Major Incident Operation Support Mechanism and the Promotional Event Support 
Manual to standardize product assurance processes and ensure product delivery. These measures stabilized 
operations across all categories before, during, and after major promotions, improved the standardization, 
planning, and comprehensiveness of procurement, and provided solutions for handling exceptional incidents. This 
enabled successful real-time project management, ensuring the smooth fulfillment of key procurement needs and 
timely delivery of materials.
Number of Suppliers by Region
Number of Suppliers by Type
Supplier Full Lifecycle Management System
Stage
Content
Supplier 
Admission
We screen and shortlist suppliers registered on JD.com's procurement bidding platform 
through communication, assessment, sample testing, and on-site inspections. 
We set differentiated screening requirements for suppliers in different categories and 
verify relevant certifications such as ISO 14001, ISO 45001, and ISO 9001, selecting 
compliant suppliers for cooperation.
Supplier 
Assessment
We have established the Tripartite Performance Appraisal Procedure, conducting multi-
faceted assessments of product quality and service capabilities for Tier-1 suppliers and 
significant suppliers in non-Tier-1 across different categories. 
We regularly evaluate suppliers against internationally recognized standards such as ISO 
14001, ISO 45001, and ISO 9001. In 2023, we conducted biannual assessments and tiered 
management of suppliers, grading them as excellent, good, or unqualified.
Supplier Exit
In 2023, we assessed a total of 2,068 suppliers. As a result, 53 suppliers were blacklisted, 
111 were frozen, and 63 were deemed unqualified. Among these, 1,661 Tier-1 suppliers 
were assessed, with 1,614 found to be qualified and 47 unqualified.
Based on the evaluation results, we work with unqualified suppliers to identify issues and 
implement follow-up improvement measures, fostering a healthy and stable cooperative 
relationship. For frozen suppliers, we suspend new business engagements, monitor their 
rectification measures, and resume cooperation only after successful implementation and 
verification of the measures.
Supplier Management
Chinese 
mainland
4,548
4,216
588
378
28
14
32
Tier-1 
Suppliers
China's Hong 
Kong, Macao, 
and Taiwan
Significant 
Suppliers in Tier-1
Overseas
Suppliers in 
non-Tier-1
Significant 
Suppliers in 
non-Tier-1
Sustainable Packaging Solutions Training


60
2023 JD.com, Inc.
Environmental, Social and Governance Report
A Pragmatic Path
Promotes
Good Consumption	
A Pragmatic Attitude
Paves the Way
for a Green Future
A Pragmatic Approach
Leads to Shared
Development Outcomes
A Pragmatic Vision
Consolidates
the Foundation of 
Responsibility
A Pragmatic Path 
Promotes 
Good Consumption
04
JD.com is dedicated to becoming a valuable, warm, and responsible 
enterprise. Our mission is to provide users with comprehensive, high-
quality products and services. We regularly improve our supply chain 
infrastructure and digital technology capabilities, ensuring responsible 
marketing throughout our operations. Additionally, we use our strengths 
to get involved in social welfare activities, contribute to society through 
practical efforts, and work with industry partners to create a better life 
for consumers.


61
2023 JD.com, Inc.
Environmental, Social and Governance Report
A Pragmatic Path
Promotes
Good Consumption	
A Pragmatic Attitude
Paves the Way
for a Green Future
A Pragmatic Approach
Leads to Shared
Development Outcomes
A Pragmatic Vision
Consolidates
the Foundation of 
Responsibility
JD.com has established an all-encompassing safety 
prevention and control system to fully enhance 
product quality and safety across all business 
sectors. This system integrates comprehensive 
quality control, platform governance, online rights 
protection, and brand protection, ensuring thorough 
coverage of five key areas: intellectual property 
protection, food safety, drug safety, quality safety, 
and prohibited and restricted goods. We have also 
assembled a specialized team focused on quality 
and safety to ensure the effective operation of the 
system. This team is responsible for both online 
protection and offline investigations, creating a full-
chain joint prevention and control mechanism. The 
mechanism operates through "pre-identification, 
daily prevention and control, and governance and 
disposal" to manage risks effectively.
We have developed a comprehensive quality management 
system that covers key areas, including platform admission 
qualifications, product inspection sampling, counterfeit 
accountability, and violation management. This system 
enhances e-commerce compliance, controls merchant 
qualifications and product quality, and aims to provide a 
superior experience for both merchants and consumers.
JD.com actively collaborates with external 
organizations to ensure product quality and 
safety while strengthening internal governance. 
In February 2024, the 2
nd JD.com Product 
Safety and Compliance Forum was held in 
Beijing. At the forum, representatives from 
regulatory agencies, law enforcement, industry 
associations, and brand owners shared insights 
on joint efforts for product safety. Moreover, 
the 2023 JD.com Product Safety Alliance Work 
Report was released, which announced the top 
ten cases of the JD.com Product Safety Alliance 
for 2023.
JD.com Product Safety and Compliance Forum
JD.com held the 2
nd JD.com Product Safety and Compliance Forum
At JD.com, we focus on offering authentic and 
top-notch products. We are always enhancing 
our product quality control capabilities to 
earn trust as the most reliable company for 
Chinese consumers. We are dedicated to 
the philosophy of "responsible marketing," 
where we prioritize customer satisfaction by 
constantly optimizing customer service and 
ensuring a pleasant shopping experience.
JD.com has established comprehensive product 
quality management systems. By adhering to high 
standards, we meticulously control product quality. 
This involves conducting thorough reviews of all 
products throughout their lifecycle to ensure the 
quality and safety of products.
JD.com has developed a series of internal policies 
for product quality management, and systematically 
carried out various quality management tasks 
to ensure product safety. We have established 
internal quality control and experience teams, as 
well as product compliance teams, responsible for 
overseeing and implementing quality-related efforts. 
This structure allows us to steadily promote quality 
management across various business scenarios.
Product Quality Assurance
Quality Management System
Serving Consumers
Subsidiaries of JD.com: Beijing Jingdong Century 
Information & Technologies, Beijing Huaguan 
Commercial Technology Development Co., 
Ltd., Shanghai Yuanmai Trading, Guangzhou 
Jingdong Trading, Chengdu Jingdong Century 
Trading, Xi'an Huaxunde Trading, Shenyang 
Jingdong Century Trading and Wuhan Jingdong 
Shiji Commerce and Trade; 
Subsidiaries of JD Industrials: Beijing Jingdong 
Dianjiezhi Technology, Beijing Jingdong Industrial 
Products Trading.
Subsidiaries of JD.com: Beijing Jingdong 
Century Trading, Beijing Huaguan Commercial 
Technology Development Co., Ltd.;
Subsidiaries of JD Retail: nine 7FRESH stores.
ISO 9001 Quality Management System Certification
FSSC 22000 Food Safety System Certification
In 2023, JD.com's progress in ensuring standardized 
quality management across various business scenarios 
was as follows:


62
2023 JD.com, Inc.
Environmental, Social and Governance Report
A Pragmatic Path
Promotes
Good Consumption	
A Pragmatic Attitude
Paves the Way
for a Green Future
A Pragmatic Approach
Leads to Shared
Development Outcomes
A Pragmatic Vision
Consolidates
the Foundation of 
Responsibility
JD.com is committed to enhancing the quality and efficiency of quality management efforts, consistently 
improving every aspect of the process. We ensure thorough oversight of product quality, and provide consumers 
with safe, reliable, and worry-free high-quality products through rigorous quality inspections and comprehensive 
product recall plans.
JD.com Product Quality Inspection Initiatives in 2023:
In 2023, 7FRESH under JD Retail conducted two nationwide product recall drills to simulate scenarios 
where product abnormalities were detected at the warehousing and after-sales stages. The Group 
verified recall operations in all stores, including triggering the removal process, receiving removal 
notifications, confirming product information, removing and handling products, and submitting removal 
reports. The practice runs showed some problems in certain stores. For example, some stores couldn't 
trace products far enough back, didn't trace enough products, or didn't fill out all of the reports correctly. 
JD.com coordinated with these stores to optimize the recall process, enhancing their emergency response 
capabilities for product recalls.
JD.com steadfastly upholds the principle of responsible marketing, dedicated to providing consumers with 
genuine and reliable products. The Group consistently adheres to laws and regulations, social norms, and ethical 
standards, to ensure the truthfulness and accuracy of information in marketing, advertising, and sales practices.
Provide truthful and accurate information about products and services to the public, avoiding deceiving 
or misleading consumers;
Reject any exaggeration of the social and environmental impact of products and services;
Protect groups that face challenges in accessing commercial information, such as the elderly, children, 
and people with disabilities;
Avoid denigrating or discrediting the products and services of competitors.
JD.com consistently strengthens mechanisms for 
handling non-compliant products and product recall 
management. We have promoted the development 
of detailed policy documents such as the Product 
Recall Control Procedure  and the JD Industrials 
Recall and Withdrawal Management Procedure by 
the Group and its subsidiaries. In addition, we have 
established an emergency response mechanism 
for product recalls to address potential recall 
incidents. In the event of a recall, we swiftly conduct 
investigations, thoroughly analyze the causes, 
and formulate effective corrective and preventive 
measures to prevent recurrence, safeguarding 
consumer rights, interests and safety. In 2023, there 
were no product recalls for JD.com's private label 
caused by health and safety issues.
Product Quality Inspection and Recall
7FRESH Conducts Nationwide Product Recall Drills
JD Retail
JD.com's Private Label Brands
We conduct in-process inspections, acceptance checks, and 
sampling tests before products are launched. Any issues 
identified are promptly addressed with factory rectifications.
Home Appliances and 
Home Goods Division, Major 
Supermarket Division
We conduct inspections on categories such as gas 
appliances, energy gathering rings, and imported milk 
powder. Non-compliant products are removed from the 
platform or rectified.
7FRESH
Quarterly internal sampling inspections are performed 
across multiple product categories.
JD 
Industrials
JD Industrials conducts irregular sampling inspections and releases quality inspection reports in 
collaboration with third-party independent inspection and certification organizations, such as SGS, TÜV 
Rheinland, and GRG Metrology & Test, as well as specific product testing agencies.
Responsible Marketing
To ensure the standardization and accuracy of product information, JD.com has established several internal 
management regulations to govern brand management and product labeling management, preventing consumer 
misinformation.
We have strengthened management of advertising content by formulating and continuously optimizing internal 
advertising management systems. Through measures such as human-machine review, inspection mechanisms, 
advertiser compliance training, and regular surveys, we ensure that advertising content is truthful, accurate, and 
compliant, eliminating false advertising.
Marketing and Advertising Management
We manage advertisements 
intelligently by setting 
prohibited categories and 
pre-screening sensitive words 
to block non-compliant 
ads. A dual mechanism of 
human and machine review 
is employed to ensure 
compliance of advertising 
content.
Our ad content review 
team conducts dynamic 
inspections of various 
ads, promptly blocking 
and removing non-
compliant advertisements.
Leveraging online 
channels such as Jing Dian 
Academy and Jing Mai 
online learning platform, 
we conduct responsible 
marketing training for 
advertisers through live 
broadcasts, articles, and 
videos.
We conduct regular 
surveys to understand 
advertisers' needs 
and feedback on the 
ad review service, 
allowing us to adjust the 
advertising review service 
appropriately.
Human-machine 
Review
Advertiser 
Training
Regular 
Surveys
JD.com's Commitments to Ethical Marketing
JD.com consistently conducts brand perception surveys to understand consumers' perceptions and expectations 
regarding corporate sustainability. In 2023, JD.com commissioned a third-party consulting firm to carry out a brand 
perception survey. The results indicated that JD.com's ESG image ranks among the top in the industry, demonstrating 
the Group's excellence in various aspects such as protecting consumer rights and interests, caring for employees, 
providing high-quality products and services, and supporting environmental initiatives.
Inspection 
Mechanism


63
2023 JD.com, Inc.
Environmental, Social and Governance Report
A Pragmatic Path
Promotes
Good Consumption	
A Pragmatic Attitude
Paves the Way
for a Green Future
A Pragmatic Approach
Leads to Shared
Development Outcomes
A Pragmatic Vision
Consolidates
the Foundation of 
Responsibility
JD.com continues to enhance its comprehensive 
capabilities to prevent telecom and internet fraud, 
protecting consumers from deception. Under the 
guidance of the government, the Group established 
the JD Anti-Fraud Center, which is responsible for 
detecting, warning, managing, and combating 
telecom and internet fraud activities. In 2023, the 
JD Anti-Fraud Center, leveraging a systematic joint 
prevention and control mechanism, successfully 
intercepted fraud through risk control measures and 
early warnings, directly preventing financial losses of 
RMB 2.354 billion for users. Additionally, the Center 
assisted law enforcement agencies in apprehending 
over 1,300 suspects involved in fraud cases.
JD.com strictly adheres to applicable laws and regulations to resolutely prevent any content that may harm 
the physical and mental health of minors. We adopt a long-term governance approach, focusing on controlling 
content that endangers the well-being of young people, thereby protecting minors from harmful content.
Protection Measures for Minors at JD Retail:
Anti-Fraud Governance
Protection of Minors
Adjustment of 
Product Posting 
Rules
Establishment of 
Regular Inspection 
Mechanisms
Promotion of 
Content Compliance 
Awareness
Optimization of 
Content Reporting 
Mechanism
Enhancement of 
Content Interception 
Measures
We regulate the posting of information related to minors' apparel, specifying 
details regarding attire, poses, and camera angles. Clear guidelines are set 
against posting content related to juvenile crime and bullying, with explicit 
warnings that prohibit the publication, promotion, and dissemination of such non-
compliant information.
Specialized inspectors are designated for key categories to conduct daily inspections. If 
suspected non-compliant products are discovered, immediate actions such as removal 
and blocking are taken. If typical harmful cases are found, we promptly summarize the 
characteristics of the non-compliant products, adding the harmful sample information to 
the sensitive and blacklist databases to consistently intercept harmful content.
Governance announcements are issued through merchant platforms and systems 
to urge merchants to conduct self-inspections. Specialized training on content 
compliance is provided to enhance reviewers' sensitivity to content.
Reporting windows are set up on product detail pages and in the product 
review center, with dedicated personnel handling user reports. This ensures 
timely responses and the investigation of similar non-compliant information. For 
merchants who violate regulations, penalties such as point deductions are applied.
By analyzing harmful samples and mining public opinion data, we continuously 
enrich our blacklist database, preemptively blocking undesirable content.
RMB2.354billion
Financial losses directly prevented for 
users via intercepted fraud through risk 
control measures and early warnings


64
2023 JD.com, Inc.
Environmental, Social and Governance Report
A Pragmatic Path
Promotes
Good Consumption	
A Pragmatic Attitude
Paves the Way
for a Green Future
A Pragmatic Approach
Leads to Shared
Development Outcomes
A Pragmatic Vision
Consolidates
the Foundation of 
Responsibility
Premium Customer Services
JD.com adheres to the core value of "customer first," consistently optimizing and innovating service management 
models and customer service projects to better meet user needs, laying a solid foundation for an excellent 
consumer experience.
Optimizing Service Management
JD.com has established a well-trained customer 
service team that actively responds to customer 
needs through online communication, service calls, 
and emails. We strive to solve customer issues more 
efficiently, consistently enhancing the problem-
solving capabilities and efficiency of our customer 
service team. By preventing issues proactively 
and implementing a "daily resolution" mechanism, 
we shorten response time to customer requests. 
Additionally, we consistently optimize our customer 
service system to improve service management 
efficiency and reliability, integrating different 
complaint channels to enhance issue follow-up 
efficiency and reduce oversight.
Leveraging strong data and technological capabilities, 
JD.com actively applies AI technology to assist 
human customer service to resolve user issues more 
efficiently. Our intelligent customer service matrix 
includes "Intelligent Emotional Customer Service," 
"Merchant Intelligent Customer Service JD XiaoZhi," "AI 
Shopping Assistant," "Intelligent Scheduling," "Intelligent 
Assistance," and "Intelligent Management," significantly 
enhancing user experience and service efficiency.
Proactive Customer Service for One-Time Resolution
In October 2023, JD.com launched the "Dong Dong Inquiry Proactive Intervention" feature, automating 
guidance for three key scenarios, including common operational inquiries, urging merchants to handle 
progress, and resolving after-sales disputes. This feature provides customers with a one-time solution, 
improving the efficiency of addressing customer requests and enhancing the customer consultation 
experience.
JD.com underscores addressing the root causes of issues, consistently preventing potential customer service risks, 
optimizing platform operations to reduce customer complaints. We identify various merchant violation scenarios 
and establish mechanisms to report problematic products and merchant violations, to promptly intercept risks 
and penalize offending merchants. During promotional campaigns, we anticipate and mitigate potential risks, 
striving to offer consumers the best experience. In 2023, we completed over 1,700 improvements in product 
promotion, problematic product management, and process optimization.
While consistently enhancing service standards, JD.com also takes the lead in uplifting the supply chain and 
services within the industry. We aim to perfect the service system across the entire supply chain, setting an 
example for industry enterprises and fostering a pleasant consumption environment from the service end.


65
2023 JD.com, Inc.
Environmental, Social and Governance Report
A Pragmatic Path
Promotes
Good Consumption	
A Pragmatic Attitude
Paves the Way
for a Green Future
A Pragmatic Approach
Leads to Shared
Development Outcomes
A Pragmatic Vision
Consolidates
the Foundation of 
Responsibility
Better Experiences
More Cost-effective Experiences
JD.com is dedicated to offering highly cost-effective 
products and superior consumption experiences, 
ensuring "low prices every day." As an industry 
leader, JD.com pioneered the "price protection" 
service, continuously expanding product coverage 
and optimizing service experiences to maintain a 
leading position in price protection. By the end of the 
reporting period, this service had saved users nearly 
RMB 8 billion
1, truly saving money for them.
In 2023, JD.com further enriched the selection of low-
cost products, launching promotional channels such 
as "Free Shipping for Orders Over RMB 9.9" and 
"RMB 10 Billion Subsidy." By collaborating closely 
with numerous brands and merchants, JD's "RMB 10 
Billion Subsidy" channel offers substantial subsidies 
on products, providing consumers with a highly cost-
effective shopping experience. Additionally, the "Free 
Shipping for Orders Over RMB 9.9" channel brings a 
wide range of high-quality, affordable products to 
consumers.
Furthermore, JD.com has enhanced free shipping 
service, allowing JD PLUS members to enjoy unlimited 
free shipping for a whole year, regardless of the 
number of purchases, order price, or total amount. 
Starting from August 2023, the minimum purchase 
amount for free shipping for regular users was 
reduced from RMB 99 to RMB 59, allowing more users 
to enjoy the benefits.
Senior-Friendly Services
To assist the seniors in using smart technology for a convenient life, we constantly optimize the "Senior 
Mode" on the JD.com App, by simplifying functions and information presentation. Senior users can 
consult a dedicated customer service team or use the family assistance function to further streamline 
operations. They can also watch JD.com's online video tutorials to bridge the digital divide.
JD.com also ensures supporting services for senior-friendly products, offering full-chain services 
including trade-ins, 180-day returns and exchanges, and all-inclusive services such as delivery, 
installation, disassembly, and cleaning. These measures allow children to confidently purchase 
products or services for their elderly parents even when they are living apart.
"Life Passage" Project
While providing excellent services to customers, JD.com is highly attentive to their mental health. We 
continue to implement the "Life Passage" project, utilizing big data technology to create a warning 
mechanism for psychological health. This mechanism provides real-time alerts and interventions for 
users with suicidal tendencies, and collaborates with the police for timely intervention in emergencies. By 
December 31, 2023, this project had helped 681 users with suicidal tendencies.
Faster Experiences
JD.com aims to deliver a superior shopping experience 
where customers can "buy and receive products 
anytime." In 2023, JD.com launched the "Happiness 
Within Three Kilometers" five-year plan for instant retail. 
This initiative aims to integrate local retail resources, 
such as physical stores and warehouses through digital 
and instant logistics infrastructure. Ultimately, it seeks 
to achieve a seamless instant retail loop where orders 
placed by consumers within a 3-to-5-kilometer range 
are fulfilled by nearby stores and delivered within one 
hour.
JDL Express has also offered three industry-leading 
services: "Compensation if not picked up within one 
hour," "Compensation for entire process delays," and 
"Compensation for non-door delivery," ensuring timely 
and safe delivery of every package. Currently, JDL 
Express has sped up delivery for personal parcels 
to "the next morning delivery" in key regions such as 
Beijing, Shanghai, and Guangdong.
JD Health's Internet Hospital integrates nationwide 
medical resources, including top-tier medical experts, 
and has built a team of full-time doctors. This enables 
24/7 online availability of doctors from all departments, 
with an average response time of 30 seconds, ensuring 
timely responses to customer needs and safeguarding 
their overall well-being.
24/7
in9key regions
within30seconds
Online available doctors from 
all departments
sped up delivery for personal parcels 
to “the next morning delivery”
Average response time
Exceptional Consumer Experience
More Experiences
JD.com remains committed to the principle of "serving the customers first with the best experience," providing 
"diverse, fast, good and economical" services that cover the entire lifecycle, all channels, all scenarios, and all 
time periods, fully catering to consumers' needs for a better life.
JD.com consistently expands the product range, 
serving various brick-and-mortar businesses including 
pharmacies, specialty stores, supermarkets, convenience 
stores, flower shops, and auto repair shops, through 
its supply chain and omni-channel services. JD Retail 
offers over 10 million SKUs of self-operated products 
and has established tens of thousands of offline stores. 
JD.com's local services provide customers with a one-
stop solution for dining, entertainment, and daily needs. 
Moreover, JD.com home appliance stores operate over 
18,000 outlets nationwide, covering 600,000 administrative 
villages.
over18,000
600,000
administrative villages
JD.com home appliance stores nationwide
Covering
JDL Express
1 This data is quoted from a public report dated June 19, 2023.


66
2023 JD.com, Inc.
Environmental, Social and Governance Report
A Pragmatic Path
Promotes
Good Consumption	
A Pragmatic Attitude
Paves the Way
for a Green Future
A Pragmatic Approach
Leads to Shared
Development Outcomes
A Pragmatic Vision
Consolidates
the Foundation of 
Responsibility
Philanthropy and Disaster 
Responses
"Starlight Reading for Kids" Initiative 
Reaches over 100 Primary Schools
JD.com, through JD's online charity fundraising platform 
and JD Foundation, actively carries out public welfare 
activities in health, education, and environmental 
protection. We encourage employees to contribute to 
the community by participating in these activities. In 
addition, we actively participate in disaster emergency 
response, providing emergency assistance and 
material support to affected areas.
As of January 2024, "Starlight Reading for Kids," 
an initiative launched by JD's online charity 
fundraising platform, had donated nearly 70,000 
books to over 100 primary schools, exceeding 
its goal of "donating books to 100 rural primary 
schools within one year," three months ahead of 
schedule. 
Launched on the World Book and Copyright 
Day, April 23, 2023, this initiative successfully 
completed its mission in just over nine months, 
donating books to children in primary schools 
across rural areas such as Tibet, Yunnan, 
Guizhou, Gansu, and Inner Mongolia.
Philanthropy and Charity
"Starlight Reading for Kids" Reaches Jiuneng Primary 
School in Yunnan Province
JD.com not only deeply embeds the concept 
of philanthropy in the core values, but also 
consistently translates it into action. As a new 
type of real economy-based enterprise, we 
leverage our strengths and extensive experience 
in digital operations and responsible supply 
chains to actively engage in various fields such 
as philanthropy, disaster response, and rural 
revitalization. Through these tangible efforts, 
we fulfill our corporate social responsibility and 
promote harmonious social development.
JD Health Hosts Ear Care Day to Protect Senior Hearing
"Starlight Dream Class" 2023 Relaunch: JD Five Star Helps Students Fulfill Academic 
Aspirations
In March 2023, in response to World Hearing Day and National Ear Care Day, JD Health, in collaboration 
with the Audiology Development Foundation of China, held a public welfare event in Beijing. The event 
aimed to raise awareness of senior hearing health and promote ear care knowledge by donating hearing 
aids, providing hearing tests, and offering free expert consultations. These efforts were designed to 
enhance awareness and prevention of hearing impairments among the elderly.
In December 2023, the "Starlight Dream Class" was officially launched through collaboration between the 
Jiangsu Women and Children's Welfare Foundation, JD Five Star, and Nanjing Commercial College. Since 
the project kicked off in 2019, JD Five Star has donated a total of RMB 1 million to the Jiangsu Women and 
Children's Welfare Foundation. This initiative has established 15 "Starlight Dream Classes" in six vocational 
schools across Jiangsu and Anhui provinces, supporting 472 outstanding students from disadvantaged 
families, helping them overcome financial barriers and complete their education. In addition, JD Five 
Star integrates practical courses on e-commerce, omni-channel retail operations, and efficient supply 
chain management into the classroom. The Group also offers paid internship opportunities in store 
operations, information technology, and logistics, helping students gain practical experience and lay a 
solid foundation for their future careers.
JD.com advocates for the spirit of public welfare, encourages employees to participate in public welfare activities, and integrates the concept of philanthropy into corporate 
culture, making it a significant force in fulfilling social responsibility.
Group Photo of Students in "Starlight Dream Class"
Jiangsu Women and Children's Welfare Foundation 
Awards JD Five Star "2023 Outstanding Contributor to 
Women's and Children's Welfare"
nearly70,000
Books donated through the “Starlight Reading 
for Kids” launched by JD’s online charity 
fundraising platform to over 100 primary schools
During the reporting period
27,800hours
RMB122.067million
Volunteering hours of JD employees
Donation by JD Foundation
Giving Back to 
Communities


67
2023 JD.com, Inc.
Environmental, Social and Governance Report
A Pragmatic Path
Promotes
Good Consumption	
A Pragmatic Attitude
Paves the Way
for a Green Future
A Pragmatic Approach
Leads to Shared
Development Outcomes
A Pragmatic Vision
Consolidates
the Foundation of 
Responsibility
Employee Public Welfare Activities
Disaster Response
JD.com Donates Supplies to Support Flood Relief Efforts in Multiple Areas of Beijing, 
Tianjin, and Hebei 
JD.com's Immediate Aid for Earthquake Relief in Jishishan, Gansu
In 2023, JD.com organized several 
employee public welfare activities. In 
August, we launched a book donation 
campaign, with 298 employees 
donating a total of 2,089 books, all 
of which were given to rural primary 
schools and libraries. In October, 
we held an internal "flea market," 
featuring second-hand items and 
books, and JD.com employees actively 
participated in this event. The total 
funds raised, amounting to RMB 
43,861, along with 10 boxes of books, 
were all donated to the "Starlight 
Reading for Kids" initiative.
JD.com has an internal policy stating that whenever a disaster occurs anywhere in China, the managers of the 
nearest JD warehouse are authorized to donate the necessary supplies from their inventory without report. In 
addition, JD.com would promptly establish an emergency support team to ensure dedicated transportation of 
relief supplies to the disaster-affected area.
From the end of July to the beginning of August 2023, due to extreme rainfall triggered by Typhoon Doksuri, the 
Beijing-Tianjin-Hebei region has experienced severe flooding and geological disasters, resulting in significant 
losses. The JD Foundation took prompt action by donating supplies to support flood relief efforts. JD Logistics 
urgently deployed logistics drones to assist in rescue operations. Meanwhile, various business units under 
JD.com actively provided comprehensive support to the affected areas. 7FRESH increased their stock of food 
supplies; JD Health, in collaboration with charitable brands, donated emergency kits and other supplies, and 
offered free online consultation services through internet hospital to users in the disaster-stricken areas.
In December 2023, Jishishan County in Linxia Prefecture, Gansu Province, was hit by a series of earthquakes. 
JD.com immediately established a specialized emergency response team and launched an urgent rescue 
plan. We urgently dispatched large quantities of drinking water, food, and warm clothing from several 
nearby warehouses, and arranged for dedicated personnel and vehicles to swiftly deliver these supplies 
to the disaster-stricken areas. In addition, JD Retail urgently allocated dozens of high-power fuel heaters, 
JD Health coordinated the donation of medicines and medical equipment to meet the urgent needs of the 
people in the disaster-stricken areas, and JD Logistics proactively assisted relevant donation organizations 
in transporting relief supplies, ensuring the rescue efforts were carried out efficiently.
JD.com Group Urgently Deploys Relief Supplies
"Flea Market" Event


68
2023 JD.com, Inc.
Environmental, Social and Governance Report
A Pragmatic Path
Promotes
Good Consumption	
A Pragmatic Attitude
Paves the Way
for a Green Future
A Pragmatic Approach
Leads to Shared
Development Outcomes
A Pragmatic Vision
Consolidates
the Foundation of 
Responsibility
Rural Revitalization and Common Prosperity
Leveraging its unique advantages in the digitalized social supply chain, JD.com promotes the standardization of 
agricultural production, product branding, and industry digitalization through practical support. This approach 
provides comprehensive services for agricultural modernization, driving rural industrial revitalization while 
achieving its own sustainable development.
To celebrate the "Chinese Farmers' Harvest Festival," 
JD.com hosted the 2
nd "Agricultural Specialties Shopping 
Festival" in September 2023. The event introduced various 
initiatives to support farmers, including the "RMB 10 
Billion Subsidy" with priority given to agricultural products, 
direct shipment of fresh produce from the source, 
comprehensive quality control for agricultural products, 
and a compensation guarantee for spoiled goods. JD.com 
invested a total of RMB 1 billion in cash subsidies and traffic 
resources, supporting the high-quality development of over 
2,000 agricultural specialty industries.
JD.com uses its strengths across all parts of their business to help turn products 
from grasslands into finished goods. To establish a fast channel for Inner 
Mongolia's agricultural and livestock products, we utilize origin warehousing 
and distribution, cold chain logistics, and Customer-to-Manufacturer (C2M) new 
product development. These measures reduce logistics costs while ensuring that 
beef and lamb from Inner Mongolia are delivered nationwide within 48 hours. We 
are also accelerating the development of 15 landmark brands, including Sunnite 
Lamb, to enhance the value of these agricultural product brands. In addition, we 
have launched the first pure camel milk powder in the market to increase the 
added value of camel milk products.
In August 2023, JDL Express optimized services for peach 
production areas nationwide by providing customized 
logistics support solutions. By stationing couriers in orchards, 
establishing sorting centers at production sites, and 
optimizing transport routes, JDL Express effectively reduced 
product loss during transportation and shortened the 
delivery time for consumers to as little as half a day. By the 
end of the reporting period, these logistics support solutions 
had been implemented in the production areas of Yanling 
Yellow Peaches in Hunan Province and Pinggu Peaches in 
Beijing. In addition, JDL Express set up 18 specialized courier 
teams in Yangshan Town in Jiangsu Province, with 300 places 
of receipt and nearly 1,000 couriers stationed in various 
villages, achieving a "one specialized courier team in each 
village" model to help villagers ship peaches locally.
JD.com Hosts "Agricultural Specialties Shopping Festival" for Two Consecutive Years
Deepening Cross-Sector Collaboration and Innovating Rural Revitalization Models
Empowering the Whole Industry Chain, and Building 
"New Infrastructure" for Grassland Supply Chain
Optimized Origin Services and Customized Logistics Support Solutions
Launching Ceremony of the 2023 JD.com 
Agricultural Specialties Shopping Festival
JD Couriers Stationed in Orchards to Implement 
Customized Logistics Support Solutions
JD.com Supports Inner 
Mongolia's Development 
by Launching the First 
Camel Milk Powder
In March 2023, JD.com and Yili jointly developed and launched 
the "Ambrosial Xiuwen Kiwi Yogurt" in JD Supermarket. 
Leveraging JD.com's strong supply chain capabilities, the 
product highlights the unique qualities of the Xiuwen kiwi, 
a local agricultural product. This new project is a big step 
forward in JD.com and Yili's long-standing partnership to 
help improve rural areas. It is also an important attempt for 
both parties to further leverage their respective strengths 
and achieve resource sharing, injecting new vitality into the 
development of the rural economy.
JD.com and Yili Jointly Launch "Ambrosial 
Xiuwen Kiwi Yogurt," Exploring New Models of 
Rural Revitalization


69
2023 JD.com, Inc.
Environmental, Social and Governance Report
About This 
Report
Message from Chairman 
of Board of Directors
Board 
Statement
About 
JD.com
Appendix
Annual Honors 
and Awards
Annual Key 
Performance
Appendix 1 Important Legal Statement 
Appendix 2 ESG Key Performance Tables
The information covered by the report contains forward-
looking statements within the meaning of the U.S. 
Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995, including 
statements regarding our goals, targets, commitments, 
strategies and initiatives related to ESG matters. 
These forward-looking statements can be identified 
by terminology such as "will," "expects," "anticipates," 
"future," "intends," "plans," "believes," "estimates," 
"confident" and similar statements. Forward-looking 
statements involve inherent risks and uncertainties. A 
number of factors could cause actual results to differ 
materially from those contained in any forward-looking 
statement, including those risks included in our filings 
with the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission 
and the announcements on the website of the Stock 
Exchange of Hong Kong Limited. The forward-looking 
statements made in this report relate only to events 
or information as of the date on which the statements 
are made in this report and are based on current 
expectations, assumptions, estimates and projections. 
We undertake no obligation to update any forward-
looking statements to reflect events or circumstances 
after the date on which the statements are made or to 
reflect the occurrence of unanticipated events, except 
as required under applicable law.
The report does not cover all information about our 
business. References in this report to information should 
not be construed as a characterization regarding 
the materiality of such information to our financial 
results or for purposes of the U.S. securities laws. For 
more comprehensive information about our results 
and operations, including risks that could adversely 
affect our results of operations and financial condition, 
please refer to our annual reports and other filings 
with the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission and 
announcements on the website of the Hong Kong Stock 
Exchange.
Data in this report reflects estimates using methodologies 
and assumptions believed to be reasonable and accurate. 
Those estimates, methodologies and assumptions may 
change in the future as a result of new information or 
subsequent developments.
Environmental 
Indicators
Unit
2022
1
2023
2
Greenhouse 
gas (GHG) 
emissions
Total emissions (Scope 1+ 
Scope 2)
tCO2e
2,508,613.00
2,908,508.00
GHG emissions (Scope 1)
tCO2e
1,488,360.00
1,815,861.75
GHG emissions (Scope 2)
tCO2e
1,020,253.00
1,092,646.25
GHG emissions (Scope 3)
3
tCO2e
3,249.65
6,680,172.71
GHG emission density (Scope 1 
+ Scope 2)
tCO2e/RMB million
2.40
2.68
Wastewater
Wastewater discharge
4
tonnes
4,625,741.99
9,642,571.66 
Wastewater discharge 
intensity
tonnes/RMB million
4.42
8.89
Exhaust gas
Exhaust gas emissions
5
kilograms
10,191,069.64
12,056,583.68
Exhaust gas emission intensity
kilograms/RMB million
9.74
11.12
1 
In 2022, JD.com accounted for its GHG emissions, referring to the 2006 IPCC Guidelines for National Greenhouse Gas 
Inventory and the Greenhouse Gas Protocol: A Corporate Accounting and Reporting Standard. After the release of 
JD.com's 2022 ESG Report, to calculate environmental-related data such as GHG emissions more accurately, we 
engaged a third-party organization to reassess our 2022 environmental data, which have been restated in this report.
2 
The GHG emission data for JD.com in 2023 has been verified by a third-party organization. Please see Appendix 5 GHGs 
Verification Statement for details.
3 
JD.com's GHG (Scope 3) emissions were primarily from employee commuting in 2022 and broadened to incorporate additional 
elements in 2023, including emissions from purchased goods and services (packaging materials only), fuel and energy-related 
activities, upstream transportation and distribution, waste generated during operations, as well as employee commuting.
4 
The enlarged scope of wastewater statistics was applied to the premises in 2023.
5 
The key air pollutants produced by JD.com are nitrogen oxides ("NOX"), sulfur oxides ("SOX"), and respiratory suspended 
particles ("RSP," also known as Particulate Matter ("PM")), predominantly generated from motor vehicles. The calculation 
formulas, and emission factors for these pollutants are referenced from the Reporting Guidance on Environmental KPIs 
set forth by the Hong Kong Stock Exchange (HKEX) and the Guidelines on the GHG Emission Accounting and Reporting 
for Land Transport Enterprises (Trial) released by the National Development and Reform Commission (NDRC).
Appendix


70
2023 JD.com, Inc.
Environmental, Social and Governance Report
About This 
Report
Message from Chairman 
of Board of Directors
Board 
Statement
About 
JD.com
Appendix
Annual Honors 
and Awards
Annual Key 
Performance
Environmental
Indicators
Unit
2022
2023
Waste
Total waste
tonnes
122,532.51
109,777.06
Total waste density
tonnes/RMB million
0.12
0.10
Hazardous waste
1
tonnes
16.35
24.48
Hazardous waste intensity
kilogram/RMB million
0.016
0.023
Non-hazardous waste
tonnes
122,516.16
109,752.58
Non-hazardous waste 
intensity
tonnes/RMB million
0.12
0.10
Waste recycled/reused
tonnes
/
24,956.59
Waste landfilled
tonnes
/
5,808.32
Waste incinerated
tonnes
/
78,990.16
Waste otherwise disposed
tonnes
/
21.91
Recycling 
of waste 
electrical 
appliances
Total appliances
million units
5.9491
15.4308
Household appliances
million units
5.6150
12.4949
Cell phones, computers, 
digital products, etc.
million units
0.3341
2.9359
Energy use
Comprehensive energy 
consumption
tce
907,333.23
1,077,951.14
Comprehensive energy 
consumption intensity
tce/RMB million
0.87
0.99
Renewable energy 
consumption
MWh
31,247.92
42,501.10
Non-renewable energy 
consumption
MWh
7,382,970.53
8,771,288.40
Environmental
Indicators
Unit
2022
2023
Energy use
Direct energy consumption
MWh
5,578,482.88
6,810,117.32
Indirect energy consumption
MWh
1,804,487.65
1,961,171.08
Purchased electricity
MWh
1,620,927.93
1,813,075.25
Purchased heat
GJ
660,938.38
533,176.67
Gasoline
tonnes
44,422.64
72,159.79
Diesel
tonnes
423,144.84
481,999.11
Kerosene
tonnes
1,106.30
15,866.80
Natural gas
cubic meters
1,514,545.48
3,826,300.42
Water Use
2
Consumption of reclaimed 
water
tonnes
31,921.34
111,719.04
Consumption of fresh water
tonnes
7,280,056.58
12,053,214.58
Water consumption density
tonnes/RMB million
7.00
11.22
Use of 
packaging 
materials
Plastic
tonnes
114,241.75
114,669.03
Paper
tonnes
125,110.74
285,461.92
Other categories
tonnes
157.50
117,012.69
Total used package material
tonnes
239,509.99
517,143.64
Used package material 
density
tonnes/RMB million
0.23
0.48
Recycling 
of plastic  
packaging 
materials
Total amount of recyclable 
plastic packaging
tonnes
6,404.55
80,001.02
Total amount of recycled 
content within plastic 
packaging
tonnes
1,151.28
15,000.00
Total compostable plastic 
packaging
tonnes
5,253.27
8,067.89
1 
The increase in hazardous waste mainly came from the new offline hospitals and physical examination centres of JD 
Health in 2023.
2 
In the 2023 reporting year, water consumption of JD Logistics‘ operational premises was included.


71
2023 JD.com, Inc.
Environmental, Social and Governance Report
About This 
Report
Message from Chairman 
of Board of Directors
Board 
Statement
About 
JD.com
Appendix
Annual Honors 
and Awards
Annual Key 
Performance
Social
Indicators
Unit
2022
2023
Number of employees
1
Person
445,268
515,022
Number of new employees
Person
153,843
252,203
Number of internal candidates filling vacant positions
Person
139,482
195,333
Number of employees with disabilities
Person
3,058
4,067
Number of minority employees
Person
26,920
32,888
Number of employees 
by employment type
Full-time
Person
445,268
515,022
Part-time
Person
7,566
7,539
Number of employees 
by gender
Male
Person
347,021
407,046
Female
Person
98,247
107,976
Number of employees 
by age
Under 31 years old
Person
185,871
202,239
31-50 years old
Person
255,551
307,879
Above 51 years old
Person
3,846
4,904
Number of employees 
by region
Chinese mainland
Person
444,953
514,380
Other regions
Person
315
642
Number of employees 
by function type
Management
Person
28,352
34,350
Employees
Person
416,916
480,672
Share of women in total workforce
%
22.1
21.0
Share of women in all management positions
%
15.2
15.8
Share of women in junior management positions
%
13.5
14.8
Share of women in senior management positions
%
22.0
25.1
Share of women in management positions in revenue-
generating functions
%
16.5
14.8
Share of women in STEM
2-related positions
%
11.3
17.1
Employee turnover rate
3
%
17.6
15.4
1 
The total number of employees and other employee statistical data on the dimensions of gender, age, and function only 
cover full-time employees of businesses directly managed by JD.com. 
2 
STEM stands for Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics. STEM positions include computer programmers, 
web developers, statisticians, engineers, physicists, scientists, etc.
3 
The data related to employee turnover rate is based on the statistical scope of voluntary resignation.
Social
Indicators
Unit
2022
2023
Employee turnover 
rate by gender
Male
%
17.3
15.4
Female
%
18.6
15.2
Employee turnover 
rate by region
Chinese mainland 
%
17.6
15.4
Other regions
%
16.3
10.6
Employee turnover 
rate by age
Under 31 years old
%
23.4
19.3
31-50 years old
%
12.7
12.3
Above 51 years old
%
5.5
5.9
Total investment 
in training and 
development
Percentage of employees covered by 
talent development training
%
100
100
Amount invested in talent 
development training per employee
RMB
90.2
118.1
Average training 
hours per employee 
by employee category
Management
Hour
35.3
56.8 
Employees
Hour
41.9
39.6 
Average training 
hours per employee 
by gender
Male
Hour
39.9
38.1 
Female
Hour
47.1
50.8 
Average training 
hours per employee 
by function type
Senior management
Hour
30.7
41.5 
Middle management
Hour
42.9
42.7 
Junior management
Hour
35.0
44.0 
Technical employees
Hour
78.8
47.6 
Production employees
Hour
35.8
37.2 
Other employees
Hour
57.9
67.4 
Percentage of 
trained employees by 
employee category
4
Management
%
100
100
Employees
%
100
100
Percentage of trained 
employees by gender
Male
%
100
100
Female
%
100
100
4 
In 2022, the percentage of trained employees by category was equal to "The number of trained employees in a specific 
category / total number of trained employees * 100%." However, in the 2023 Report, the calculation formula was 
standardized to "The number of trained employees in a specific category / total number of employees of this category * 
100%."


72
2023 JD.com, Inc.
Environmental, Social and Governance Report
About This 
Report
Message from Chairman 
of Board of Directors
Board 
Statement
About 
JD.com
Appendix
Annual Honors 
and Awards
Annual Key 
Performance
Social
Indicators
Unit
2022
2023
Percentage of trained 
employees by function 
type
Senior management
%
100
100
Middle management
%
100
100
Junior management
%
100
100
Technical employees
%
100
100
Production employees
%
100
100
Other employees
%
100
100
Employee satisfaction 
survey
Employee satisfaction rate
/
4.51/5
4.53/5
Effective questionnaire response rate
1
%
78
84
Number of respondants
/
720,000 
1,100,000
Average employment cost
RMB
599
714
Total human resources expenditure
RMB billion
/
104.7 
Freedom of association
Percentage of employees covered by 
collective contract
%
100
100
Number of work-related fatalities
Person
35
33
Number of lost days due to work injury
Day
57,434
59,561
Lost Time Injury 
Frequency Rate 
(LTIFR) - Employees
(LTIFR) - Employees
Number of 
incidents/
million 
working 
hours
1.58
1.77
Percentage of employees 
participating in the survey
%
100
100
1 
JD.com's employee satisfaction survey encompasses all staff members, and the data represents the effective response 
rate of the satisfaction survey questionnaire.
Social
Indicators
Unit
2022
2023
Number of suppliers
Total number of suppliers
Unit
4,563
4,594
Number of suppliers by region: Chinese 
mainland
Unit
4,511
4,548
Number of suppliers by region: China's 
Hong Kong, Macao and Taiwan
Unit
12
14
Number of suppliers by region: Overseas
Unit
40
32
Incidents of 
corruption
Number and brief description of 
corruption related cases
Case
248
190
Number of cases concluded
Case
21
6
Business ethics 
and anti-corruption 
training hours per 
employee at all levels
Directors
%
100
100
Management
%
100
100
Employees
%
100
100
Supplier Training
Suppliers' anti-corruption training 
coverage 
%
60
26
Total number of suppliers that 
attended anti-corruption training
2
Unit
2,753
1,173
Number of sessions of supplier  
anti-corruption training conducted
Session
3
3
Times of information security or cyber security breaches
Time
0
0
Product recall of 
private-label brands
Times of product recalls
Time
0
0
Total number of recalled products
Unit
0
0
Percentage of total products sold or 
shipped that are subject to recall for 
safety and health reasons
%
0
0
Costs from product recalls
RMB
0
0
Total charity donation
RMB million
93.48
122.067
Total hours of employee public welfare participation
Hour
21,800
27,800
2 
In 2023, the Group only sent invitations to suppliers involving high-risk categories and significant suppliers in 
consideration of frequency and intensity of anti-corruption training. 


73
2023 JD.com, Inc.
Environmental, Social and Governance Report
About This 
Report
Message from Chairman 
of Board of Directors
Board 
Statement
About 
JD.com
Appendix
Annual Honors 
and Awards
Annual Key 
Performance
Appendix 3 Progress on the United Nations Global Compact
The United Nations Global Compact is an initiative advocated by the United Nations to promote 
enterprises' operation and strategy to meet ten fundamental principles of human rights, labor, 
environment and anti-corruption. JD.com became a participating company to the United Nations 
Global Compact in September 2021. We recognize and support the ten principles by taking 
strategic actions to achieve more sustainable development goals.
On October 7, 2023, Sanda Ojiambo, Assistant Secretary General of the United Nations and 
Executive Director of the United Nations Global Compact, met with Sandy Ran Xu, CEO of JD.com, 
which marked the first enterprise visit of her China tour. During the same period, JD.com announced 
it has joined the UN Global Compact's "Forward Faster" initiative, underscoring the Group's 
commitment to the "gender equality" goal, contributing "JD strength" to achieving SDGs. 
Sanda Ojiambo (right), Executive Director of the United Nations Global Compact and Sandy Ran Xu, CEO of JD.com
Progress Updates on the United Nations Global Compact
Category
Principle
Corresponding Chapter
Human 
rights
Principle 1: Businesses should support and respect the protection 
of internationally proclaimed human rights
Human Orientation
Principle 2: Make sure that they are not complicit in human rights 
abuse
Labor 
standards
Principle 3: Businesses should uphold the freedom of association 
and the effective recognition of the right to collective bargaining
Human Orientation
Principle 4: The elimination of all forms of forced and compulsory 
labor
Principle 5: The effective abolition of child labor
Principle 6: The elimination of discrimination in respect of 
employment and occupation
Environment
Principle 7: Businesses should support a precautionary approach 
to environmental challenges
Environmental 
Governance and Climate 
Change Responses
Principle 8: Undertake initiatives to promote greater environmental 
responsibility
Green Workplace
Green Retail
Green Logistics
Green Park
Principle 9: Encourage the development and diffusion of environmentally 
friendly technologies
Green Workplace
Green Retail
Green Logistics
Green Park
Anti-
corruption
Principle 10: Businesses should work against corruption in all its 
forms, including extortion and bribe
Business Responsibility


74
2023 JD.com, Inc.
Environmental, Social and Governance Report
About This 
Report
Message from Chairman 
of Board of Directors
Board 
Statement
About 
JD.com
Appendix
Annual Honors 
and Awards
Annual Key 
Performance
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
SGS - CSTC’S REPORT ON SUSTAINABILITY ACTIVITIES IN THE JD.COM’S 
ESG REPORT FOR 2023 
 
NATURE OF THE ASSURANCE/VERIFICATION 
SGS-CSTC STANDARDS TECHNICAL SERVICES CO., LTD. (hereinafter referred to as SGS) was 
commissioned by JD.com to conduct an independent assurance of the Chinese version of JD.com’s ESG 
Report for 2023 (hereinafter referred to as the Report). 
 
INTENDED USERS OF THIS ASSURANCE STATEMENT 
This Assurance Statement is provided with the intention of informing all JD.com’s Stakeholders.  
 
RESPONSIBILITIES 
The information in the Report and its presentation are the responsibility of governing board and related 
functions of JD.com. SGS has not been involved in the preparation of any of the material included in the Report. 
 
Our responsibility is to express an opinion on the text, data, graphs and statements, including the environmental 
and social key performance in the appendix performance table, within the scope of verification with the intention 
to inform all JD.com’ stakeholders. 
 
ASSURANCE STANDARDS, TYPE AND LEVEL OF ASSURANCE 
The SGS ESG & Sustainability Report Assurance protocols used to conduct assurance are based upon 
internationally recognized assurance guidance and standards, which including: 
• 
The principles of reporting process contained within the Global Reporting Initiative Sustainability 
Reporting Standards (GRI Standards) as: 
o 
GRI 1: Foundation 2021, for report quality 
o 
GRI 2: General Disclosure 2021, for organization’s reporting practices and other organizational detail 
o 
GRI 3: Material Topics 2021, for organization’s process of determining material topics, its list of 
material topics and how to manage each topic 
• 
and the guidance on levels of assurance contained within the AA1000 series of standards and 
ISAE3000. 
 
The assurance of this report has been conducted according to the following Assurance Standards: 
• 
SGS ESG & SRA Assurance Protocols (based on GRI Principles and guidance in AA1000)  
 
Assurance has been conducted at a moderate level of scrutiny. 
 
SCOPE OF ASSURANCE AND REPORTING CRITERIA 
The scope of the assurance included evaluation of quality, accuracy and reliability of specified performance 
information as detailed below and evaluation of adherence to the following reporting criteria: 
• 
HKEX Environmental, Social and Governance Reporting Guide. 
 
ASSURANCE METHODOLOGY 
The assurance comprised a combination of pre-assurance research, interviews with relevant employees onsite 
at JD.com’ headquarters located at No. 18 Kechuang 11 Street, Beijing Economic-Technological Development 
Area, Beijing City, P. R. China. Documentation and record review where necessary. 
 
LIMITATIONS AND MITIGATION 
Financial data drawn directly from independently audited financial accounts has not been checked back to source 
as part of this assurance process. 
Carbon emission data drawn directly from independently audited inventory report has not been checked back to 
source as part of this assurance process. 
Data tracing on headquarters level, not including original data of all subsidiaries. 
The assurance process only involved interviews with the heads of relevant departments and certain employees 
of headquarters and consultation with relevant documents. No external stakeholder involved. 
 
ASSURANCE STATEMENT 
 
STATEMENT OF INDEPENDENCE AND COMPETENCE 
The SGS Group of companies is the world leader in inspection, testing and certification, operating in more than 
140 countries and providing services including management systems and service certification; quality, 
environmental, social and ethical auditing and training; environmental, social and ESG report assurance. SGS 
affirm our independence from JD.com, being free from bias and conflicts of interest with the organisation, its 
subsidiaries and stakeholders. 
 
The assurance team was assembled based on their knowledge, experience and qualifications for this 
assignment.  
 
FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS 
 
ASSURANCE/VERIFICATION OPINION 
On the basis of the methodology described and the verification work performed, the information and data 
contained within the Report verified is accurate, reliable, and provides a fair and balanced representation of 
JD.com’s sustainability activities in 2023. 
 
The assurance team is of the opinion that the Report has prepared with reference to the KPIs disclosures of the 
HKEX listing rules appendix C2 ‘Environmental, Social and Governance Reporting Guide’. 
 
Reporting Rules 
 
Materiality 
JD.com conduct materiality research and adjust the indicators regularly, the environmental, social and 
governance significant issues was reported to stakeholders, which could meet the materiality principle 
requirement.  
 
Quantitative  
JD.com conducted the statistics and analysis for KPIs, and reported the disclosures’ impacts and purposes. In 
the Report some datas were compared with historiacal years, which could better help stakeholders to evaluate 
the effectiveness of management systems and make decisions. 
  
Balance 
JD.com presented the balance reporting rule in the Report and reported the environmental, social and 
governance issues truthfully. 
 
Consistency 
JD.com disclosed the methodologies with consistency for report content and data statistics in the company, in 
addition, remarks and interpretations were marked in the Report to assist stakeholders make a relatively clear 
comparison.  
 
Findings and recommendations 
Good practices and recommendations for ESG report and management process were described in the internal 
management report which has been submitted to the management of JD.com for continuous improvement. 
 
 
Signed: 
 
For and on behalf of SGS-CSTC 
 
David Xin 
Sr. Director – Business Assurance 
16/F Century Yuhui Mansion, No. 73, Fucheng Road, Beijing, P.R. China 
 
June 25th 2024 
WWW.SGS.COM 
Appendix 4 Third Party Assurance Statement


75
2023 JD.com, Inc.
Environmental, Social and Governance Report
About This 
Report
Message from Chairman 
of Board of Directors
Board 
Statement
About 
JD.com
Appendix
Annual Honors 
and Awards
Annual Key 
Performance
Appendix 5 GHGs Verification Statement


76
2023 JD.com, Inc.
Environmental, Social and Governance Report
About This 
Report
Message from Chairman 
of Board of Directors
Board 
Statement
About 
JD.com
Appendix
Annual Honors 
and Awards
Annual Key 
Performance
Appendix 6 ESG Policy List
The following list outlines the laws and regulations that have a significant impact on the Group in relation to the issues 
disclosed in this report, as well as the Group's internal management policies and systems concerning these issues.
Titles
Laws and Regulations
Internal Policies
A Pragmatic 
Vision 
Consolidates 
the 
Foundation of 
Responsibility
Corpoeate 
Management
Corporate 
Governance
Company Law of the People's Republic of China
Securities Law of the People's Republic of China
List Rules of the Hong Kong Stock Exchange 
(HKEX)
Corporate Governance Code of the Hong Kong 
Stock Exchange (HKEX)
Corporate Governance Code of the Nasdaq 
Stock Market
Independence Standards for Independent 
Directors
JD.com's Policy on Board Diversity
Constitution of the Nomination and 
Corporate Governance Committee
Risk 
Governance
E-Commerce Law of the People's Republic of 
China
Advertisement Law of the People's Republic of 
China
Food Safety Law of the People's Republic of 
China
Law of the People's Republic of China on the 
Protection of Consumer Rights and Interests
Anti-Monopoly Law of the People's Republic of 
China
Anti-unfair Competition Law in People's 
Republic of China
Cybersecurity Law of the People's Republic of 
China
Data Security Law of the People's Republic of 
China
Personal Information Protection Law of the 
People's Republic of China
Law of the People's Republic of China on Work 
Safety
Regulations of JD Group on Legal Risk 
Grading Management
Contract Management System of JD 
Group
Trade Secret Management Measures of 
JD Group
Rules for Managing the Official Seal of JD 
Group
Measures for the Administration of 
Qualification Certification of JD Group
JD Group Anti-Corruption Regulations
JD Logistics Safety Production 
Management System
ESG 
Governance 
ESG Reporting Guide from the Nasdaq Stock 
Market
ESG Reporting Guide from the Hong Kong 
Stock Exchange (HKEX)
Constitution of the ESG Committee
Titles
Laws and Regulations
Internal Policies
A Pragmatic 
Vision 
Consolidates 
the 
Foundation of 
Responsibility
Corpoeate 
Management
Compliance 
Govenance
E-Commerce Law of the People's Republic of 
China
Advertisement Law of the People's Republic of 
China
Food Safety Law of the People's Republic of 
China
Law of the People's Republic of China on the 
Protection of Consumer Rights and Interests
Anti-Monopoly Law of the People's Republic of 
China
Anti-unfair Competition Law in People's Republic 
of China
Cybersecurity Law of the People's Republic of 
China
Data Security Law of the People's Republic of 
China
Personal Information Protection Law of the 
People's Republic of China
Law of the People's Republic of China on Work 
Safety
Regulations of JD Group on Legal Risk 
Grading Management
Data and Privacy Security Management 
Regulation of JD Group
JD Group Anti-Corruption Regulations
JD Logistics Safety Production 
Management System
Business 
Responsibility
Business 
Ethics
Company Law of the People's Republic of China
Corporate Governance Code of the Hong Kong 
Stock Exchange (HKEX)
Corporate Governance Code of the Nasdaq 
Stock Market
JD Group Anti-Corruption Policy
JD Group Anti-Corruption Regulations
JD Group's Commitment to Anti-Corruption
Code of Business Conduct and Ethics
JD Group Integrity Reward Policy
Anti-Commercial-Bribery Agreement
JD Health Banquet Management System
JD Group Whistle-blower Protection and 
Reward System
Information 
Security 
and Privacy 
Protection
Cybersecurity Law of the People's Republic of 
China
Data Security Law of the People's Republic of 
China
Personal Information Protection Law of the 
People's Republic of China
Provisions on Ecological Governance of 
Network Information Content
JD Group Privacy Policy and Compliance 
Requirements
Application Development Security Lifecycle 
Management Regulation of JD.com
Data and Privacy Security Management 
Regulation of JD Group
Network Security Management Regulation 
of JD.com
Data Classification and Grading Guide of 
JD Group
Information Security Incident Grading 
Management Requirements of JD Group
Security Monitoring and Response 
Regulations of JD Group
JD Group Privacy Policy for Basic Functions


77
2023 JD.com, Inc.
Environmental, Social and Governance Report
About This 
Report
Message from Chairman 
of Board of Directors
Board 
Statement
About 
JD.com
Appendix
Annual Honors 
and Awards
Annual Key 
Performance
Titles
Laws and Regulations
Internal Policies
A Pragmatic 
Vision 
Consolidates 
the 
Foundation of 
Responsibility
Business 
Responsibility
Technological 
Innovation
Scientific and Technological Progress Law of 
the People's Republic of China
Interim Measures for the Administration of 
Generative Artificial Intelligence Services
Provisions on the Administration of Algorithm-
generated Recommendations for Internet 
Information Services
Algorithm Safety Management System of 
JD Group
Patent Management Measures of JD 
Group
Interllectual 
Property 
Rights 
Protection
Patent Law of the People's Republic of China
Trademark Law of the People's Republic of 
China
Copyright Law of the People's Republic of 
China
Patent Management Measures of JD Group
Trademark Management Measures of JD 
Group
Copyright Management Measures of JD 
Group
Domain Name Management Measures of 
JD Group
Trade Secret Management Measures (Trial) 
of JD Group
Handbook of Patent Work
Guidelines on Work Norms of Patent 
Agencies
A Pragmatic 
Attitude Paves 
the Way for a 
Green Future
Environmental 
Governance 
and Climate 
Change 
Responses
Strategy
Annual Report on Actions to Address Climate 
Change (2022)
Opinions of the Central Committee of the CPC 
and the State Council on Working Guidance 
for Carbon Peaking and Carbon Neutrality in 
Full and Faithful Implementation of the New 
Development Philosophy
Notice by the State Council of the Action Plan 
for Carbon Dioxide Peaking before 2030
National Strategy for Climate Change 
Adaptation 2035
The 14th Five-year Plan for Renewable Energy 
Development
Environmental Infrastructure Construction Level 
Improvement Action (2023-2025)
Measures for the Administration of Voluntary 
Greenhouse Gas Emission Reduction 
Transactions
Implementation Plan for Promoting Green 
Consumption
The 14th Five Year Plan for Green Transportation 
Development
The 14th Five Year Plan for the Development of 
Cold Chain Logistics
Notice on Further Strengthening the Control of 
Excessive Packaging of Goods
JD Group Environmental Management 
Policy
Titles
Laws and Regulations
Internal Policies
A Pragmatic 
Attitude Paves 
the Way for a 
Green Future
Environmental 
Governance 
and Climate 
Change 
Responses
Strategy
Action Plan for Plastic Pollution Control During 
The 14th Five Year Plan
Action Plan for Further Promoting the Green 
Transformation of Express Packaging
Implementation Plan for National Green 
Development Special Action in High Tech Zone
Implementation Opinions on Promoting High-
quality Development of Photovoltaic Power 
Generation
Guidelines for Green Finance in Banking and 
Insurance
JD Group Environmental Management 
Policy
Green 
Workplace
Environmental Protection Law of the People's 
Republic of China
Pollution Prevention and Control Law of the 
People's Republic of China
Water Pollution Prevention and Control Law of 
the People's Republic of China
Solid Waste Pollution Environmental Prevention 
and Control Law of the People's Republic of 
China
Energy Conservation Law of the People's 
Republic of China
Water Law of the People's Republic of China
JD Group Environmental Management 
Policy
JD Group Vehicle Management Regulations
JD Group Shuttle Bus Riding Management 
Regulations
JD Group Business Vehicle Driver 
Management Regulations
Regulations on Transportation 
Reimbursement Management of JD.com 
JD Group Management Regulations on 
Baby-care Facilities
Green Park
Biodiversity 
and Forest 
Conservation
Environmental Protection Law of the People's 
Republic of China
Land Management Law of the People's Republic 
of China
Forest Law of the People's Republic of China
JD Group Environmental Management 
Policy
Regulations on the Management of 
Prohibited Commodities and Information 
on the JD's Open Platform
Green Retail
Biodiversity 
Conservation
Wildlife Protection Law of the People's Republic 
of China
Implementation Regulations of the People's 
Republic of China on the Protection of 
Terrestrial Wildlife
Fisheries Law of the People's Republic of China
JD Group Environmental Management 
Policy
Green 
Logistics
Green  
Packaging
Environmental Protection Law of the People's 
Republic of China
Law of the People's Republic of China on the 
Prevention and Control of Environment Pollution 
Caused by Solid Wastes
Returnable Container Management 
Regulations 2.0
Used Carton Recycling Management 
System


78
2023 JD.com, Inc.
Environmental, Social and Governance Report
About This 
Report
Message from Chairman 
of Board of Directors
Board 
Statement
About 
JD.com
Appendix
Annual Honors 
and Awards
Annual Key 
Performance
Titles
Laws and Regulations
Internal Policies
A Pragmatic 
Approach 
Leads to 
Shared 
Development 
Outcomes
Human 
Orientation
Diversity, 
Equity and 
Inclusion
Universal Declaration of Human Rights
International Labor Organization Conventions
Labor Law of the People's Republic of China
Labor Contract Law of the People's Republic of 
China
JD Group Management System for 
Preventing Sexual Harassment in the 
Workplace
JD Group Employee Handbook
Employee 
Training and 
Development
Labor Law of the People's Republic of China
JD Group's Management System for 
Employee Continuing Education
JD Group's Employee Promotion Plan
Employee 
Rights and 
Care
Universal Declaration of Human Rights
International Labor Organization Conventions
Labor Law of the People's Republic of China
Labor Contract Law of the People's Republic of 
China
Constitution of the All-China Federation of 
Trade Unions
Trade Union Law of the People's Republic of 
China
JD.com's Human Rights Policy
JD Group Background Investigation 
System
JD Group Employee Handbook
Collective Contract of JD Group
Collective Contract of JD Logistics
Occupational 
Health and 
Safety
Law of the People's Republic of China on 
Prevention and Control of Occupational 
Diseases
Law of the People's Republic of China on Work 
Safety
JD Group Occupational Health and Safety 
Management Policy
A Sustainable 
Supply Chain
Responsible 
Procurement
Labor Law of the People's Republic of China
Green Procurement Management
Bidding and Procurement Business 
Management Rules
Supplier 
Management
Environmental Protection Law of the People's 
Republic of China
Labor Contract Law of the People's Republic of 
China
Food Safety Law of the People's Republic of 
China
Law of the People's Republic of China on Work 
Safety
Product Quality Law of the People's Republic of 
China
Tripartite Performance Appraisal 
Procedure
Supplier Quality Exceptional Handling 
Procedure
Supplier Agreement Honoring Feedback 
and Handling Process
JD Group Supplier Code of Conduct
JD Group Operation Event Assurance 
Mechanism of Bidding, Procurement and 
Expense Management Department
Titles
Laws and Regulations
Internal Policies
A Pragmatic 
Path Promotes 
Good 
Consumption
Serving 
Customers
Product 
Quality 
Assurance
Product Quality Law of the People's Republic of 
China
Food Safety Law of the People's Republic of 
China
JD Group Marketplace Investment 
Qualification Standards
Qualification Management Rules for JD 
Group Retail Business Suppliers
General Principles of JD Group 
Marketplace Product Quality Inspection 
Sampling
General Principles of JD Group Retail 
Business Supplier Product Quality 
Inspection Sampling
JD Group Marketplace Merchant Violation 
Credit Management Rules
JD Group Supplier Violation Management 
Rules
JD Retail Counterfeit Accountability Rules
Product Recall Control Procedure
JD Industrials Recall and Withdrawal 
Management Procedure
JD Group Marketplace Product Shelf-Life 
Rules
Food Safety Handbook
Responsible 
Marketing
Advertisement Law of the People's Republic of 
China
Law of the People's Republic of China on the 
Protection of Minors
Regulation on the Protection of Minors in 
Cyberspace
Measures for the Administration of Internet 
Advertising
D Group Brand Management Regulations
JD Group Marketplace Product Labeling 
Sampling Rules
JD Group Retail Business Supplier Product 
Labeling Sampling Rules
JD Group Advertising Audit Rules
Premium 
Customer 
Services
Law of the People's Republic of China on the 
Protection of Consumer Rights and Interests
Regulation on the Protection of Minors in 
Cyberspace
Law of the People's Republic of China on 
Protection of the Rights and Interests of the 
Elderly
Guidelines for Customer Service and 
Experience Management of JD Group


79
2023 JD.com, Inc.
Environmental, Social and Governance Report
About This 
Report
Message from Chairman 
of Board of Directors
Board 
Statement
About 
JD.com
Appendix
Annual Honors 
and Awards
Annual Key 
Performance
Appendix 7 Report Indicator Index
Reporting Section
HKEX ESG Index
GRI
SDGs
About This Report
Paragraph 11, Paragraph 
14 and Paragraph 15
2-2, 2-3, 2-4
Message from 
Chairman of Board 
of Directors
Paragraph 12
201-1
Board Statement
Paragraph 10 and 
Paragraph 13
3-3
About JD.com
2-1
A Pragmatic Vision Consolidates the Foundation of Responsibility
Corporate 
Management
Paragraph 13, Paragraph 
14 and B7
2-6, 2-9, 2-10, 2-11, 2-12, 2-13, 2-14, 
2-16, 2-17, 2-18, 2-22,  
2-23, 2-24, 2-25, 2-26, 2-27,  
2-29, 3-1, 3-2, 3-3, 405-1
5, 16, 17
Business 
Responsibility
B6, B6.3, B6.5, B7, B7.1, 
B7.2, B7.3
2-28, 205-1, 205-2, 205-3, 206-1, 
415-1, 416-1, 418-1
9, 16, 17
A Pragmatic Attitude Paves the Way for a Green Future
Environmental 
Governance and 
Climate Change 
Responses 
Paragraph 13, A4 and 
A4.1
201-2, 302-4,  305-5
7, 9, 12, 13, 14, 15
Green Workplace
A1, A1.1, A1.5, A1.6, A2, 
A2.3, A2.4, A3, A3.1
302-1, 302-4, 303-1, 303-2, 306-1, 
306-3, 306-4, 306-5
6, 7, 9, 11, 13, 15
Green Retail
A1, A1.6, A2.3, A3.1
2-28, 302-4, 304-3, 306-4
2, 7, 9, 12, 13, 14, 
15, 17
Green Logistics
A1, A1.5, A2, A2.5, A3.1
301-1, 301-2, 301-3, 302-2, 302-4
7, 12, 13
Green Park
A1, A1.1, A1.5, A1.6, A2, 
A2.3, A3, A3.1
302-1, 302-4, 304-2, 304-3, 306-1, 
306-3, 306-4, 306-5
6, 7, 9, 12, 13, 14, 
15
Reporting Section
HKEX ESG Index
GRI
SDGs
A Pragmatic Approach Leads to Shared Development Outcomes
Human Orientation
B1, B2, B2.3, B3, B4,  
B4.1, B4.2
2-7, 2-19, 2-20, 2-21, 2-30, 202-
1, 401-1, 401-2, 401-3, 402-1, 403-
1, 403-2, 403-3, 403-4, 403-5, 403-
6, 403-7, 403-8, 403-9, 403-10, 404-
1, 404-2, 404-3, 405-1, 405-2, 406-
1, 407-1, 408-1, 409-1, 410-1, 412-1, 
412-2, 412-3
3, 4, 5, 8, 10
A Sustainable 
Supply Chain
B5, B5.1, B5.2, B5.3, B5.4
2-8, 204-1, 308-1, 308-2, 409-1, 414-
1, 414-2
3, 6, 9, 10, 11, 16, 
17
A Pragmatic Path Promotes Good Consumption
Serving Consumers
B6, B6.1, B6.2, B6.4, B8, 
B8.1, B8.2
2-28, 416-1, 416-2, 417-1, 417-2, 
417-3
3, 12, 16, 17
Giving Back to 
Communities
B8, B8.1, B8.2
203-1, 203-2, 413-1, 415-1
1, 2, 3, 4, 6, 9, 10, 
11, 16, 17
Appendix
Important Legal 
Statement
Paragraph 11
ESG Key 
Performance Tables
A1.1, A1.2, A1.3, A1.4, A2.1, 
A2.2, A2.5, B1.1, B1.2, B2.1, 
B2.2, B3.1, B3.2, B5.1, B6.1, 
B7.2, B7.3, B8.2
2-7, 2-30, 302-1, 302-3, 303-3, 303-
4, 303-5, 305-1, 305-2, 305-3, 305-
4, 305-7, 306-3, 306-4, 306-5, 401-1, 
403-9, 403-10, 404-1, 405-1, 416-2
6, 7, 12, 13
Progress on the 
United Nations 
Global Compact
2-23, 2-24, 2-28
5, 17
Third Party 
Assurance 
Statement
Paragraph 9
2-5
GHG Inventory 
Report
Paragraph 9
2-5
ESG Policy List
A1, A2, A3, A4, B1, B2, B3, 
B4, B5, B6, B7, B8
2-23, 2-24, 2-27




2022
Environmental, Social and
Governance Report
JD.com, Inc.


Table of Content
About the Report
Message from Chairman 
of the Board
Board Statement
About JD
Annual Key Performance
Annual Honors and 
Awards
04
06
08
09
10
12
01
A Responsible Supply Chain 
Consolidates the Foundation of Responsibility
Corporate Management
Business Responsibility
16
26
03
A Responsible Supply Chain 
Leads to Shared Development Outcomes 
Human Orientation
Sustainable Supply Chain
84
103
04
A Responsible Supply Chain 
Promotes Good Consumption
Serving Consumers
Giving Back to the Community
110
118
02
A Responsible Supply Chain 
Paves the Way for a Green Future
Addressing Climate Change through 
the Task Force on Climate-related 
Financial Disclosure (TCFD)
Green Operations
Green Logistics
Green Ecology
44
59
72
79
Appendix
ESG Key Performance Tables
Progress on the United 
Nations Global Compact
Third Party Assurance 
Statement
Report Indicator Index
ESG Policy List
Reader Feedback Form
128
128
133
134
136
138
140


A Responsible Supply Chain  
Paves the Way for a Green Future
About the  
Report
This report is the Environmental, 
Social, and Governance Report 
2022 (referred to as the "ESG 
report" or "this report") released by 
JD.com to detail the ESG strategies, 
management, and practices of 
JD.com and its major subsidiaries 
included in its annual report.
Reference and  
Principles
This report is prepared in compliance with the 
ESG Reporting Guide from the Hong Kong Stock 
Exchange (HKEX), the ESG Reporting Guide from 
the Nasdaq Stock Market, the United Nations 
Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), the GRI 
Standards issued by the Global Sustainability 
Standards Board (GSSB), the Ten Principles of 
the UN Global Compact, and industry standards 
issued by the Sustainability Accounting 
Standards Board (SASB). Content dealing with 
climate change is prepared by referring to 
the HKEX Guidelines on Climate Information 
Disclosure, and the framework suggested by 
the Task Force on Climate-related Financial 
Disclosures (TCFD).
Reporting  
Principles
Access to Report 
This report conforms to the principles of "materiali-
ty"
, "quantitative"
, "balance"
, and "consistency"
.
Materiality: We have identified and assessed key 
ESG issues of concern for both internal and exter-
nal stakeholders of the Group. For detailed ma-
teriality assessment process and results, please 
refer to "Material Issues and Stakeholder Commu-
nication".
Balance: This report provides an impartial ac-
count of our performance in the areas of the 
environment, employees, supply chain, product 
services, and community.
Quantitative: We have regularly collected data on 
quantitative key indicators including environmen-
tal, social, and governance categories, and pre-
sented summaries and disclosures in this report. 
The calculation method, reference standards, and 
parameters for quantitative ESG data in this report 
have been explained, as detailed in each chapter of 
this report.
Consistency: The methodology employed in this 
report is in line with that of previous years. Any dif-
ferences that could affect meaningful comparisons 
with previous studies have been duly explained in 
the relevant chapters.
This report is prepared in both Chinese and 
English. Should there be any discrepancy in 
meaning between the two versions, the Chinese 
version shall prevail. The electronic versions 
can be accessed on the Group's website in the 
section "Investor Relations".
Reporting Scope
This annual report covers the period from January 
1, 2022, to December 31, 2022 (hereinafter referred 
to as the "reporting period"). To make this report 
more comparable and forward-looking, some 
contents have been extended. The disclosure 
scope of this report is based on the boundaries 
of JD.com's listed entities on the NASDAQ Stock 
Exchange in the United States, and for the first 
time includes Dada Group and Deppon Express in 
its disclosure scope.
Source of 
Information
The information and data in this report mainly 
come from the Group's internal data collection 
system, work reports and public information, 
such as annual reports and media releases. 
Unless specified, the monetary amounts shown 
in this report are all presented in RMB. For ease 
of presentation, "JD.com", "JD", "JD Group", 
"the Group", and "we" all refer to JD. com, Inc.


01
A Responsible Supply Chain 
Consolidates the Foundation 
of Responsibility
02
03
A Responsible Supply Chain 
Leads to Shared Development 
Outcomes 
04
A Responsible Supply Chain 
Promotes Good Consumption
Appendix
A Responsible Supply Chain  
Paves the Way for a Green Future
In 2022 amidst a landscape of constant 
changes, JD has emerged as a key play-
er in the real economy and has gained 
a heightened awareness of our respon-
sibilities towards sustainable develop-
ment. We recognize the importance of 
ensuring smooth, stable and reliable 
supply chains that benefit society as a 
whole. Our steadfast commitment re-
mains to contribute to the transforma-
tion, upgrade, and high-quality growth 
of the supply chain nationwide. 
To fulfill our mission, we have strategi-
cally aligned the concept of corporate 
sustainability with the value proposition 
of a "Responsible Supply Chain." This 
integration enables us to drive a com-
prehensive optimization of environmen-
tal, social, and corporate governance 
aspects. By doing so, we aim to meet 
the challenges of uncertainty with a 
more prudent and proactive approach.
We have taken significant steps to 
strengthen our corporate governance 
by establishing an ESG committee at 
the Board level. This committee ensures 
that environmental, social, and govern-
ance factors are effectively integrated 
into our decision-making processes. Ad-
ditionally, we have focused on diversi-
fying and enhancing the independence 
of our Board members, ensuring a more 
robust and objective oversight of our 
operations.
Managing operational risks within 
our supply chain is a top priority for 
us. We actively engage with various 
stakeholders, maintaining open lines of 
communication and addressing their 
expectations. By leveraging our digital 
and sustainable supply chain capa-
bilities, we create value that extends 
beyond our organization and positively 
impacts society as a whole. JD is com-
mitted to continuously improving our 
ESG governance structure and system, 
driving sustainable business growth 
while incorporating digital innovation 
and intelligence into our supply chain 
operations.
We place great importance on informa-
tion security, privacy protection, and 
intellectual property rights. With a com-
bination of management practices and 
technological advancements, we ensure 
the secure and efficient operation of our 
platform. This reliable foundation ena-
bles us to pursue sustainable develop-
ment while safeguarding the interests of 
our stakeholders.
Aligned with the principles of green 
and sustainable development, we have 
actively responded to the nation's call 
to achieve carbon peaking and carbon 
neutrality. Throughout our supply chain, 
we promote low-carbon operations and 
optimize resource utilization. We also 
encourage our supply chain partners to 
join us in protecting the environment 
and combating global climate. In 2022, 
we intensified our efforts to incorpo-
rate more renewable resources in our 
business operations, expand resource 
repurposing and recycling initiatives, 
and build responsible companies that 
prioritize resource efficiency and en-
vironmental eco-friendliness. Energy 
conservation and carbon reduction 
are monitored across our supply chain 
operations, with warehousing, trans-
port, and store management integrated 
into our comprehensive planning. We 
7
6
also ensure responsible engineering 
construction to minimize our environ-
mental impact and make a substantial 
contribution to green development.
Our "people-centered" approach rec-
ognizes employees as the cornerstone 
of corporate wealth and development. 
In 2022, we further reinforced our talent 
development system while valuing and 
maintaining the diversity, equality, and 
inclusiveness within our workforce. 
Enhancing employee benefits, occupa-
tional health and safety measures, and 
livelihood support is a priority for us. 
By creating high-quality employment 
opportunities in the community, we 
strive to cultivate a sustainable supply 
chain and contribute to the growth of 
the real economy. Collaboration with 
our supply chain partners is strength-
ened, fostering fair co-development 
with small and medium-sized enter-
prises (SMEs). We implement multiple 
measures to assist suppliers in achiev-
ing positive environmental and social 
impacts, enhancing the resilience and 
vitality of the real economy, and driving 
high-quality economic and social devel-
opment.
With our unwavering commitment to 
delivering the ultimate user experience, 
we continuously optimize our supply 
chain infrastructure and leverage relia-
ble digital technologies to provide qual-
ity services to our customers. In 2022, 
we took multiple actions to further 
enhance our supply chain infrastructure 
and technology capabilities, ensuring 
strict control over product and service 
quality and protecting consumer rights. 
To better serve our customers with 
a warm and heartfelt experience, we 
launched faster delivery services and 
price protection plans. Leveraging our 
technological and business advantages, 
we actively fulfill our corporate social 
responsibility. In 2022, we spared no 
effort in supporting pandemic preven-
tion and the delivery of related supplies 
through our responsible, digital, and 
intelligent supply chain system. We 
wholeheartedly serve the national rural 
revitalization strategy, empowering the 
agricultural industry and significantly 
increasing the income of millions of 
farmers. Engaging in social welfare initi-
atives and making charitable donations 
to support underprivileged students 
and alleviate poverty are also integral 
parts of our commitment to giving back 
to society.
Reflecting upon the past, the specta-
cle of vibrant life shines as bright as 
the dazzling glow of stars. JD remains 
steadfast in fulfilling our corporate so-
cial responsibility and fully embracing 
sustainable development principles. 
Moving forward, we will remain true to 
our original aspirations, strive to pro-
mote a real economy, and under the 
pragmatic and innovative spirit, we will 
join hands with stakeholders to draw a 
landscape of well-being, green and win-
win sustainability. 
JD is committed to a mission of "Powered by Technology for a 
More Productive and Sustainable World" and strives to achieve 
our vision of "Becoming the Most Trusted Company Worldwide". 
By utilizing digital intelligence to develop and manage our 
supply chains, JD actively embraces social responsibilities and 
aims to create additional value in business, industry and society. 
Our goal is to inspire confidence among customers, impress 
partners, and win the trust of the general public.
Message 
from 
Chairman of 
the Board
Richard Qiangdong Liu
Founder and Chairman of the Board, JD.com
2022
Environmental, Social and 
Governance Report


8
9
01
A Responsible Supply Chain 
Consolidates the Foundation 
of Responsibility
02
2022
Environmental, Social and 
Governance Report
A Responsible Supply Chain  
Paves the Way for a Green Future
Board Statement
The Board of Directors ("the Board") 
of JD.com recognizes how crucial 
adherence to ESG efforts is to the 
Group's long-term and stable opera-
tions. JD.com strictly adheres to ESG 
reporting guidelines and requirements 
of the stock exchanges where it is list-
ed and continuously improves its ESG 
management mechanism and govern-
ance system. The Board also attaches 
great importance to the potentially 
hefty impact that ESG risks pose on 
JD.com. Taking into account the ex-
ternal socio-economic macro environ-
ment and the Group's development 
strategy, JD.com regularly performs 
comprehensive ESG assessments and 
prioritizes the findings to form ma-
jor ESG efforts for management and 
improvement, which are then incor-
porated into the Group's strategies to 
oversee management improvement 
and performance.
The Board, as the highest decision-mak-
ing body of JD.com's ESG operations, 
has an ESG Committee responsible for 
reviewing the ESG strategies and their 
effectiveness, including integrating ESG 
components into strategies, oversee-
ing ESG performance and targets, and 
directing ESG operations overall and 
listening to ESG reports. Moreover, the 
ESG Committee helps achieve more 
independent, efficient, and professional 
ESG management for the Board, and ex-
plore new models combining ESG with 
the Group's business.
The ESG Committee has established 
a dedicated ESG Working Group (the 
"Working Group") that continuously 
embeds ESG-related risk management 
into the Group's daily code of conduct. 
The Working Group is responsible for 
implementing and advancing ESG-tar-
geted tasks with ESG leaders of each 
subsidiary and business system and 
identifying and managing climate-re-
lated risks and opportunities.
During the reporting period, JD.com 
identified 23 strategic issues gleaned 
from detailed systematic stakeholder 
research, internal interviews, and 
special meetings, and evaluated and 
determined their ranking. This led to 
the creation of the materiality matrix, 
which is detailed in the "ESG Govern-
ance" part of this report.
JD.com has identified and assessed 
the potential effects of climate change 
on its business and operations in the 
short-, medium-, and long-term by ex-
amining both physical and transitional 
risks within its existing business. JD 
will continue to leverage its industry 
influence to promote and lead green 
and low-carbon initiatives throughout 
the value chain and consumer sectors 
while doing our part in boosting ener-
gy efficiency and reducing emissions.
This report provides a detailed disclo-
sure of how far JD.com has progressed 
and achieved in its ESG operations dur-
ing 2022. Reviewed and approved by 
the Board, the content of this report is 
crafted with accuracy, truthfulness, and 
integrity with no false records, mislead-
ing statements, or significant omissions.
About JD
JD.com adheres to the values of putting 
customers first, integrity, collaboration, 
gratitude, dedication, and ownership. 
With the mission of being "powered 
by technology for a more productive 
and sustainable world",JD.com strives 
to become the most trusted company 
globally.
JD officially began its e-commerce busi-
ness in 2004. In May 2014, JD.com was 
listed on the NASDAQ Stock Exchange 
in the United States, becoming the first 
comprehensive e-commerce company 
from China to successfully go public in 
the U.S. In June 2020, JD.com complet-
ed a secondary listing on the Hong Kong 
Stock Exchange, aiming to raise capital 
to invest in key technological innova-
tions based on the supply chain, further 
enhance user experience, and improve 
operational efficiency.
JD.com is "a technology and services 
enterprise with supply chain at its core." 
Its business cover retail, logistics, tech-
nology, health, property development, 
industrial goods, private label brands, 
international business, and other areas 
of commerce. Its cutting-edge retail 
infrastructure enables consumers to 
purchase goods anytime, anywhere. 
JD also opens its technology and infra-
structure to partners, brands, and multi-
ple industries, providing comprehensive 
retail-as-a-service (RaaS) solutions that 
drive improvement and innovation in 
production efficiency across various 
sectors.
2022
Environmental, Social and 
Governance Report
03
A Responsible Supply Chain 
Collaborates with Partners for 
Development
04
A Responsible Supply Chain 
Promotes Good Consumption
Appendix


10
11
01
A Responsible Supply Chain 
Consolidates the Foundation 
of Responsibility
02
03
A Responsible Supply Chain 
Leads to Shared Development 
Outcomes 
04
A Responsible Supply Chain 
Promotes Good Consumption
Appendix
A Responsible Supply Chain  
Paves the Way for a Green Future
1　SKU, or Stock Keeping Unit, is the unit of measurement for inbound and outbound inventory in e-commerce.
Annual Key Performance 
A responsible supply chain paves the way for a green future
A responsible supply chain consolidates the foundation of responsibility
All employees have completed 
anti-corruption, integrity and 
compliance training and exams, 
with a training coverage rate of
an exam pass rate of 
Number of violations of 
information security and 
privacy protection
As of the end of 2022, JD had installed photovoltaic power generation systems on the 
roofs of 23 Intelligent Industrial Parks, with an installed capacity of 
100%
100%
Number of acquired domestic 
and foreign authorized patents
Number of published domestic and 
foreign authorized trademarks
6,272
18,424 
Number of penalty received for
information security vulnerabilities
or other network security breaches
0
0
132.5MW
Number of waste and used appliances 
recycled by JD Retail and Five Star 
Appliance platform over
5.9491million 
By the end of 2022, JD Logistics achieved 
direct delivery of tens of thousands of 
stock keeping units (SKUs
1) delivered with 
original package (DWOP) and was expect-
ed to reduce disposable packaging by 
some 10 billion, equivalent to reduced 
logging of some 20 million trees
Green electricity supplied by distributed 
photovoltaic system on the roof of the JD 
Intelligent Industrial Park
81,970 
MWh 
Coverage of ISO 27701 and ISO 
27001 certified operations roughly
80%
Total annual investment in product 
research and innovation nearly 
RMB16.9billion
A responsible supply chain leads the trends for good consumption
JD.com's customer service 
team consists of more 
than 20,000 .
20,000 
employees
Survey result of JD.com's net 
promoter score (NPS) in 2022
65.5
During "11 · 11" sales event, 2022, 
JD platform provided 30-day price 
protection on 500 million products, 
benefiting  more than
380million consumers
JD Foundation donation made in 2022
RMB93.48million
A responsible supply chain  leads to shared development outcomes
Proportion of rural population in 
frontline logistics employees
80%
Collective contract employee 
coverage
100%
Amount paid for front-line logistics 
employees in salary and benefits 
in 2022 over
RMB44.6billion
In 2022, JD's various business units 
provided 2,442 offline training courses 
and 25,223 online training courses, 
covering all of its employees. Total 
employee training coverage
100%
The total employee training devel-
opment amounted to 18,423,446 
hours, averaging  per employee
41.5hours 
Best inventory turnover days of self-
operated commodities
30.2days
Number of personnel participated in 
employee satisfaction surveys over
Annual employee satisfaction rate
720,000
4.51out of 5
3million
Number of green commodities 
introduced by JD.com
2022
Environmental, Social and 
Governance Report


12
13
01
A Responsible Supply Chain 
Consolidates the Foundation 
of Responsibility
02
03
A Responsible Supply Chain 
Leads to Shared Development 
Outcomes 
04
A Responsible Supply Chain 
Promotes Good Consumption
Appendix
2022
Environmental, Social and 
Governance Report
A Responsible Supply Chain  
Paves the Way for a Green Future
Annual Honors and Awards
Selected into the 2023 
Bloomberg 
Gender-Equality Index
on the Fortune Global 500 - 2022
Ranked 46th
Ranked 2nd on the "Top 100 
New Real Economy-based
Enterprises 2022" by the China
Enterprise Evaluation Association
Ranked among the World's Most Admired 
Companies 2022 by Fortune
and ranked 1st in social responsibility 
indicators for Chinese companies
Ranked among the first version of the 
Fortune
 China ESG Influence List
Ranked 30th among Forbes 2022 World's 
Best Employer for five consecutive years and 
ranked 2nd among Chinese companies
Ranked among Fortune's
2022 Change the World list 
Ranked among Bloomberg Green 
Environmental Pioneers 
of Bloomberg Green ESG  Pioneers
The carbon neutrality logistics park 
solution was selected for the 
2022 Annual Case of  
China Green Point
by CBN
JD's "Asia No.1" Taiyuan Xiaohe 
Logistics Park was given 
a five-star rating 
by the China Association of Warehouse 
and Distribution
Ranked 3rd
 on Fortune China's Most Admired 
Chinese Companies 2022
Ranked 1st
in the "Top 500 Private Companies 
in China 2022" 
by the All-China Federation of 
Industry and Commerce
Ranked as China's Most 
Attractive Employer 2022 
by Universum
 ranking 3rd 
among industry peers
JD (Langfang) Intelligent Industrial 
Park was awarded LEED Gold by 
the US Green Building Council
JD's Integrity Innovation Project won the 
"China Integrity Innovation Award"


14
15
01
A Responsible Supply Chain 
Consolidates the Foundation 
of Responsibility
02
03
A Responsible Supply Chain 
Leads to Shared Development 
Outcomes 
04
A Responsible Supply Chain 
Promotes Good Consumption
Appendix
2022
Environmental, Social and 
Governance Report
A Responsible Supply Chain  
Paves the Way for a Green Future
With a"Responsible Supply Chain" as the core, JD.com 
fulfills its corporate mission and responsibility, fortifies 
its governance system and capacity building, and commits 
to the highest ethical business standards. With a focus on 
unleashing the potential of technological innovation, the 
Group is committed to intellectual property management, 
strong safeguards for network information and private data 
control and protection, and is building the responsibility 
foundation for sustainable supply chain.
01
A Responsible Supply 
Chain Consolidates 
the Foundation of 
Responsibility


16
17
02
03
A Responsible Supply Chain 
Leads to Shared Development 
Outcomes 
04
A Responsible Supply Chain 
Promotes Good Consumption
Appendix
A Responsible Supply Chain  
Paves the Way for a Green Future
01
A Responsible Supply Chain 
Consolidates the Foundation 
of Responsibility
2022
Environmental, Social and 
Governance Report
JD.com continues to improve its governance level, embody the concept of sustain-
ability, and effectively control operational risks. We also maintain close commu-
nication with relevant stakeholders, and proactively respond to their needs and 
expectations while promoting the sustainable development of JD's supply chain 
ecosystem, and thus creating long-term value for all involved.
JD.com has established a scientifically developed and efficient corporate 
governance structure that defines distinct roles and responsibilities. The Group has 
set up an Audit Committee, a Compensation Committee, a Nomination Committee, 
and an ESG Committee under the Board to oversee the Group's various activities 
and ensure rational decision-making in its resource allocation and operations. The 
terms of reference of the Board and Committees, as well as the information relating 
to each director, is available on the Group's website of Investor Relations
4 and the 
websites of stock exchanges in which it is listed.
Ms. Xu Ran, as JD.com's first female CEO, joined the Board of JD.com in May 2023. The Board 
of JD.com is comprised of seven directors, including one executive director, five independ-
ent non-executive directors and one non-executive director. Four of the current directors 
hold doctoral degrees. The current Board members are qualitatively distinguished by their 
wide-ranging expertise, which encompasses business administration, law, finance, finance, 
economics, and the social sciences. Drawing on their professional experience in industry, fi-
nance, and risk management, they are capable of improving the enterprise
's decision-mak-
ing level from a holistic perspective and optimizing the top-level governance of the Board.
Currently, three members of the Board are female, and the females comprise one 
third or over each of the Compensation Committee, Nomination Committee and ESG 
Committee. In 2022, we amended the Constitution of the Nomination and Corporate 
Governance Committee, which mandates comprehensive consideration of diver-
sity factors such as gender, race, ethnicity, country of origin, nationality, or cultural 
background in the Board nomination procedure. In May 2023, the Board of JD.com 
released JD.com's Policy on Board Diversity and the Independence Standards for 
Independent Directors, which furthers the requirement concerning the Board's inde-
pendence and diversity, and consequently bolsters its ability in corporate governance.
Corporate Governance
2 IR | JD.Com, Inc.
JD.com's Board Structure
Audit Committee
Compensation 
Committee
Nomination Committee
ESG Committee
Corporate Management
We have constructed an integrated management and control system for enterprise 
security risks, keeping a close eye on the five key areas of "risk detection, incident 
assessment, incident handling, potential danger management, and effect apprais-
al", gradually extending our risk management standpoint from short-term to long-
term, transcending from the present incident-handling mode to the pre-emptive 
"early identification and alert" approach. With the motto of "compliance repre-
sents development" in mind, we build a distinct risk management system for JD.
Overseen and guided by the Board, we have established an exhaustive risk miti-
gation and control structure. This includes a Safety and Risk Control Committee, 
chaired by the Group's CCO, and a Chief Security Officer responsible for the sta-
bility, reliability, and security of the Group's digital infrastructure and informa-
tion systems. A special working group focusing on risk control–composed of risk 
control leaders from different systems, was integrated within the Safety and Risk 
Control Committee to comprehensively control any risk that the Group might en-
counter. The Committee meets weekly to analyze and evaluate risks and inform all 
subgroups of decisions. Each first-level division is in charge of following up risk in-
vestigation and governance, in conjunction with periodic reviews and promotion 
of paramount risk cases to the management and relevant departments through 
regular management conferences, quarterly business analysis meetings, and re-
porting to business groups and business units.
We attach great importance to risk management and internal control, with a focus 
on risk governance in the four dimensions of regulatory security, legal security, op-
erational security, and information security. We have developed risk management 
systems such as the Regulations of JD Group on Legal Risk Grading Management, 
the Contract Management System of JD Group, and Trade Secret Management 
Measures of JD Group to ensure the smooth implementation of various risk man-
agement.
A transparent and scientific risk governance mechanism is also an essential part 
of JD's risk management. We clearly define the extent of punitive measures for 
various safety related accidents, and promptly hold the responsible departments 
accountable once the accident is verified. We also conduct annual self-assessments 
on internal control, with deductions in employee performance ratings when signifi-
cant issues in a business unit or department, are discovered. These deductions are 
linked to the overall performance of the business groups and their respective unit 
leaders.
JD.com has established a comprehensive risk governance system, through which 
we continuously identify, evaluate, prevent and manage internal and external 
risks. We vigorously promote a culture of risk governance and augment risk 
governance and mitigation capabilities.
Risk Governance
Risk Governance System
risk detection
incident 
handling
incident 
assessment
potential hazard 
management
effect
appraisal
The Board 
of Directors
Female members account 
for nearly
43%
of the Board


18
19
02
03
A Responsible Supply Chain 
Leads to Shared Development 
Outcomes 
04
A Responsible Supply Chain 
Promotes Good Consumption
Appendix
A Responsible Supply Chain  
Paves the Way for a Green Future
01
A Responsible Supply Chain 
Consolidates the Foundation 
of Responsibility
2022
Environmental, Social and 
Governance Report
In 2022, we referenced the COSO
3  Enterprise Risk Management Framework and 
undertook risk identification and response across nine key areas: strategic risk, 
investment risk, market risk, financial risk, legal compliance risk, operational risk 
(including technological risk), ESG governance risk, reputational risk, and integrity 
risk. Risk exposure was assessed and analyzed via a structured management 
process.
We have taken the following measures to address some of the risks.
Risk Identification and 
Response
3 COSO is the Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway Commission
JD.com  
2022
Risk Identification
Some Risk Response Measures of JD.com in 2022 
Strategic risk
Investment risk
Integrity risk
Market risk 
Reputational 
risk
Financial risk 
ESG governance 
risk
Legal compliance 
risk
Operational 
risk (including 
technological 
risk)
JD.com also evaluates and responds to major medium to long-term emerging risks, such as geopolitical risks and information 
security risks, to further enhance risk prevention and control awareness and capabilities.
Geopolitical  
risks
  
Geopolitics poses certain risks to international businesses and hinders the smooth 
functioning of internal operations, posing challenges such as personnel recruitment 
restrictions, travel bans, supply chain interruption, and import-export restrictions.
  
JD operates in multiple countries and regions. In the current tumultuous geopolitical 
environment, JD closely monitors global trends and objectively assesses geopolitical 
risks. JD continuously optimizes its supply chain to deal with potential risks by 
increasing the versatility and resilience of its domestic and international operations.
Information  
security risks
  
Due to rapid global digitalization, there exists an increasing level of risk to information 
security.
  
To mitigate information security risks, JD is constructing a governance model to refine its 
information security compliance. We are committed to enhancing the protection of systems, 
tools, and data, to foster a stable and healthy business environment. We strive to ensure the 
highest standards and procedures to protect data and information security for billions of 
consumers, millions of SMEs, large multinational businesses, and government users.
  
To guarantee the secure operation of large-scale online promotional shopping events, 
such as "618" and "11 · 11", digital security is paramount to ensuring smooth business 
operations. JD will continue to apply advance security technologies to ensure the 
safety of users, enterprises, and industries and contribute to the healthy development 
of the information security ecosystem.
Operational risk
Each business unit should maintain a keen awareness of risk management at all times, stan-
dardize business activity rules, improve business risk control systems, strictly control any 
negative impact on user experience and violations of platform policies, effectively protect the 
legitimate rights and interests of users and partners, and effectively prevent and control risks.
ESG governance risk
ESG Committee at the level of the Board to oversee and guide related matters such as climate, 
environment, risk, health and safety, business ethics, product safety and services, diversity and 
inclusiveness, and etc.
Integrity risk
Hold zero tolerance against corruption, includes establishing a comprehensive anti-corruption 
system, accurately identifying and evaluating integrity risks, conducting comprehensive 
training and education, and collaborating with industries to build an integrity ecosystem. We 
aim to encourage diversified participants in integrity risk governance and help enterprises 
develop in a healthy, safe and sustainable manner.
Legal compliance risk
Strictly abide by local laws and regulations for business operations and regulatory rules for 
compliance in the location where we operate, establish and improve an international business 
legal compliance system, and follow up on regulatory trends.
Conduct current and forward-looking legal research in newly-emerged business areas. Estab-
lish research organizations to focus on data algorithms and personal information protection. 
Engage in communication and exchange activities with regulatory authorities, industry asso-
ciations, experts and scholars. Invite experts in related fields to provide training to ensure full 
compliance with various legal and regulatory requirements.
Under the framework of the Group risk management, supply legal compliance indicators to en-
courage awareness of pertinent risk elements and overall compliance capabilities.


20
21
02
03
A Responsible Supply Chain 
Leads to Shared Development 
Outcomes 
04
A Responsible Supply Chain 
Promotes Good Consumption
Appendix
A Responsible Supply Chain  
Paves the Way for a Green Future
01
A Responsible Supply Chain 
Consolidates the Foundation 
of Responsibility
2022
Environmental, Social and 
Governance Report
Cases of Risk Response
Risk Awareness and Culture
To provide stable and reliable system experiences to users and avoid application 
downtime caused by peak traffic and system overload, JD conducts over 1,700 
internal stress tests every year and conducts timely and effective troubleshooting 
and elimination of testing risk points. For example, on the eve of the "618" 
promotion each year, we simulate temporary blackouts, network disconnection, 
and sudden traffic peak surges. This kind of test helps guarantee the stable 
operation of our system under uncertain situations.
In 2022, 58 training sessions on risk management were held both online and in-
person. 10,114 employees participated.
JD has also set up risk feedback channels, and a supporting joint prevention and 
control information system. These measures allow employees to provide feedback 
on risk related issues through open channels. All employees are encouraged to 
report potential system risks. When an employee files a report, the system will 
automatically assign it to the director of the primary responsible department 
which will forward it to heads of related departments and then distribute it to the 
relevant operator, who is required to record the processing results in the system. 
The employee who filled the report is automatically informed of the result.
To address climate change risks, we have engaged in risk identification and as-
sessment of our businesses, structure, and other aspects. We have also conducted 
sensitivity tests under various climate scenarios to assess possible non-financial 
risks that we may face. For more information, please refer to Section 2.1 of the 
Task Force on Climate-related Financial Disclosures (TCFD).
JD was commissioned to conduct the Red Envelope Project during CCTV's Spring Festival Gala 2022. The technical 
team meticulously outlined the method, testing scope, responsible body, implementation roadmap, application 
profiling and hierarchical sorting of stress tests. The implementation steps of stress testing were detailed and 
broken down to the operational level, leading to over 1,000 tests being completed. This allowed preparations to be 
concluded in a timely and efficient manner. To ensure the quality and feasibility of the project, "chaos engineering" 
and emergency plan drills were simulated to enhance responses to unforeseen circumstances.
Stress Testing of the Spring Festival Gala Red Envelope Project
We conduct
internal stress tests every year
1,700
training sessions on risk management 
held both online and in-person
58
employees participated
10,114
JD.com adheres to the corporate mission of "Powered by Technology for a More Pro-
ductive and Sustainable World" and diligently optimizes its ESG governance structure, 
and management system. The Group continuously communicates effectively with 
regulatory authorities, investors, the public and other stakeholders. This is key to 
forming a solid foundation for ESG governance and is instrumental to ultimately cre-
ating sustainable value for users, business partners, and society.
To strengthen ESG governance, we have instituted a dedicated ESG Committee on the 
Board, with the Chairman of the Board serving as the Committee Chairman to coordi-
nate ESG governance work within the Group and integrate environmental, social and 
corporate governance standards and parameters into the Group's management system. 
We set objectives for risk control, information security, business ethics and anti-corrup-
tion, along with energy conservation and efficiency targets. We consider the completion 
of these targets when assessing and evaluating management performance, to realize 
the link between management compensation and sustainable development perfor-
mance.
ESG Governance
JD.com's ESG Governance Structure
The Board of Directors
  
ESG Committee oversees ESG matters of the Group. This includes environ-
mental sustainability, the implementation of environmental management 
policies, increased environmental performance, business ethics, product 
safety and service quality, employee training and development, diversity and 
inclusiveness, community support, privacy and data security. 
  
The Committee helps the Board to identify and assess potential risks and op-
portunities regarding ESG issues.
  
The Committee guides and reviews the development of ESG strategies and 
plans, practices and major ESG-related public disclosures and reports.
  
The Strategy Execution Committee (SEC) leads the ESG Working Group to 
develop the Company's ESG strategy and priorities.
  
The ESG Working Group organizes ESG requirements and goals, facilitates 
collaboration between ESG leaders across the Group and business units, 
executes and advance strategies, monitors the execution of tasks, and 
submits regular reports to the SEC.
  
Professionals from several subgroups and business units utilize their industry-
specific knowledge, to promote the overall ESG practices of the Group and 
regularly update the ESG Working Group on the latest developments.
ESG representatives of each subsidiary group and business system
ESG Committee 
Strategy Execution Committee (SEC)
ESG Working Group


22
23
02
03
A Responsible Supply Chain 
Leads to Shared Development 
Outcomes 
04
A Responsible Supply Chain 
Promotes Good Consumption
Appendix
A Responsible Supply Chain  
Paves the Way for a Green Future
01
A Responsible Supply Chain 
Consolidates the Foundation 
of Responsibility
2022
Environmental, Social and 
Governance Report
Materiality Assessment and 
Stakeholder Engagement
JD.com attaches great significance to communication and collaboration with stake-
holders. The Group continues to proactively expand communication channels, and 
engages in frequent and diversified interactions with stakeholders including consum-
ers, employees, shareholders, investors, governments and regulatory bodies, and 
value chain partners, to promptly respond to their expectations and requirements.
Stakeholder Engagement
Stakeholders
Material Issues
4
Communication
Consumers
 
Product and service 
quality
 
Consumer relations
 
Protection of employee 
rights and interests
 
Data security and privacy 
protection
 
Business ethics and an-
ti-corruption
 
Continuous online and 
offline communication 
(apps/websites/stores)
 
24/7 customer service 
hotline
 

Daily media communi-
cation
 
Social media commu-
nication
 
Consumer research
Employees
 
Product and service 
quality
 
Consumer relations
 
Protection of employee 
rights and interests
 
Data security and privacy 
protection
 
Business ethics and an-
ti-corruption
 
Employee development 
and talent training
 
All-staff emails, com-
munication meetings, 
forums, employee 
representative congress, 
training activities and 
feedback mechanisms
 
Employee service hot-
line, bigear@ jd. com, the 
Group's trade union, the 
Group's audit channel, 
etc.
Investors
 
Data security and privacy 
protection
 
Corporate governance
 
Sustainable management 
and economic develop-
ment
 
Greenhouse gas emis-
sions and product carbon 
footprint
 
Diversity, equality, and 
inclusiveness
 
Promote high-quality 
employment
 
Phone calls, meetings and 
company visits
 
Corporate annual reports, 
quarterly reports and 
announcements
 
Roadshow
 
Daily communication on 
sustainability and ESG 
related issues 
Government 
and Regulato-
ry Bodies
 
Data security and priva-
cy protection
 
Protection of employee 
rights and interests
 
Consumer relations
 
Sustainable management 
and economic develop-
ment
 
Promote high-quality 
employment
 
Rural revitalization and 
common prosperity
 
Daily reports,  Com-
munication and policy 
recommendations
 
Irregular industry fo-
rums and conferences
 
 Field investigation
 
Cooperation agree-
ments signing and 
strategic partnership 
establishment
 
Respond to inquiries 
for listed companies 
from regulatory agen-
cies
Partners on 
the Value 
Chain
 
Data security and priva-
cy protection
 
Product and service 
quality
 
Business ethics and an-
ti-corruption
 
Consumer relations
 
Protection of employee 
rights and interests
 
Daily procurement, 
training, and evaluation
 
Irregular industry fo-
rums
 
Supplier conferences 
 
Daily media communi-
cation
 
"Jing Dian" Academy, 
"Jing Mai" Platform 
Communities 
and 
Environment
 
Promote high-quality 
employment
 
Occupational health and 
safety
 
Protection of employee 
rights and interests
 
Employee development 
and talent training
 
Data security and privacy 
protection
 
Intellectual property 
protection
 
Public welfare programs 
and fund-raising plat-
forms
 
Daily media communi-
cation
 
Social media communi-
cation
 
CSR forums and activi-
ties
 
Volunteer activities
We undertake at least a comprehensive and systematic identification and analysis of material issues annually. In 2022, 
we distributed an ESG questionnaire to company executives, employees, and external stakeholders to gauge their level 
of interest in various ESG-related issues. Twenty-three strategic issues that support the creation of long-term value were 
identified and organized into a materiality matrix.
Material Issue Identification Process
Identification of 
material issues
 
Based on the material issue list of JD.com in 2021, and in accordance with the 
ESG Reporting Guide from the Hong Kong Stock Exchange (HKEX), the ESG 
Reporting Guide from the Nasdaq, and with reference to local and international 
reporting standards, major ESG ratings, and industry sustainable development 
trends, JD.com sorted, summarized and updated those issues through 
benchmarking against industry peers and monitoring news media. As a result, 
23 issues have been identified, forming a list of JD.com's material issues in 2022.
 
Distributed questionnaires to both internal and external stakeholders through 
a variety of channels, including email and WeChat, to solicit comments and 
suggestions on the Group's ESG governance. Exactly 3,028 valid questionnaires 
were collected.
 
Initiated special communication on ESG issues through ESG meetings targeting 
specific stakeholder groups.
Stakeholder 
engagement
Develop and 
adjust the matrix
 
Created a preliminary material issue matrix based on the survey results.
 
Material issues were adjusted and confirmed by the leadership and ESG Working 
Group based on industry trends, peer comparison, and capital market concerns.
Review materiality 
matrix
 
Submitted the adjusted materiality matrix to the ESG Committee for review 
and confirmation, forming the final materiality matrix.


24
25
02
03
A Responsible Supply Chain 
Leads to Shared Development 
Outcomes 
04
A Responsible Supply Chain 
Promotes Good Consumption
Appendix
A Responsible Supply Chain  
Paves the Way for a Green Future
01
A Responsible Supply Chain 
Consolidates the Foundation 
of Responsibility
2022
Environmental, Social and 
Governance Report
Materiality Matrix of JD.com in 2022
Importance to JD.com
Low
High
High
Importance to stakeholders
Material Issues of JD.com in 2022
Environmental 
Social
Compliance 
Governance
Taking "Achieving Success the Right Way" as its value and compliance as its 
foundation, JD.com has deeply integrated the concept of "Compliance Represents 
Development" into all business areas of the Group and adheres to a policy of achieving 
success through compliance governance. To ensure this, we have established a 
compliance system consisting of "One Principle", "Three Defensive Lines", and "Five 
Perspectives". A comprehensive promotion and implementation strategy, focused 
on accountability and rewards, ensures the enforcement of our internal control 
compliance management processes and adherence to ethical business standards.
01
13
20
22
Green packaging and recycling
Energy use and energy efficiency 
management
Addressing climate change
GHG emissions and carbon 
footprint
Waste management
Water management
13
18
19
20
22
23
23
03
06
09
10
11
02
04
05
07
08
Product and service quality
Consumer relations
Occupational health and 
safety
Employee development and 
talent cultivation
Employee rights protection
Supply chain management
Anti-pandemic and disaster 
relief
Rural revitalization and 
common prosperity
Diversity, equality, and 
inclusiveness
Promoting high-quality 
employment
Philanthropy and charity
01
02
04
05
07
08
14
15
16
17
21
12
14
15
16
17
18
19
21
Data security and privacy 
protection
Technology and innovation
Intellectual property 
protection
Business ethics and anti-
corruption
Corporate governance 
Sustainable management 
and economic development
Governance
03
06
09
10
11
12
JD's Compliance Management System
Three Defensive Lines 
"Achieving Success the Right Way"
Guided by the concept of "Achieving Success the Right Way" and adhering to the principle of "Compliance Represents Development," 
the Group complies with laws and regulations, builds a culture of integrity and anti-corruption, enables effective compliance 
management driven by technology and data, and establishes a forward-looking, flexible, and efficient compliance system.
The first line
Every employee is familiar with and firmly 
implements JD.com's compliance system and 
adheres to the bottom line of compliance by 
resisting undesirable temptations.
Applicable to all 
employees
The second line 
All professional teams shall publicize and 
implement a good compliance culture, apply 
smart technology to all essential nodes of 
risk and compliance management, reduce 
corporate risks, and ensure long-term and stable 
development.
Applicable to risk management teams 
including legal, finance, information 
security and risk control
The third line
Applied to independent supervisory and 
audit team 
By following the compliance system and 
upholding the principle of fairness, justice 
and independence, the supervision and audit 
team oversees the compliance practices of 
each organizational unit, investigates and 
combats corruption, and ensures operational 
compliance.
Five Perspectives
Laws and regulations compliance
Information security compliance
Transaction risk control
Anti-corruption and integrity compliance
Auditing compliance
JD. com regards legal compliance as the basic requirement to achieve 
its business objectives and strictly abides by relevant national laws, 
regulations, and rules.
JD.com attaches great importance to information security, ensures that employees have full access to the basic knowledge and principles of information 
security; establishes a sound responding process and disposal mechanism for system security, external attacks and violations; safeguards the confidentiality of 
information and data of the enterprise, employees and customers, making sure information and data can only be obtained and used when necessary.
All business units in JD.com shall always maintain a keen awareness of 
transaction risk management, regulate business activities, improve the 
business transaction system, and connect to JD's risk control system to 
ensure accurate identification and intelligent confrontation of business 
transaction risk behaviors.
JD. com has always adhered to "zero tolerance" of corruption and is 
determined to create an incorruptible and integrity business environment.
JD.com strictly complies with all legal requirements for a listed company. 
Management provides a written statement on the effectiveness of internal 
controls of financial reporting in the annual report.
Ensure all employees are fully aware of 
compliance policies through promotion and 
implementation.
The system of "Accountability Basics and Control" 
and collateral penalties are carried out in cases of 
major compliance issues.
Offer rewards to employees who have 
performed well in compliance and those who 
have reported violations.
Full publicity and implementation
Joint accountability
Rewards
One Principle
Compliance Enforcement Mechanism 


26
27
02
03
A Responsible Supply Chain 
Leads to Shared Development 
Outcomes 
04
A Responsible Supply Chain 
Promotes Good Consumption
Appendix
A Responsible Supply Chain  
Paves the Way for a Green Future
01
A Responsible Supply Chain 
Consolidates the Foundation 
of Responsibility
2022
Environmental, Social and 
Governance Report
Business Responsibility
Adherence to business responsibility is fundamental in allowing JD.com to build a 
"Responsible Supply Chain", and the internal cornerstone for enhancing the business's 
competitive and dynamic nature. JD emphasizes four key aspects: business ethics 
governance, information security and privacy protection, technology innovation 
enhancement, and intellectual property protection. JD has implemented multiple 
mechanisms, such as the establishment of governance systems, comprehensive training 
and promotion, and accountability and rewards, to build a wholesome trustworthy better 
business ecosystem.
JD strictly adheres to local laws and regulations for domestic and international business 
operations, conducts business activities in accordance with legal requirements and 
accepts supervision from a wide range of stakeholders, including consumers, suppliers, 
business partners and other parties, while strictly preventing illegal activities such as 
bribery, extortion, fraud, money laundering and monopoly. Guided by the concept of 
"Achieving Success the Right Way", JD.com shapes a corporate culture of integrity, 
characterized by a commitment to responsibility over commercial interests, complying 
with all applicable local laws to conduct business operations in a fair competitive 
environment, free from bribery and corruption. This in turn, effectively safeguards the 
Group's core fundamentals of fair, open and transparent business ethics.
Business Ethics
Building Business Ethics System
JD.com prioritizes a culture of business ethics and integrity and adheres to the principle of 
zero tolerance for corruption. The Board regularly hears reports on progress on anti-corrup-
tion and business ethics-related tasks, reviews special issues concerning anti-corruption 
and business ethics, and makes suggestions for improvements.
We have implemented comprehensive anti-corruption and integrity compliance policies that 
combine rewards and punishments, including the Code of Business Conduct and Ethics of 
JD.Com, Inc., the Anti-Corruption Regulations of JD Group, and the Whistleblower Protection 
and Reward System of JD Group. Each business department has established corresponding 
policies and regulations in compliance with the standards set by the Group, which contain 
more detailed requirements on gift-giving, banquets, samples, etc. Examples include the Red 
Line Management System of JD Logistics and the Banquet Management System of JD Health.
JD.com mandates all employees adhere to the established Code of Business Conduct. Full-
time employees are required to sign the JD Group's Employee Handbook and JD Group's 
Commitment to Anti-Corruption. Interns, consultants, and other temporary personnel also 
need to sign the Commitment to Comply with JD Group's Anti-Corruption Regulations, en-
suring a 100% coverage rate.
Entities and individuals engaged in commercial dealings with JD.com (including suppliers, 
contractors, subcontractors, and others) must comply with and uphold JD.com's anti-brib-
ery and anti-corruption policies. Any and all partners working with JD.com are required to 
sign the Anti-Commercial Bribery Agreement.
Our never-ending work to enhance our anti-corruption system through innovative practices 
in anti-corruption, integrity and compliance is key to building a forward-looking, flexible, 
and efficient management system, that sustains our business development. The super-
vision department, which is dedicated to enforcing corruption prevention regulations, is 
responsible for investigating corruption across all our business lines. It has also developed 
specialized management systems - "Three Major Measures" for anti-corruption manage-
ment and "Three Lines of Defense" for anti-corruption and integrity risk assessment.
Coverage rate of employee 
signature of Code of Business 
Conduct and Ethics
100%
"Three Major 
Measures" 
for anti-
corruption 
management
 
Conduct an integrity perception index survey across all employees and managers 
of JD.com. The scope includes the awareness of integrity and compliance (such 
as familiarity with the integrity culture, recognition of the integrity system, and 
awareness of integrity advocacy), knowledge of penalties for non-compliance, 
integrity compliance actions (such as actions/motivations for reporting, actions/
motivations for proactive reporting), integrity and compliance management and more. 
In 2022, we collected 55,800 notes and suggestions from employees and managers. 
To address low ratings on the integrity perception index at specific business units, we 
implement risk prevention in key areas and further initiatives such as collaborating 
with the business departments to identify, monitor and evaluate areas prone to 
integrity risks, and engaging in internal and external integrity and compliance 
advocacy.
 
Conduct multi-level specialized training on integrity and compliance, which applies 
to all personnel, management personnel, critical roles, and core departments.
 
Organize the supplier integrity and compliance conference to communicate JD's 
integrity and compliance standards to its suppliers and partners, and collaborate to 
establish an integrity and compliance ecosystem.
Prevention of corruption
 
Carry out targeted actions in key areas, construct business risk-aware monitoring models 
and connected governance platforms, refine the anti-corruption systems and procedures, 
and build effective punishment frameworks and organizational structures.
 
Dismiss employees who violate the Anti-Corruption Regulations of JD Group and add 
them to the discredited list. Those suspected of committing crimes shall be referred 
to judicial authorities.
 
In 2022, JD.com concluded 248 internal corruption investigations. Another 21 employee 
corruption cases (including cases transferred over from the preceding years) lawfully 
transferred by the company to the judiciary were concluded during the reporting period.but 
there were no corruption litigation cases having JD.com as either the plaintiff or defendant.
Crack down on corruption
 
Work with the business units and specialized risk management teams to review 
key cases, and suggest targeted measures and rectifications for potential integrity-
related risks associated with corruption cases. Self-inspection and self-correction 
are required from the business units to actively prevent the Group's anti-corruption, 
integrity and compliance risks and maintain its sustained business growth.
Governance against corruption


28
29
02
03
A Responsible Supply Chain 
Leads to Shared Development 
Outcomes 
04
A Responsible Supply Chain 
Promotes Good Consumption
Appendix
A Responsible Supply Chain  
Paves the Way for a Green Future
01
A Responsible Supply Chain 
Consolidates the Foundation 
of Responsibility
2022
Environmental, Social and 
Governance Report
To bolster directors and the management’s primary anti-corruption and integrity 
responsibilities and ability in managing integrity risk, JD.com implemented special 
anti-corruption training for directors and managers. In 2022, we developed a new 
case-study style of anti-corruption and integrity compliance training, based on busi-
ness scenarios and typical cases, focusing on legal compliance, case-based learning, 
case-based governance, and integrity risk management. The training consisted of 64 
in-person courses, with each lasting three hours on average and 100% of directors 
and management having taken the training, which enabled the directors and man-
agement team to become familiarized with anti-corruption laws and regulations, gain 
insight into the psychology of corruption, and persistently promote the formation of 
JD’s integrity and compliance system. ensuring that officials do not dare, are not 
able, and ultimately have no desire to be corrupt. 
During the reporting period, we implemented anti-corruption training sessions for procurement and logistics suppliers both 
online and offline, with a total of around 9,100 suppliers participating in the training.
The business departments established a self-inspection mechanism for anti-corruption and integrity risks. The business 
units are mainly responsible for maintaining risk control, preventing corruption cases, and establishing a connected integrity 
mechanism. The supervision department provides warnings for integrity risks, regularly reviews and improves the integrity 
risk monitoring and warning system, and assesses and optimizes the effectiveness of integrity risk management operations.
The supervision department, in 
partnership with the business risk 
control department and business 
units, convenes in-house commu-
nication meetings to analyze and 
design their business integrity risk 
map and integrity risk matrix and 
identifies potential risk points, 
and draws the integrity risk map.
The business departments con-
sistently monitor suspicious data 
and gather clues to the unusual 
performance of employees and 
partners, and provide regular up-
dates to the supervision depart-
ment.
Report integrity risks and effective 
corruption clues
Identify situations for integrity 
risks and their control points
Build a monitoring and warning system for integrity risk indicators
In line with "preventing corruption, 
promoting compliance, and 
boosting business", we engage 
in the identification, prevention, 
monitoring and control of anti-
corruption and integrity risks.
 JD.com's Special Training on Integrity and Compliance Management in 2022 
At the Supplier Conference held 
by Procurement Department of 
JD, we conducted promotion 
activities for our partners and 
suppliers. The training focused 
on JD.com's core business val-
ues of the Right Way, integrity 
and compliance system, as well 
as typical anti-corruption cases 
and reporting channels. Through 
this, we sought to collaborate 
with our partners to cultivate an 
ethical business environment.
Integrity and Compliance Promotion and Implementation of the JD.com Supplier Conference 2022
Promotion and Implementation of Integrity and Compliance at the Supplier Conference
"Three Lines of Defense" 
for anti-corruption and 
integrity risk assessment
Building a Culture of Business Ethics
JD.com provides anti-corruption training to all employees. Employees are required to 
participate in anti-corruption, integrity, and compliance training and assessment once a 
year, and then pass the relevant assessment with full marks. New employees also must 
complete online anti-corruption training and pass the assessment before becoming 
regular employees. In 2022, the Group completed online anti-corruption, integrity, and 
compliance training and assessments for all employees, with a 100% coverage rate 
and a 100% pass rate. This year, the anti-corruption, integrity and compliance training 
includes explaining the importance of anti-corruption, the fundamental principles of 
JD.com's anti-corruption, and the requirements of an anti-corruption, integrity and 
compliance system. Multilingual training versions were developed and produced in 
Chinese, English, Indonesian, Thai, etc.
the Group offered
in-person anti-corruption  
and integrity training sessions
attracting
of directors and management have 
taken the training
447
43,938attendees
100% 
In 2022


30
31
02
03
A Responsible Supply Chain 
Leads to Shared Development 
Outcomes 
04
A Responsible Supply Chain 
Promotes Good Consumption
Appendix
A Responsible Supply Chain  
Paves the Way for a Green Future
01
A Responsible Supply Chain 
Consolidates the Foundation 
of Responsibility
2022
Environmental, Social and 
Governance Report
JD.com strives to advance cooperation among all industries to create a 
credible and positive commercial climate and reinforce the "Sunshine 
Integrity Alliance" brand. As of the end of 2022, the Sunshine Integrity 
Alliance has served more than 700 enterprise members. The year's principal 
focus of the"Sunshine Integrity Alliance" encompasses:
 
Held the fifth Corporate Integrity and Compliance Summit and release 
the "Employee Fraud Analysis Report" for the manufacturing and retail 
industries;
 
Carried out the Sunshine Evolved series of online courses on corporate 
integrity and compliance, providing high-quality anti-corruption, 
integrity and compliance content;
  
Released the book 
Secret of Anti Corrup-
tion for Real Economy 
Enterprises, which 
collects innovative 
practices of integrity 
and compliance from 
real economy enter-
prises such as manu-
facturing, retail, and 
service industries.
"Sunshine Integrity Alliance"
The Fifth Corporate Integrity and Compliance Summit (2022)
Secret of Anti Corruption for Real Economy 
Enterprises
Standard Certification
JD.com is a signatory to the United Nations Global Compact, recognizing and 
upholding the ideals of the Ten Principles initiative and integrating it into our 
corporate strategies and operations. We actively promote the certification of 
other global anti-corruption standards to meet our commitment to organizational 
responsibility and anti-corruption compliance. We aim to attain ISO 37001 
certification within one to three years and seek external audits and certifications 
such as SMETA, BSCI, RBA assessments and SA8000 certifications to ensure the 
success of our internationalization strategy.
In September 2022, JD.com was the only 
private enterprise among the six winners of 
the third "China Integrity Innovation Award." 
JD.com drew on its experience in innovative 
integrity governance to create "JD's Integrity 
Governance Innovation Project" which was 
presented in its application to the third "China 
Integrity Innovation Award," which is sponsored 
and organized by the Integrity Governance 
Building and Governance Research Professional 
Committee of the Chinese Academy of Manage-
ment and the Discipline Inspection and Super-
vision Institute of Tsinghua University (Beijing 
Integrity Governance Development Research 
Base). JD.com was praised by evaluators for its 
innovation, importance, effectiveness, sustain-
ability and promotability. The award attracted 
applications from 174 other companies. 
JD.com Won the Third "China Integrity Innovation Award"
JD's Integrity Governance Innovation Project won the Third China 
Integrity Innovation Award
Whistleblower Protection
JD has posted the Whistleblower Protection and Reward Scheme of JD Group on its 
website, encouraging suppliers, other partners, employees, and other stakeholders 
to become part of the supervising system for the Group's honest operation and effec-
tively expose violations, such as corruption and official misconduct. Whistleblowers 
who give truthful reporting will receive cash awards based on the pertinence of clues 
as well as the nature and gravity of the reported cases they report. An anonymous or 
pseudonymous reporting system will be adopted to guarantee the confidentiality of 
both whistleblowers and the information they provide in various aspects such as ac-
ceptance, registration, storage, and investigation to prevent leakage or loss. Any viola-
tion of confidentiality regulations will be dealt with severely. JD prohibits any form of 
retaliation against whistleblowers, and violators may be held liable to legal penalties 
in accordance with national laws and regulations.
1、Telephone: 400-601-3618;
2、Email: jiancha@jd.com;
3、
Mailing address: Supervision Department, Tower A, Building 1, JD.com Headquarters, 
Kechuang 11th Street, Beijing Economic and Technological Development Zone;
4、By appointment;
5、Other forms deemed appropriate by the whistleblower.
Public reporting 
channels:


32
33
02
03
A Responsible Supply Chain 
Leads to Shared Development 
Outcomes 
04
A Responsible Supply Chain 
Promotes Good Consumption
Appendix
A Responsible Supply Chain  
Paves the Way for a Green Future
01
A Responsible Supply Chain 
Consolidates the Foundation 
of Responsibility
2022
Environmental, Social and 
Governance Report
JD.com strictly conforms to applicable national laws, regulations and regulatory 
guidelines, and attaches the utmost importance to the data privacy protection 
of consumers, customers, suppliers, partners, employees and any other related 
stakeholders. Drawing on international standards and industry best practices, it has 
built a comprehensive information security and privacy protection management system 
- including policies, management, technology, supervision and training - relying on a 
zero-trust security framework.
In line with relevant domestic and international legislation and regulations such as 
the Data Security Law of the People's Republic of China and the Personal Information 
Protection Law of the People's Republic of China, as well as industry-standard bodies 
such as ISO 27001 and ISO 27701, we continuously enhance our information security 
and privacy management system. We have developed 67 information security and 
privacy regulation systems and standards covering all existing activities, including the 
Information Security and Privacy Policy of JD Group and the Data and Privacy Security 
Management Regulation of JD Group.
In 2022, we comprehensively upgraded our information security and privacy protection 
measures, including host security, application security, data security, account security 
and application software privacy compliance.
Information 
Security and Privacy 
Protection
Establish and Improve Safety Management Mechanisms
Safety and Risk Control 
Committee
Safety Execution Working Group
Data Security & Privacy Compliance 
Working Group
Group Security, Legal, Each BG, etc.
Developing Information Security Compliance 
The Board and the Strategy Execution Committee of JD.com attach great importance to 
information security and privacy protection and participates in the strategic planning, 
review and decision-making of such matters.
The Board has set up a Security and Risk Control Committee as the highest manage-
ment body for information security and privacy protection. This Committee is chaired 
by the Chief Compliance Officer (CCO) and includes the technology vice presidents from 
sub-groups and business lines. It regularly reports to the Board and Strategy Execution 
Committee (SEC). The Security and Risk Control Committee is comprised of two work-
ing groups: a data security and privacy compliance working group and a security exe-
cution working group, forming a multi-level organizational framework for safeguarding 
information and privacy. The Information Security Department is responsible for the 
Committee's daily operations, convening regular monthly meetings to review major is-
sues, and regularly reporting to the Board and the SEC.
In the digital transformation sector, JD.com is committed to the principles of agility 
and efficiency. It is transitioning away from the network security protection known 
as "boundary protection" and is building a governance architecture based on "zero 
trust". We are exploring supply-chain-specific governance models to establish the 
"JD Zero Trust security system". With an emphasis on asset security, we integrate 
emerging technologies such as big data, artificial intelligence, blockchain, and cloud 
computing to construct a comprehensive zero-trust security system covering as-
set digitization, asset personalization, diversified checkpoints, diversified strategy 
centers, and a zero trust "cockpit." Construction of the "JD zero trust security system" 
has undergone four stages: proof of concept, implementation and practice, capability 
enhancement, and capability maturity, to form a reliable information security com-
pliance management system to secure the information security of all JD's assets. JD's 
Zero Trust security practices are detailed in our white paper titled; White Paper on JD's 
Zero Trust Security Practices
5.
To effectively handle information security incidents caused by IT system interruptions 
or cyberattacks, we are constantly revising and improving the Information Security 
Incident Grading Management Requirements of JD Group and the Security Monitoring 
and Response Regulations of JD Group. These documents set out the classification 
and grading standards and emergency response processes to protect information se-
curity and privacy and further enhance our security management mechanism.
Employees who violate information security and privacy protection policies face 
warnings, reprimands, or dismissal in accordance with the degree of misconduct. In-
dividuals who contravene national regulations will be held liable for adherence to the 
law. Those who inflict economic losses on JD.com will be required to compensate the 
company.
JD.com's Information Security and Privacy Protection Management Structure
Zero Trust Security Technology and Practice
5 
White Paper on JD's Zero Trust Security Practices
In 2022, 
Number of information security and 
privacy violation cases
Fines levied against JD.com for 
information security vulnerabilities or 
other network security incidents
0
0
Retail
Property
Health
CHO Line
CCO Line
CFO Line
Logistics
Private 
Label 
Brands
Industrials
Working Mechanism
Regular meeting: once a month
Temporary meetings: major 
emergencies or decisions, etc
Security risk governance: weekly report


34
35
02
03
A Responsible Supply Chain 
Leads to Shared Development 
Outcomes 
04
A Responsible Supply Chain 
Promotes Good Consumption
Appendix
A Responsible Supply Chain  
Paves the Way for a Green Future
01
A Responsible Supply Chain 
Consolidates the Foundation 
of Responsibility
2022
Environmental, Social and 
Governance Report
JD.com's ISO 27001 Information 
Security Management System 
Certificate
JD.com's ISO 27701 Privacy 
Information Management System 
Certificate
JD.com has established an information security and privacy protection system 
that covers data security, application security, office network security, and privacy 
protection. These protections are detailed in the Information Security and Privacy 
Management Code of JD Group, Data and Privacy Security Management Regu-
lation of JD Group, and Data Classification and Grading Guide of JD Group. The 
documents stipulate requirements for the collection, processing, use, and user-re-
sponse right to accessing the use of privacy data. A privacy impact assessment 
is also required when developing new businesses and carrying out R&D testing. 
Every business activity and research project that involves user privacy must com-
plete privacy impact assessments and regular audits. Data security assessment 
and governance work is carried out in accordance with local laws and regulations 
and policy guidance. All commercial activities must pass privacy and compliance 
testing prior to their online launch, effectively protecting the various privacy rights 
and interests of users.
In May 2023, JD.com updated JD's Privacy Policy, which stipulates the principle 
of data minimization, users' right to know, and the right to choose. We insist on 
"acquiring data only for legitimate and necessary purposes, with the informed 
consent of users and ensuring security and lawful use". We strictly follow the re-
quirements of laws and regulations for the storage, use, and disclosure of personal 
information. JD will further improve the management and requirements of third 
parties in data use and maintenance.
User Privacy Protection
Data Minimization, User's Right to Know and Choose 
JD regularly performs compliance audits and information security tests, includ-
ing annual external and internal audits. The non conformities discovered during 
the external and internal audits in 2022 were improved and repaired. Every year, 
we invite qualified third-party security professionals to carry out system stability 
tests and network security emergency tests. Through this practical exercise, infor-
mation security weaknesses and potential security risks are revealed and overall 
response and prevention capabilities are further strengthened.
JD.com continues to upgrade ISO 27701 and ISO 27001 certification, which now 
encompasses 80% of its operational scope. We are likewise actively partnering 
with third-party consulting agencies to ensure GDPR compliance. The Group has 
completed GDPR security and compliance for its MCA business, thereby guaran-
teeing data security and adherence to regulations for our business in Europe.
Supervision and Audit by Independent Agencies
JD.com employs encryption technology to encrypt and save user's personal data 
and isolates data through isolation technology. The Data and Privacy Security 
Management Regulation of JD Group explicitly states display of user data display 
must be desensitized, using a desensitization process that covers the daily opera-
tions of employees, users, and suppliers. We have set up a data backup and recov-
ery management system that regularly backup data. The data storage system is 
deployed in distributed networks and equipped with a data recovery module.
All-chain Data Protection
In 2022, JD Health, a subsidiary of JD.com, was certified with the 
ISO 27799 Information Security Management System in Healthcare, 
becoming the first enterprise in the Chinese Internet healthcare in-
dustry to earn the certification.
JD Health was ISO 27799 Certified


36
37
02
03
A Responsible Supply Chain 
Leads to Shared Development 
Outcomes 
04
A Responsible Supply Chain 
Promotes Good Consumption
Appendix
A Responsible Supply Chain  
Paves the Way for a Green Future
01
A Responsible Supply Chain 
Consolidates the Foundation 
of Responsibility
2022
Environmental, Social and 
Governance Report
JD.com has successfully passed the first batch of the CAICT Business 
Security Capability Assessment, becoming a member of the Business 
Security Initiative. JD's business security products and services were 
selected into the CAICT "Business Security Panorama".
JD.com's web application and 
API protection (WAAP) has been 
evaluated by CAICT in terms 
of API security protection, API 
security monitoring, and other 
aspects, and the results have 
met the requirements of the Ad-
vanced Level. It also passed the 
test of Q/KXY CS111 Application 
Program Interface Full Life Cycle 
Security Management Require-
ments and obtained the API Se-
curity Capability Certificate from 
CAICT.
JD.com Became a Member of the Business Security 
Initiative of the China Academy of Information and 
Communications Technology (CAICT)
JD.com's API Security Capability Certificate
JD.com is Now a Member of the CAICT Business Security Initiative
JD.com's API Security Capability 
Certificate
JD.com's Compliance Training and Exams for 
All Employees in 2022  (Including Information 
Security and Privacy Protection)
JD's Data Security Protection Awareness Training 
of Contracted Personnel in 2022 
The Information Security Department and Legal Compliance Department of JD.com 
are responsible for delivering training on the Group's information security compli-
ance, data security, and personal data privacy protection. An annual training program 
and assessment of information security and privacy protection are required for all 
employees, including full-time employees, interns, consultants, and other labour 
personnel, as well as all entities and individuals engaged in commercial activities with 
JD.com, including suppliers, contractors, subcontractors, etc. New employees must 
participate in online information security and privacy protection training and pass 
exams before passing their probation period. Customized courses are included within 
the information security compliance training for product development specialists, 
and outsourcing personnel employees who work in key customer segments, such as 
information security compliance and phishing-prevention training. JD incorporates 
information security compliance management and personal information privacy 
protection into its business assessment of core managers and people in key positions, 
creating a culture of information security and privacy protection for all employees.
Developing Safety Culture and Awareness 
Number of personnel who 
has completed training 
examinations
560,000
Training examination 
pass rate
100%
Overall time of training and 
examinations approximately
280,000hours
Number of information se-
curity and privacy protection 
training sessions conducted 
24
In 2022,


38
39
02
03
A Responsible Supply Chain 
Leads to Shared Development 
Outcomes 
04
A Responsible Supply Chain 
Promotes Good Consumption
Appendix
A Responsible Supply Chain  
Paves the Way for a Green Future
01
A Responsible Supply Chain 
Consolidates the Foundation 
of Responsibility
2022
Environmental, Social and 
Governance Report
Technology and innovation are the driving forces behind JD.com's high-quality 
growth and the core competitiveness of JD's sustainable development. JD's indus-
try-leading innovation is driven by various application scenarios and technology 
and powered by a team formed from core scientists to young technicians.
In early 2017, JD.com began a comprehensive technological transformation and has 
so far invested nearly RMB100 billion in technology research and development. These 
investments have enabled JD.com to bolster its technological and industrial digiti-
zation capabilities by leveraging advanced technologies such as cloud computing, 
artificial intelligence, big data and the Internet of Things (IoT). JD continues to lead 
technological innovation in logistics, supply chain security and customer service. Its 
technology continues to improve consumers' shopping experience while reducing 
costs and improving the efficiency of JD.com's brands and business partners. JD 
Cloud provides technology and services to various stakeholders including munici-
palities, businesses, financial institutions, and farmers. During the reporting period, 
JD.com invested nearly RMB16.9 billion in research and innovation. 
In 2022, JD system listed and unlisted companies received three "China Patent Excel-
lence Awards" in the field of data processing, visual recognition systems, and cross 
domain data fusion technology.
Technology and 
Innovation
On July 16, 2022, the "Key Technologies of Intelligent Product Matching and Their 
Applications in Marketing," jointly researched by JD.com and Tianjin University, received 
second prize at the Science and Technology Progress Award ceremony of the 11th 
"Wu Wen Jun AI Science & Technology Awards". JD's award was for three essential 
key techniques: multi-level user profiling, cross-modal product modelling, and precise 
people-goods matching, which were based on user characteristics, product attributes, 
and matching recommendations. This technology has enabled the provision of intelligent 
marketing services to over 100,000 domestic and international businesses with noteworthy 
improvements in marketing management, cost-cutting, and enhanced user experience.
JD.com Receives Second Prize of the Science and Technology Progress 
Award from "Wu Wen Jun AI Science & Technology Award" in 2022 
The 11th "Wu Wen Jun AI Science & Technology Award" Ceremony 
We are committed to delivering the infrastructure capabilities that JD has accumulated 
to benefit society, driving the digital transformation of the industry and boosting the 
real economy by leveraging JD's identity as a real economy enterprise. Open Alliance 
for Carbon Neutrality Technology is based on the core concept of openness and 
sharing and is building a patent pool related to energy conservation and emission 
reduction and green development for carbon neutrality. Through the opening and 
sharing of patent technology, the alliance accelerates digital technology innovation and 
integration in carbon neutrality.
JD.com and Several Companies Jointly Establish the Open Alliance 
for Carbon Neutrality Technology
The Launch of Open Alliance for Carbon Neutrality Technology
During the reporting period, 
JD.com spent nearly
in R&D
RMB16.9billion
JD.com has invested nearly
RMB100billion
in R&D so far
In 2022,  
JD system listed and unlisted companies received
"China Patent Excellence Awards" 
for data processing, visual recognition systems, 
 
and cross-domain data fusion technology
3


40
41
02
03
A Responsible Supply Chain 
Leads to Shared Development 
Outcomes 
04
A Responsible Supply Chain 
Promotes Good Consumption
Appendix
A Responsible Supply Chain  
Paves the Way for a Green Future
01
A Responsible Supply Chain 
Consolidates the Foundation 
of Responsibility
2022
Environmental, Social and 
Governance Report
JD.com's Key Data on 
Accumulated Intellectual 
Property (as of the end of 
2022)
JD.com firmly adheres to intellectual property ("IP") protection and is compliant with 
applicable laws and regulations – such as the Patent Law of the People's Republic of 
China and the Trademark Law of the People's Republic of China. It has put in place 
internal intellectual property management measures, namely the Patent Management 
Measures of JD Group and Trademark Management Measures of JD Group. In 2022, 
the Group announced the Trade Secret Management Measures (Trial) of JD Group, 
further extending its intellectual property management system and guiding the 
comprehensive progress of its intellectual property management efforts.
JD.com launches targeted campaigns and comprehensive training sessions on 
implementing its intellectual property management and raising awareness of in-
tellectual property protection. In 2022, it carried out more than 200 internal train-
ing sessions on patents, trademarks, copyrights, trade secrets, open source, and 
rights protection, covering nearly 6,000 employees.
JD.com staunchly encourages employees to apply for patents to protect their R&D 
innovations and integrate incentives for creativity into their daily tasks. The Group has 
set up the Patent Application Award and Patent Authorization Award for patents with 
remarkable innovative value, application potential, economic benefits and social ben-
efits. The JD Patent Award was created to reward excellence. Incentive measures are 
also offered.
Thanks to the ever-growing technology and R&D investments, in 
2022, JD.com had accumulated more than 6000 globally authorized 
patents, ranging from AI, cloud computing and retail technology 
to logistics warehousing, digital intelligent supply chain, new infra-
structure for digital economy, green low-carbon technology, and its 
pan-regional patent collaborative business development spaned ten 
countries and territories.
The Group's intellectual property management is essential 
to securing and protecting its IP rights, meeting the demands 
of business development, and preventing infringement of 
trade secrets and other important information. It also aims to 
standardize employee behaviour, internal procedures, and reg-
ulations, and enhance its risk management system. The Group 
strives to comprehensively and promptly protect its IP assets, 
such as technological innovations and achievements, brands, 
commercial logos, software works, and domain names, via 
cooperation between the IP management team and business 
operations. Specific internal and external management plans 
have been formulated to ensure clear workflow and measures, 
and efficient executions of various IP management processes 
which are designed to improve the IP management certifica-
tion system.
JD is dedicated to protecting intellectual property and combat-
ting infringement through a combined approach of prevention 
and control. This strategy covers the full spectrum of preven-
tive measures, from pre-event, during-event, and post-event. 
The Group actively responds to rights infringement complaints 
submitted by intellectual property holders and their represent-
atives while safeguarding the legal rights and interests of all IP 
rights holders.
We are committed to ensuring the authenticity of merchandise 
and actively collaborate with local law enforcement, brand 
rights holders, and various brand protection organizations. 
Guided by the philosophy of social collaborative governance, 
we endeavour to construct a connected platform for corporate 
social responsibility collaborative governance, encompassing 
innovative institutional governance, innovative organizational 
governance, and innovative technological governance, to en-
sure a lawful commercial atmosphere.
In 2022, JD's Intellectual Property Protection Platform es-
tablished cooperation with the Public Service Department of 
the National Intellectual Property Administration (NIPA) by 
integrating the National Intellectual Property Public Service 
Network into the home page of the JD platform. With a single 
click, users of the JD platform can directly access the official 
NIPA website to learn about their rights.
JD's Patent Award Trophy in 2022
JD's Intellectual Property Protection Platform 
Intellectual Property 
Protection
Number of authorized 
patents at home and abroad
6,272Patents
Number of published patents  
at home and abroad
18,424Patents


42
43
02
03
A Responsible Supply Chain 
Leads to Shared Development 
Outcomes 
04
A Responsible Supply Chain 
Promotes Good Consumption
Appendix
A Responsible Supply Chain  
Paves the Way for a Green Future
01
A Responsible Supply Chain 
Consolidates the Foundation 
of Responsibility
2022
Environmental, Social and 
Governance Report
JD.com is committed to building a green and low-carbon 
supply chain system by actively promoting carbon-reduc-
tion measures in the fields of warehousing, packaging, 
transportation and consumption and striving to go green in 
offices, logistics, stores, parks and other scenarios. Work-
ing with upstream and downstream partners to shape a 
future green supply chain, the Group helps to achieve the 
national goal of reaching carbon peaking and carbon neu-
trality, and respond to and mitigate the impacts of climate 
change.
02
A Responsible Supply 
Chain Paves the Way 
for a Green Future


44
45
01
A Responsible Supply Chain 
Consolidates the Foundation 
of Responsibility
03
A Responsible Supply Chain 
Leads to Shared Development 
Outcomes 
04
A Responsible Supply Chain 
Promotes Good Consumption
Appendix
02
A Responsible Supply Chain  
Paves the Way for a Green Future
45
44
2022
Environmental, Social and 
Governance Report
Addressing Climate Change through the Task Force 
on Climate-related Financial Disclosure (TCFD)
Amidst the issue of global warming, countries have adopted carbon reduction 
commitments and explored ways to alleviate climate change. In December 2020, 
President Xi Jinping said at the General Debate of the 75th Session of the UN Gen-
eral Assembly that China would peak carbon dioxide emissions before 2030 and 
achieve carbon neutrality before 2060. Addressing climate change is a responsi-
bility shared by the global community with a shared future for humanity. As a new 
type of real economy-based enterprise with global influence, JD.com leverages its 
deep connections within the value chain to deal with climate opportunities and 
challenges, developing climate competencies while motivating stakeholders from 
across the supply chain to work together to meet the goals of climate mitigation.
We are calling on corporate governance and strategic frameworks to incorporate cli-
mate change through the Task Force on Climate-related Financial Disclosure (TCFD) 
framework. This includes developing appropriate carbon reduction routes, fortifying 
climate change risk management, identifying effective carbon reduction measures, 
verifying and disclosing climate change related information, and assessing the effec-
tiveness of our climate strategies and carbon reduction actions, which is JD's contri-
bution to achieving China's goals of carbon peaking and carbon neutrality.
The Group's Board of Directors has ultimate responsibility for climate change 
related risks and opportunities and appoints the ESG committee to comprehen-
sively oversee relevant tasks, such as climate risk identification, assessment, and 
management. The ESG committee regularly reports to the Board of Directors on 
sustainability matters, including climate-related issues.
The ESG committee also holds regular meetings to fulfill the following 
responsibilities related to climate change:
JD has continuously adjusted its business development strategy and resource al-
location after analysis of climate-related risks and opportunities, formulating sus-
tainable development strategies. JD is committed to addressing potential climate 
change-induced risks, taking advantage of low-carbon growth opportunities while 
striving to promote green development for itself, and for society as a whole.
We adopted the Shared Socioeconomic Pathways (SSPs) recommended by the Inter-
governmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) to carry out a climate scenario analysis 
on the external environment of our business operations, including ecology, economy 
and society, using the SSP1 and SSP3 for the two time periods of 2025 and 2030 re-
spectively.
Governance
Strategy
Forecast of Macro-Environmental Situation JD.com May Face in Different Climate Scenarios
SSP1 (Low emission scenario under strict climate policies )
  
 
Mean temperature: the temperature will rise by 1.6℃ by 2040 
when compared with the pre-industrial era, and by 2.0℃ by 2100;
  
 
Sea level: the sea level will rise by 0.1 meters in 2040 and by 0.4 
meters in 2100;
  
 
Extreme weather: its frequency and intensity will increase to a 
certain extent;
  
 
Rainfall: as temperatures rise between 1.5 and 2.0 ℃, global ag-
riculture and ecology will suffer from more intense droughts, with 
an increase in precipitation intensity of 10.5% to 14%.
  
 
Mean temperature: the temperature will rise by 1.6℃ by 2040 
when compared with the pre-industrial era, and by 3.9℃  by 2100;
  
 
Sea level: the sea level will rise by 0.1 meters in 2040 and by 0.6 
meters in 2100;
  
 
Extreme weather: its frequency and intensity will increase greatly;
  
 
Rainfall: as temperatures rise between 2.0 and 4.0℃, global 
agriculture and ecology will suffer from more intense droughts, 
with an increase in precipitation intensity of 14.0% to 30.2%.
SSP1 (High emission scenario without climate  policies )
Nature
6
   
Global climate policy: major countries and regions worldwide 
announce the carbon neutrality path (including China's goals of "carbon 
peaking" and "carbon neutrality"), and strictly implement the goals;
   
Global business model: transitioning rapidly from an economy 
based on fossil fuels to one driven by renewable energy sources;
   
China's greenhouse gas emissions: emissions per unit of GDP 
will decrease by 18% in 2025 from the 2020 level, and by more 
than 65% in 2030 from the 2005 level 
7;
   
China's carbon prices: carbon prices are expected to reach 
RMB89.48/ton and RMB203.71/ton by 2025 and 2030 respectively 
(without total emission control) 
8;
   
China's energy structure: The proportion of non fossil fuels in one-
time energy consumption will reach 20% in 2025 and 25% in 2030; 
9
   
China's new energy vehicles: By 2025, the sales of new NEVs will 
reach about 20% of the total; By 2030, the proportion of newly used 
clean energy powered vehicles will reach around 40% that year 
10;
   
China's consumer attitudes: By 2025, the market share of green 
and low-carbon products will significantly increase; By 2030, green 
consumption become the mainstream trend, and the public will 
actively choose green and low-carbon products 
11.
   
Global climate policy: some countries and regions lack carbon 
neutrality goals, and have no detailed short-term actions and 
goals;
   
Global business model: the profit-driven business model fails to 
properly consider the environmental and social impacts, and there 
are no obvious changes in the renewable energy portfolio;
   
China's greenhouse gas emissions: In 2030, greenhouse gas 
emissions will rise by 38% from the 2021 level;
   
China's carbon prices: In 2025 and 2030, carbon prices remained 
the same as in 2022, at RMB50.54-61.60/ton
12；
   
China's energy structure: the proportion of non fossil fuels in 
primary energy consumption is the same as that in 2020, about 
16%;
   
China's new energy vehicles: The proportion of total sales of NEVs 
remains the same as in 2021, at 11.25%
13；
   
China's consumer attitudes: green consumption is not yet 
mainstream, and the market for green and low-carbon products is 
relatively small.
Socio-economic environment
6 Source: Sixth Assessment Report from Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) Working Group (WGI) and CMIP6 Climate Model
7 Source: China's Intended Nationally Determined Contributions
8 Source: Long-term carbon price forecast update of China's carbon market released by Refinitiv in 2022
9 Source:  National Development and Reform Commission's Outline on "14th Five Year Plan"
10 Source: The Ministry of State issued the "Development Plan for the NEV Industry (2021-2035)" at the end of 2020
11 
Source: "Implementation Plan for Promoting Green Consumption" issued by the National Development and Reform Commission, the Ministry 
of Industry and Information Technology, the Ministry of Commerce, and other departments in 2022
12 Source: Shanghai Environment and Energy Exchange
13 Source: People's Daily, 2022
JD.com's ESG Working Group coordinates the daily management and execution of 
climate-related risks and opportunities and establishes a Climate Action Special 
Group to identify and assess such risks and opportunities.
Review/check JD.com's efforts on 
climate risks and opportunities, 
including climate risk identifica-
tion, assessment, response, etc;
Review/check JD.com's invest-
ments related to climate change 
risks and opportunities.


46
47
01
A Responsible Supply Chain 
Consolidates the Foundation 
of Responsibility
03
A Responsible Supply Chain 
Leads to Shared Development 
Outcomes 
04
A Responsible Supply Chain 
Promotes Good Consumption
Appendix
02
A Responsible Supply Chain  
Paves the Way for a Green Future
47
46
2022
Environmental, Social and 
Governance Report
14 Source: Global Risk Report 2022
15 Source: China Climate Bulletin 2022 released by China Meteorological Administration
16 Source: 2021 China Sea Level Bulletin
Potential impacts of physical risks on JD's business, risk identification and impact cycle under the high emission 
scenario (SSP3)
Starting from assessing both physical and transformation risks, JD.com analyzed relevant literature on climate, macro 
environment, and industrial policies, and integrated the findings with their own business conditions to identify and assess the 
potential effects of climate change on their short-term【S】 (within 2 years), medium-term【M】 (2-5 years), and long-term【L】
 
(more than 5 years) operations.
Classification of physical risks: heatwaves, sea level rise, floods, increased frequency of extreme weather, and loss of 
biodiversity.
The business impact of physical risk: according to Global Risk Report 2022
14, survey respondents ranked "climate action 
failure" as the biggest long-term threat and the number one risk, potentially causing the most severe impact over the next 
decade. The potential consequences of these climate-related physical risks will have an impact on companies including JD, 
such as natural resource crises, ecological environment damage, infrastructure damage, and threats to human health.
Potential impacts of physical risks on JD's business, risk identification and impact cycle under the high emission scenario (SSP3)
Risk clas-
sification
Strategic 
factor
Impact
Risk description
Physical risk 
classification
Impact 
period
Acute 
physical 
risks 
Market Risk
Infrastruc-
ture failure
Increased 
operating 
costs
  
 
Climate change leads to an increased prevalence of extreme weather 
conditions such as floods, typhoons, excessive precipitation, and 
extreme high/low temperature weather. This has, in turn, affects 
the stability of buildings and operations such as JD.com's office 
buildings, intelligent industrial parks, and data centers, resulting in 
increased costs for maintaining infrastructure such as warehousing 
and data centers. The China Climate Bulletin 2022, forecasts heavy 
rains and waterlogging in South China and Northeast China, as well 
as floods in the Pearl River basin and Songliao basin, which is likely to 
affect our storage and operational sites
15;
  
 
When the frequency or duration of flooding increases, it can cause 
damage to the warehouse and transportation network of JD.com, 
resulting in damage to logistics infrastructure, which could eventually 
lead to a decline in logistics performance and supply, a decrease in 
business volume, an increase in equipment maintenance costs, and 
a decline in business revenue;
  
 
The 2021 China Sea Level Bulletin revealed that the risk of sea 
level rise in China's coastal areas is escalating due to accelerated 
urbanization.
16 Impacts of the rising sea levels may include the 
termination or early decommissioning of facilities located in 
vulnerable coastal areas and the relocation of infrastructure 
companies in coastal regions to inland areas which would incur 
higher operation expenditures;
   
Climatic change-induced frequent sand and dust storms would 
reduce the efficiency of photovoltaic panel power generation and 
potentially increase operating and maintenance costs.
Heat wave
Flood
Sea level rise
Frequent 
occurrences 
of extreme 
weather
Frequent 
occurrence 
of sandstorm 
weather in 
some areas
M、L
Human 
health 
crisis
  
 
High temperatures shorten the external incubation period of the den-
gue fever virus, enhancing the rate of being bitten by vector Aedes 
mosquitoes and expediting their development and reproduction due 
to increased rainfall
17. Subsequently, future climate change is likely 
to create more optimal conditions for the spread and prevalence of 
dengue fever, posing potential health and safety risks to employees 
of JD.com. Consequently, should JD.com's suppliers, customers, or 
business partners be exposed to related hazards, their activities may 
be disturbed or damaged.
Loss of 
biodiversity
Heat waves
S、M、
L
Risk clas-
sification
Strategic 
factor
Impact
Risk description
Physical risk 
classification
Impact 
period
Acute 
physical 
risks 
Supply 
chain man-
agement
Infrastruc-
ture failure 
  
 
Floods, typhoons, excessive precipitation, and extreme high/
low temperatures resulting from climate change will have a del-
eterious effect on JD.com's logistics infrastructure equipment 
(including associated businesses, regional performance centers, 
front-end distribution centers, newly added warehouses, distribu-
tion stations, pick-up points, and roads). This will lead to the reduced 
operational efficiency of regional performance centers or possibly 
render them unable to carry on normal operations. This, in turn, will 
negatively impact the delivery and sale of goods. Intense rainstorms 
and flooding could disturb logistics route planning, storage, and 
transportation network planning. Heat waves or extreme cold could 
damage batteries in operational vehicles, consequently affecting ex-
press delivery efficiency and denting the Group's operating revenue;
  
 
JD has developed a comprehensive cold chain infrastructure, with 
warehouses and temperature-controlled vehicles, requiring in-
creased use of bio-friendly refrigerants in extremely high heat. This 
results in higher operational costs and raises risks of battery-relat-
ed incidents and maintenance demands for the vehicle fleet and 
cargo aircraft.
Heat wave
Flood 
Frequent 
occurrences 
of extreme 
weather
M、L
Harm to 
ecological 
environ-
mental 
Crisis of 
natural 
resource
  
 
The increased frequency of floods, typhoons, excessive precipita-
tion, and extremely high and low temperatures caused by climate 
change will affect JD.com's supply chain stability. This leads to 
higher raw material prices, and challenges in product supply and 
inventory, as well as impacting the operating revenue of JD's pri-
vate label brands and vendors. For instance, fresh produce sold on 
SEVEN FRESH, JD's supermarket, is highly vulnerable to damage 
caused by extreme weather, disrupting the supply chain and dam-
age to goods, consequently impacting consumer satisfaction and 
causing a rise in costs.
Heat wave
Flood 
Frequent 
occurrences 
of extreme 
weather
S、M
Chronic 
physical 
risk
Operation 
Human 
health 
crisis
Damage to 
infrastruc-
ture 
Harm to 
ecological 
environ-
mental
  
 
The National Climate Center's monitoring showed that from June 
2020 (as of July 12th), the average number of days of high tempera-
ture in China was 5.3 days, 2.4 days more than typical years, setting 
a new high since 1961
18. Such high temperatures affect the perfor-
mance and health of the employees at JD.com, resulting in increased 
expenses, such as medical bills and heatstroke subsidies;
  
 
A rise in average temperatures may cause potential detrimen-
tal impacts on the regular operation and maintenance of data 
centers, such as diminished lifespans of data center facilities and 
hardware; a higher burden on energy consumption for data center 
heat transfer and cooling, resulting in greater carbon emissions; 
higher consumption of water resources, and so on;
  
 
Drought poses the most serious threat to terrestrial biodiversity, 
particularly to amphibians whose highly sensitive water require-
ments render them the most vulnerable
19.
Average 
temperature 
rise
Drought
M、L
Market 
Risk
Consumer/
User
Harms to 
ecological 
environ-
mental
  
 
Extreme weather events have exacerbated shortages of some foods. 
In 2008, China suffered from a cold snap, rain, snow and freeze, re-
sulting in approximately 14 million hectares of crops being affected. 
In 2014, a severe drought hit North and Northeast China, significantly 
impacting summer grain production. Extreme downpours in Henan 
Province on July 20, 2021, caused massive crop failure, particularly of 
corn
20. Climate change will present a mounting challenge to the food 
chain and food safety & quality offered by JD.com, thus increasing 
the potential health risks to consumers, and reducing consumer 
satisfaction, while raising the costs of restoring consumer satisfaction 
and protecting consumer rights & interests for JD.com.
Loss of 
biodiversity
S、M
17  Source: Fifth Assessment Report of IPCC
18 Source: National Climate Center
19 Source: "Drought Seriously Threats Terrestrial Biodiversity" by China Science Daily
20 Source: "Impacts of Climate Change on China's Food Security Cannot be Ignored"


48
49
01
A Responsible Supply Chain 
Consolidates the Foundation 
of Responsibility
03
A Responsible Supply Chain 
Leads to Shared Development 
Outcomes 
04
A Responsible Supply Chain 
Promotes Good Consumption
Appendix
02
A Responsible Supply Chain  
Paves the Way for a Green Future
49
48
2022
Environmental, Social and 
Governance Report
Potential impacts of physical risks on JD's business, risk identification and impact cycle under the low emission 
scenario (SSP1)
Under the low-emission scenario, tighter macroeconomic policies and low-carbon transformation in society may impose 
potential restrictions and regulatory requirements for the Group, which will affect its operation and income.
JD's transformation risks include policy and legal risks, technical risks, reputational risks, and market risks.
Climate related transformation risks and strategic perspectives, risk description, classification, and time span of JD.com under 
the low emission scenario (SSP1)
Risk clas-
sification
Strategic factor
Risk description
Transformation 
risk classification
Impact 
period
Policy and 
regulatory 
risks
Trend of low-carbon 
development 
In the event of non-compliance with the relevant national laws 
and regulations, JD.com will face regulatory scrutiny, pressure 
from external stakeholders, and an increase in operational costs 
in the short term to ensure policy compliance optimization. This 
includes investment in hiring professionals in carbon emissions 
data management and disclosure of information.
  
 
China has established a "1+N" policy system for carbon peaking 
and carbon neutrality, formulated a medium- and long-term 
greenhouse gas emission control strategy, contributed to a 
national carbon emission trading market, and prepared and im-
plemented a national climate change adaptation strategy. The 
"1" refers to the guiding ideology and top-level framework for 
China to achieve carbon peak carbon neutrality. The Opinions 
on Completely, Accurately and Comprehensively Implementing 
the New Development Concept and Achieving Carbon Neu-
trality in Carbon Peaking
22 and Action Plan for Carbon Peaking 
by 2030
23 issued in 2021 defined the schedule, road map and 
construction drawing of those efforts. "N" refers to the imple-
mentation plan and accompanying support measures for key 
areas and industries, such as energy, industry, transportation, 
and urban-rural construction, along with underpinning technol-
ogies, energy security, carbon sink capacity, fiscal and financial 
pricing policies, standard measurement systems, inspection, 
and assessment;
  
 
In June 2022, China released the National Strategy for Climate 
Change Adaptation 2035
23, which proposed the guiding ideology, 
main goals, and basic principles for China's adaptation to climate 
change in the new era, and further improve safeguard measures 
to provide important guidance and a solid foundation for effective 
adaptation to climate change.
Policy and legal 
risks
S、M、L
21 Source: inions of the CPC Central Committee and the State Council on Completely, Accurately and Comprehensively Implementing the New 
Development Concept and Achieving Carbon Neutrality and Carbon Peaking
22 Source: Notice of the State Council on Issuing the Action Plan for Carbon Peaking by 2030
23 Source: National Strategy for Climate Change Adaptation
Risk clas-
sification
Strategic factor
Risk description
Transformation 
risk classification
Impact 
period
Policy and 
regulatory 
risks
Supply 
chain 
manage-
ment
Stricter 
laws 
related 
to green 
supply 
chain
China is intensively promulgating policies and regulations related 
to green transportation, green packaging, and the development 
of green parks, resulting in a profound effect on JD.com's core ac-
tivities, including warehousing and transportation. If JD.com fails 
to adequately disclose related information as required, it will face 
regulatory compliance risks, and potential pressure from external 
stakeholders.
  
 
Transportation: Seven departments including the National Devel-
opment and Reform Commission, the Ministry of Commerce, and 
the State Administration for Market Regulation have issued the 
Implementation Plan for Promoting Green Consumption 
24, which 
proposes to accelerate the development of green logistics distri-
bution; The 14th Five Year Plan for Green Transportation Develop-
ment
25 outlined the green transformation policy for logistics and 
transportation, and more quantitative goals in reducing pollution 
and carbon emissions, energy consumption structure for logistics 
vehicles, and transportation structure; The General Office of the 
State Council has issued the 14th Five Year Plan for the Develop-
ment of Cold Chain Logistics
26 to accelerate the pace of emission 
reduction and low-carbon transformation, promote the structural 
adjustment of cold chain logistics and transportation, and achieve 
healthy and sustainable development;
  
 
Packaging: The General Office of the State Council has issued the 
Notice on Further Strengthening the Control of Excessive Pack-
aging of Goods
27, which places curbs on excessive packaging of 
goods and sets clear requirements for the packaging industry; 
Action Plan for Plastic Pollution Control During The 14th Five Year 
Plan
28 and the packaging policies related to the postal and express 
delivery industry have set clear requirements and quantitative 
goals for the all-chain governance of plastic packaging, especially 
for e-commerce, reduction, standardization, recycling, and easy 
recycling of express packaging;
  
 
Park: Implementation Plan for National Green Development 
Special Action in High Tech Zone
29  pointed out the collaborative 
industrial park and green transformation of urban energy, in order 
to maximize the use of clean energy and circular transformation 
of the park to build low-carbon cities and develop the low-carbon 
economy.
Policy and legal 
risks
S、M
Market 
Risk
Pressure 
from 
supply 
sides
  
 
The national system of energy consumption intensity control 
and total emissions control has become increasingly stringent, 
resulting in limited electricity consumption and rising electricity 
prices among high energy intensive enterprises. An excessively 
active response to energy transformation will further disrupt the 
energy market, reducing the supply of highly energy-intensive 
industrial goods. As such, key-emission industries are facing a 
capacity contraction, likely pushing up raw material prices and 
restructuring the industrial landscape. Such scenarios may have 
a potential impact on JD's suppliers, manifesting as supply 
scarcity and increased procurement costs, among other issues.
Increased 
transition 
costs
  
 
JD's operational expenditures are set to rise, including invest-
ments in clean energy, technology development for carbon 
reduction, R&D of low-carbon infrastructures and procurement 
services.
24 Source: Implementation Plan for Promoting Green Consumption
25 Source: Notice of the Ministry of Transport on Issuing the 14th Five Year Plan for Green Transportation Development
26 Source: Notices of General Office of the State Council on Issuing the 14th Five Year Plan for the Development of Cold Chain Logistics
27 Source: Notice of the General Office of the State Council on Further Strengthening the Control of Excessive Packaging of Goods
26 Source: Notices of General Office of the State Council on Issuing the 14th Five Year Plan for the Development of Cold Chain Logistics
29 Source: Notice of the Ministry of Science and Technology on Issuing the Implementation Plan for National Green Development Special Action in High Tech Zone


50
51
01
A Responsible Supply Chain 
Consolidates the Foundation 
of Responsibility
03
A Responsible Supply Chain 
Leads to Shared Development 
Outcomes 
04
A Responsible Supply Chain 
Promotes Good Consumption
Appendix
02
A Responsible Supply Chain  
Paves the Way for a Green Future
51
50
2022
Environmental, Social and 
Governance Report
Risk clas-
sification
Strategic factor
Risk description
Transformation 
risk classification
Impact 
period
Reputa-
tional Risk
Social and cultural 
transformation
  
 
The disruption of JD.com's safety and continuity of operations 
due to climate risks may cause worries and adverse responses 
from investors and other stakeholders about the steadiness of JD's 
business;
  
 
Market preferences have transitioned, resulting in an upsurge in 
consumer demand for green products. This may incur an increase 
in costs, including changes in production techniques, processes 
and facilities and rising raw material costs. Should JD.com fail 
to timely recognize and respond to such trends, it may see a 
reduction in market share and revenue.
Market risk
Reputational risk
Policy and legal risk
S、M、L
Techno-
logical 
Risk
Technological 
advancement and 
application
  
 
In the context of global warming and increased focus on environ-
mental protection, China has launched new energy consumption 
and carbon emission control laws and policies, setting high Power 
Usage Effectiveness (PUE 
30) and energy-saving requirements. This 
put pressure on JD.com's data centers to transition to low-carbon 
technologies, which might trigger additional compliance and op-
erational expenses. Failure to invest in or research new low-carbon 
technologies may result in financial losses;
  
 
JD has invested heavily in the R&D of low-carbon technologies, 
including the development of recycled packaging, reduced 
packaging, and reduced use of non-degradable consumables. 
If the R&D fails, JD will face financial losses as well as increased 
carbon footprint in its operations and long-term impact from 
competitors surpassing it in the race of low carbons.
Technological risk
Policy and legal risk
Reputational risk
M、L
Market 
Risk
Climate-related 
Investing and 
Financing
  
 
In 2022, remarkable achievements were made in China's green fi-
nance policy standards, market and international cooperation. The 
People's Bank of China has developed and launched carbon reduc-
tion support instruments and specific refinancing plans to back up 
clean and efficient utilization of coal; CBRC issued the Guidelines for 
Green Finance in Banking and Insurance
32 to offer policy guidance 
and financial assistance for eco-friendly progress and low-carbon 
transformation projects. China has become one of the largest markets 
of green finance worldwide. By June 2022, the balance of green loans 
in both domestic and foreign currency surged to RMB19.55 trillion, 
up 40.4% from the preceding year; the size of green bonds reached 
RMB1.2 trillion, ranking China the second largest issuer in the world. 
The first set of transformation bonds has been issued smoothly. If 
JD.com fails to spot, evaluate, and address climate-related risks in 
time, its potential investment and financing options will be ham-
pered, leading to a revenue decrease.
Policy and legal risk
M、L
30PUE, Power Usage Effectiveness, an indicator for evaluating energy efficiency in data centers.
31 Source: Notice of the CBRC on Printing and Distributing the Guidelines for Green Finance in Banking and Insurance
32 Source: Notice of the CBRC on Printing and Distributing the Guidelines for Green Finance in Banking and Insurance Industry
Strategic 
direction
Opportunities and 
strategies
Transition accomplishment
Classification
Impact 
cycle
Green 
Operation
Develop photovoltaic 
industrial parks
As of the end of 2022, JD installed photovoltaic power systems in 23 intelli-
gent industrial parks. We will continue to increase the photovoltaic power 
generation capacity to power more JD's smart industrial parks. Also, we 
will effectively combine with the actual use needs of enterprise customers 
and lay out in advance the comprehensive application of new energy in 
the park to help energy conservation and emission reduction.
Energy supply
M
Promote green 
financing
JD.com has developed a green financing framework, systematically show-
casing the principles and processes of green financing for sustainable devel-
opment projects. In 2021, the Group signed a five-year green syndicated loan 
of $2 billion for the first time and successfully obtained a positive Second 
Party Opinion from the international ESG evaluation agency Sustainlytics. 
This milestone marks the first green financing instrument issued by JD.com 
overseas. This strategic move not only helps JD strengthen its social influence 
of ESG and corporate responsibility, but furthermore supports green transfor-
mation for  JD.com, its customers, and the retail industry.
Market
M
Monitor and manage 
climate risks by using 
big data
  
JD will explore a new data management system to provide early warning of 
possible injuries employees may suffer during extreme weather conditions. 
This system will include forecasting anomalies in business volume due to 
abrupt changes in social demand during extreme weather. It will also pro-
vide sophisticated decision-making support.
  
More frequent extreme weather events will mean an increased reliance on 
remote work. To better mitigate the risks posed by climate change, we will 
enhance our data systems to bolster operational efficacy and internal man-
agement effectiveness through data and systems.
Resilience
L
Build infrastructure 
with climate  resil-
ience
  
JD has steadily invested in infrastructure resources, building dedicated 
teams, and establishing emergency response measures to address poten-
tial disruptions caused by extreme weather. We also conduct regular emer-
gency drills and have a tracking team in place to monitor them;
  
JD took into account the potential impact of extreme weather on buildings 
during the construction of its headquarters Buildings No, 2 and No. 3 in Bei-
jing, and its headquarters office building in Southwest regions. We adopt 
a "sponge city" design to maximize the natural infiltration of rainwater, 
recharge groundwater resources, and set up rainwater storage tanks to re-
duce the pressure of municipal rainwater drainage;
  
To guarantee the steady performance of infrastructure, JD Data Center, 
Intelligent Industrial Park and other similar infrastructures have proactively 
created well-structured emergency plans to cope with the potential im-
pacts brought by sudden weather conditions, including but not limited to 
typhoons, thunder and lightning, rainstorms, extreme temperatures, heavy 
rains and snowstorms. Protective responses such as typhoon wind protec-
tion, heavy rain and flood deterrence, snow and freezing safety measures 
during snowstorms, and lightning protection testing during thunder and 
lightning weather are strictly taken into account;
  
JD.com's Security Department carries out at least 1,700 stress tests per year 
to guarantee the stability of system operation. We are constantly enhancing 
the system's resilience. By utilising containerised deployment technology, 
services are deployed in several computer rooms which protect from sud-
den disruptions such as hardware failure, server hardware issues, network 
transmission problems, and incorrect service invocation, ensuring the con-
stant performance of system services in a worst-case scenario;
  
Building climate resilient infrastructure also helps to optimize the utilization 
of natural resources, reduce water and energy consumption and mitigate 
greenhouse gas emissions. It can also decrease expenditures and meet 
emission regulations.
Resilience
S、M
We firmly believe that not only do climate change risks exist, but the trend of low-carbon and green development provides 
a plethora of opportunities for business transformation and development. Accordingly, JD.com not only identifies and 
reacts to the already-identified climate change risks, but it also pays attention to opportunities climate change possesses for 
transforming and adaptation. The Group strives to incorporate these opportunities into its daily operations and strategies, 
stays abreast of the latest trends in transformation, and actively seeks innovative breakthroughs for development.
JD.com's Strategic Direction, Transition Accomplishment, Classification and Impact Cycle Under the Background of Low-Carbon Economic 
Transformation 


52
53
01
A Responsible Supply Chain 
Consolidates the Foundation 
of Responsibility
03
A Responsible Supply Chain 
Leads to Shared Development 
Outcomes 
04
A Responsible Supply Chain 
Promotes Good Consumption
Appendix
02
A Responsible Supply Chain  
Paves the Way for a Green Future
53
52
2022
Environmental, Social and 
Governance Report
Strategic 
direction
Opportunities and 
strategies
Transition accomplishment
Classification
Impact 
cycle
Supply 
Chain
Develop NEVs and 
optimize routes
  
As of the end of 2022, JD Logistics attained an intermodal transportation 
scale of 1.84 million tons with 808 operational routes and 5,418 self-op-
erated NEVs. It is aiming to reach 100% use of new energy vehicles (NEVs) 
by 2030, by way of improving its new energy vehicles road network in-
frastructure;
  
JD.com leverages big data to optimize green-channel planning, ware-
housing, and transportation network in real-time, thus reducing the 
number of vehicles in transit and improving the return vehicle's full load 
rate. It shifts some of the goods' transportation modes from road to 
rail, implementing a green transportation pattern and optimizing green 
logistics efficiency.
Resource effi-
ciency
M、L
Promote green and 
recycled logistics 
packaging
  
JD Logistics has been promoting packaging recycling, featuring the use 
of a special recycled insulated box made of thermal insulation materi-
als, VIP vacuum plate and canvas, coupled with recyclable ice plate to 
replace the traditional EPS white foam box and disposable ice bag. To 
date, some 700,000 VIP vacuum plates have been used 200 million times 
in 18 cities, contributing to a reduction of 200 million foam boxes;
  
In 2022, JD Logistics officially released its Delivered with Original 
Package (DWOP 
33) standard and certification process. JD Logistics has 
worked with multiple industry partners on DWOP, with the goal of hav-
ing 80% of products sold through e-commerce channels to be shipped 
in their original packaging by 2030. JD Logistics and its partners jointly 
issued a DWOP statement, which advocates for recycled packaging to 
reduce packaging waste; using primary color cardboard boxes to reduce 
ink usage, minimizing packaging layers, designing simple and compact 
packages to reduce material usage, and using environmentally-friendly 
materials and encouraging plastic reduction, recycling and regeneration 
for eco-friendly carbon reduction in the packaging process. Over the 
course of five years, JD Logistics has collaborated with upstream and 
downstream partners to promote the DWOP model. As of now, over 
10,000 stock keeping units (SKUs) of goods have successfully achieved 
direct delivery of their original packaging from the factory. This has the 
potential to reduce 10 billion disposable packages, which is equivalent 
to 20 million trees.
Resource effi-
ciency
M、L
Improve the resil-
ience of the supply 
chain
  
For seasonal commodities whose sales are prone to extreme weather 
and climate variations, such as electric fans, heaters, air conditioners, 
rain gear, quilts, etc., timely inventory adjustment should be conducted 
in accordance with the changing weather to prevent stock-outs and 
stock unsold. Annual procurement planning should be developed for 
primary products such as agricultural and forestry products, to supply 
at least one year's worth of inventory; Cold storage capacity should be 
increased accordingly;
  
JD Logistics continues to invest in the development of a green and 
low-carbon integrated supply chain, focusing on green, low-carbon, 
and environmentally friendly supply chain technology and services. It 
advances the utilization of clean energy, optimizes the application of 
low-carbon tech and new energy equipment, and increases resource 
use efficiency and recycling rates to enhance its own carbon efficiency. 
By constructing a smart, low-carbon logistics park, JD Logistics works 
with its supply chain partners to achieve a joint carbon reduction.
Resilience
M、L
33DWOP, or Delivered with Original Package, refers to the integrated structure of e-commerce product packaging and express delivery packaging, 
which reduces the packaging form of e-commerce products in the shipping process.
Strategic 
direction
Opportunities and 
strategies
Transition accomplishment
Classification
Impact 
cycle
Consum-
er/User
Provide green and 
environmentally 
friendly products and 
services
  
JD's 618 Grand Promotion has joined forces with leading brands to 
launch the "Green Impact Initiative" and has established the Green Alli-
ance with several well-known brands to offer over 3 million green prod-
ucts to consumers. JD is now offering upgraded low-carbon credentials 
and green points to provide more eco-friendly options;
  
JD.com guides consumers to choose green consumption through intel-
ligent recommendations, and the energy-saving home appliances sold 
each year can reduce carbon emissions by nearly 2 million tons;
  
As one of the first pilot units of electronic invoices in China, JD.com suc-
cessfully implemented its electronic invoice issuance. Statistics reveal 
that in 2022, JD issued 3.3 billion electronic invoices, saving 18,500 tons 
of paper, equivalent to 370,000 adult trees, and a carbon emission re-
duction of 17,000 tons. Green products and services help build consum-
ers' mindset on green and sustainable consumption, as well as enhance 
the brand influence of JD.com's products and increase their market 
value;
  
Phase I Supply Chain Emission Management Platform(SCEMP) devel-
oped by JD Logistics was officially launched on November 15, 2022, pro-
viding a carbon emission account for Decathlon, a sporting seller, and 
addressing the calculation of its e-commerce B2B scenario's greenhouse 
gas carbon footprint and decarbonization path. In the first month, it 
completed over 200,000 waybills of a single customer's scenario and 
was verified by a third-party verification agency Bureau Veritas as per 
ISO 14064-1 standards.
Products and 
services
S
Providing ener-
gy-saving and carbon 
reduction services for 
enterprises through 
digital intelligence
  
JD has developed the Intelligent Management Centre (IMC) digital oper-
ation platform for JD Property’s products, which enables headquarters 
to supervise and empower daily operation management, energy con-
servation and emission reduction of projects, project to third parties, 
and headquarters to third parties;
  
JD Industrials equips enterprises with digital and intelligent capabili-
ties for their carbon neutrality business processes, providing real-time 
insights into their energy consumption and carbon emissions and 
accurately predicting their emissions trends. It supports enterprises in 
crafting practical paths towards carbon neutrality, and drives down their 
carbon emission levels, helping them gain a competitive edge in the 
market through low-carbon products;
  
JD Industrials's  "Dual Carbon Brain" offers a comprehensive range of 
energy consumption and carbon emission monitoring and manage-
ment services. Utilising advanced IOT data collection, platform, and 
analysis capabilities as well as carbon neutrality and peaking service 
in the industry chain, this innovative solution is designed to support 
government efforts in achieving accurate and effective carbon neutrality 
and peaking management. Additionally, we offer talent supply services 
to promote green industry development by working alongside govern-
ment colleges and universities to establish related laboratories. Our 
integrated approach, which leverages Industrial Internet solutions and 
product capabilities, helps to facilitate the seamless integration of car-
bon neutrality and peaking service management and intelligent man-
ufacturing, creating a new industry education integration innovation 
center.
Products and 
services
M、L


54
55
01
A Responsible Supply Chain 
Consolidates the Foundation 
of Responsibility
03
A Responsible Supply Chain 
Leads to Shared Development 
Outcomes 
04
A Responsible Supply Chain 
Promotes Good Consumption
Appendix
02
A Responsible Supply Chain  
Paves the Way for a Green Future
55
54
2022
Environmental, Social and 
Governance Report
JD.com has incorporated climate risk into its risk management system, established 
a climate risk assessment and management process, and formed a closed-loop 
management system for climate risk identification, assessment, response, and 
improvement.
Risk Management
We are committed to spearheading and exploring sustainable business models and 
solutions to mitigate climate change, and collaborating with upstream and down-
stream suppliers and partners to build an eco-friendly and sustainable value chain in 
green retail, green logistics, green finance, green sustainable lifestyle advocacy, etc.
JD Logistics, being the first logistics company from China to set carbon-based targets, 
is jointly exploring more environmentally-friendly solutions for packaging, warehous-
ing, transportation and other components of the supply chain. In 2017, JD Logistics, 
along with a number of Global 500 brands, initiated the "Green Stream Initiative," with 
upstream and downstream partners to promote end-to-end greenness and sustain-
ability throughout the entire supply chain. To date, almost 200,000 green recycling 
boxes have been distributed and used 20 million times across 30 cities worldwide.
We strive to instil the idea of sustainable consumption and endorse eco-friendly 
lifestyles. Since the launch of the "Green Impact Initiative" during the 618 Grand 
Promotion in 2022, JD has given consumers access to their carbon accounts, encour-
aging and recording the broad range of green recycling activities they engage in. By 
purchasing green recycled products and participating in green recycling programs, 
they can earn carbon energy which can be converted into exclusive green coupons, 
a Green Medal of Honor, and receive customized environmental gifts. With multiple 
high-profile brands forming the Green Alliance, we were able to provide over 3 million 
green products. We are continuously improving our low-carbon and eco-friendly qual-
ifications to ensure consumers have access to high-quality "green commodities".
In response to national actions, in 2022, JD.com took proactive efforts to promote 
green and energy-efficient consumption in different regions, such as participating in 
the Beijing Green and Energy Saving Consumption Voucher Project. Sixteen types of 
products, including laptops, tablets, monitors, air purifiers, TVs, air conditioners, re-
frigerators, washing machines, etc., needed to register on the China Energy Efficiency 
Labeling Network and meet the label standards with Level Two or above; four prod-
ucts, namely dishwashers, toilets, water purifiers, and showers should register on the 
China Water Efficiency Labeling Network and meet the label standards with Level Two 
or above. The Group has provided nearly 40,000 commodities to local customers in 
Beijing, resulting in sales of RMB2 billion and significantly driving the green and ener-
gy-efficient consumption of household appliances.
200,000
green recycling boxes have been 
distributed in 30 cities
which has been used
20million times
which drives a sales of
RMB 2 billion
Our evaluation process is as follows:
Screening risk points:
we have screened the current risk points faced by the Group based 
on macro policies, industry policies, and regulatory requirements;
Conducting risk assessment: 
we have identified climate-related entities and transformation 
risks that have a substantial impact on the Group's business by 
considering the possibility and correlation of risks;
Ranking risks:
we selected key climate risks based on literature, regulatory agen-
cies, investors, stock exchanges, and other stakeholders' expec-
tations of the Group's role in climate change, and the impact of 
climate change on our business;
Developing response measures:
we have proposed feasible response measures for the major cli-
mate risks we have assessed.
in the Beijing Green and Energy 
Saving Consumption Voucher 
Project, JD has provided nearly 
40,000
commodities to consumers in Beijing


56
57
01
A Responsible Supply Chain 
Consolidates the Foundation 
of Responsibility
03
A Responsible Supply Chain 
Leads to Shared Development 
Outcomes 
04
A Responsible Supply Chain 
Promotes Good Consumption
Appendix
02
A Responsible Supply Chain  
Paves the Way for a Green Future
57
56
2022
Environmental, Social and 
Governance Report
Primary 
metrics
Second metrics
Metrics description
Target setting
Target
Conduct a comprehensive 
greenhouse gas accounting
Determine the boundary and scope of greenhouse 
gas accounting, and conduct a comprehensive 
greenhouse gas accounting
In preparation
Establish the carbon emis-
sion reduction targets at the 
group level
Establish and announce the carbon emission reduc-
tion targets at the group level
In preparation
Strength-
en climate 
govern-
ance
Establish a climate
governance framework
  
Strengthen the focus and management of climate- 
related issues based on the existing ESG govern-
ance structure
  
Management structure: the Board of Directors and 
SEC will cooperate in supervision and manage-
ment, and the ESG Task Force will coordinate the 
implementation of climate objectives in each sub-
group and business lines
Further appointed the management of 
climate related issues and refined their 
corresponding responsibilities in 2023
Establish a climate
governance mechanism
  
Segment the Group's carbon emission reduction 
targets and establish management metrics
  
Clarify the roles and responsibilities among sub-
groups and various business lines
  
Establish a climate-related performance evalua-
tion system
  
Strengthen the recruitment and training of cli-
mate-related talents
  
Start to establish the climate-related 
management metrics and establish 
climate-related performance evaluation 
system in 2024
  
Make continuous efforts in climate-re-
lated talents' hiring and training in 2023
Promote 
carbon 
emission 
reduction 
actions 
in all 
business 
scenarios
Low-car-
bon 
operations
Low-carbon 
office
  
Strengthen the intelligent operation and mainte-
nance (O&M) management of energy use for office 
space
  Improve the use of energy-saving facilities
  
Timely shut down energy- consuming equipment
  Encourage remote work 
  Encourage employees' green transportation
By 2030, we will continue to promote 
"zero carbon office" through energy con-
servation, consumption reduction, and 
increasing the proportion of renewable 
energy use
Low-carbon 
data centre
  Use natural energy
  
Use clean energy, including energy recovery and 
large-scale distributed photovoltaic power genera-
tion system
  Energy storage and cold storage
  
Architectural layout and design for low energy 
consumption
  O&M management platform
  
More climate resilience, effective resistance 
against extreme weather risks
  
PUE continues to be improved on the 
basis of 1.1
  

Infrastructure energy consumption con-
tinues to decline
  
Climate resilience continues to improve
Expand the fi-
nancing scale 
of low-carbon 
projects
Based on the published framework, principles, and 
processes of green finance, we will continuously 
identify low-carbon projects and expand the intensi-
ty and scale of green finance 
Identify more projects with low carbon 
competitiveness and expand the scale of 
green financing
Metrics and Targets
After identifying and assessing climate risks and opportunities, JD.com recognizes 
their potential impacts on operations. Conforming to the requirements of the 
TCFD framework, we have identified a series of specific metrics related to climate 
risks, such as targets for new energy usage and reduction of packaging materials 
for quantitatively disclosing the actions taken to address climate change and 
improve our climate resilience. We will continue to use our industry influence to 
drive green and low-carbon value chain and consumer sector developments and 
do our best in energy conservation and emission reduction.
JD.com's Metrics and Targets on Issues Related to Climate Change
Primary 
metrics
Second metrics
Metrics description
Target setting
Establish 
climate 
strategy
Establish climate strategy
at the Group level
Incorporate climate change into JD's overall strategy 
framework
Preliminarily establish strategic 
framework in 2022（strategic framework 
has been initially established in 2022）
Identify the value
proposition and impetus for 
JD on climate actions
Strengthen climate adaptability and resilience
Strengthen competitiveness
  Cost reduction
  New types of attraction to talents
  Promote product and business innovation
  Income growth
Strengthen social recognition
  
Support climate public governance and obtain 
new business growth scenarios
  Improve reputation
Expand social influence
  
Gradually shaping consumers' purchasing preferences
Establish and clarify the value proposition 
and impetus of climate actions in 2024
Quantify the impact of 
climate action on value 
proposition
Evaluate the Group's financial performance attributed 
to climate action based on the value proposition and 
impetus model
Establish a value evaluation mechanism 
and quantify the financial impact of 
climate action in 2024
Risk 
rating and 
tracking
Identify climate-related
material risks
Participate in risk assessment and grading based on 
the preliminary identification and sorting of climate-
related risks in this report
Establish a substantial climate-related 
risk management system in JD. com to 
rate various risks by the end of 2024
Quantify the financial 
impact of climate risk
Make quantitative statistics for the financial impact 
of high-level risks based on risk rating 
Annual climate risk auditing
Annual review and update on risk rating and financial 
impact
After 2024, we will conduct an annual 
review of the actual business exposure 
to various risks and decide whether to 
update the rating according to the review 
results


58
59
01
A Responsible Supply Chain 
Consolidates the Foundation 
of Responsibility
03
A Responsible Supply Chain 
Leads to Shared Development 
Outcomes 
04
A Responsible Supply Chain 
Promotes Good Consumption
Appendix
02
A Responsible Supply Chain  
Paves the Way for a Green Future
59
58
2022
Environmental, Social and 
Governance Report
Primary 
metrics
Second metrics
Metrics description
Target setting
Promote 
carbon 
emission 
reduction 
actions 
in all 
business 
scenarios
Low-car-
bon sup-
ply chain 
Low-carbon 
transporta-
tion
  
Full coverage of new energy vehicles
  
Fully apply digital smart technology and optimize 
route, storage, and transportation network planning
  
Optimize transportation structure and energy effi-
ciency
  
In the future, JD. com will continue 
to develop and deploy thousands of 
autonomous delivery vehicles, con-
tinuously improve customers' experi-
ence and service efficiency, aiming to 
achieve 100% new energy for logistics 
vehicles by 2030
Low-carbon 
logistics park
  
Energy substitution: maximize the use of renew-
able power, such as distributed photovoltaic and 
efficient energy storage
  
Efficient operation: automated  operation and 
electrification of park energy consumption
  
Online O&M system of the solution to carbon neu-
trality goals in smart logistics park
  
JD's "Asia No.1" Xi'an Intelligent Indus-
trial Park has become the first certi-
fied "carbon neutral" industrial park 
in China's logistics industry, and the 
carbon neutral park of JD.com's "Asia 
No. 1" Suqian Intelligent Industrial Park 
is under construction
  
As of the end of 2022, JD installed 
photovoltaic power systems in 23 intel-
ligent industrial parks. We will continue 
to increase the photovoltaic power 
generation capacity to power more 
JD's smart industrial parks. Also, we 
will effectively combine with the actual 
use needs of enterprise customers and 
lay out in advance the comprehensive 
application of new energy in the park to 
help energy conservation and emission 
reduction
Low-carbon  
packaging
  
Promote reusable packaging
  
Packaging reduction
  
Packaging material innovation
  
Application of digital intelligence technology
  
Upstream and downstream collaboration 
  
Reusable packaging sharing and recycling public 
system
  
Packaging materials will be 100% envi-
ronmentally- friendly and recyclable by 
2030
  
Motivate more than 80% of up-
stream brand enterprises to develop 
eco-friendly packaging
Suppliers' 
collaborative 
effort in car-
bon emission 
reduction
Lead the suppliers to participate in establishing and 
implementing carbon reduction targets
  
By 2025, promote 50% of JD Logistics 
suppliers to participate in the Science 
Based Targets initiative (SBTi)
  
Actively encourage upstream and 
downstream suppliers to use new ener-
gy vehicles
Participate 
in the for-
mulation 
of national 
standards 
for low 
carbon 
products
Promote 
low-carbon 
consumption 
  
Participate in the formulation of national low-car-
bon product standards
  
Expand the supply of low-carbon products
  
Strengthen low-carbon consumption and lifestyle 
campaigns
JD.com will increase the supply and 
market size of low-carbon items and 
create corresponding incentive plans 
for green consumption to stimulate the 
participation of consumers in mitigating 
emissions.
Promote 
industrial 
low-carbon 
development 
Under the trend of digital industry development, using 
advances in modern information technologies such as 
big data, cloud computing, and AI. Digital intelligence 
technology is being deeply integrated into traditional 
industries, aiding the improvement of production and 
service efficiency and promoting the transformation 
of production methods and consumer habits toward a 
more sustainable, energy-efficient, and circular econo-
my. This will in turn facilitate the low-carbon transition 
of high emission industries.
JD will continue to explore new business 
and profit models by technologically 
empowering the low-carbon transition of 
traditional industrial enterprises
Infor-
mation 
disclosure
Conduct annual climate-re-
lated information disclosure
  
Conduct annual review and disclosure of climate-
related risks and opportunities
  
Conduct disclosure and reporting of our climate 
targets and achievements 
Starting in 2022, JD will continue to re-
lease TCFD reports and disclose environ-
mental related performance in its annual 
ESG report
Green Operations
Green Workplace
JD.com complies with the Environmental Protection Law of the People's Republic of 
China and vigorously promotes the use of renewable energy and resource recycling 
while enhancing resource utilization efficiency. Additionally, JD.com works to meet 
or exceed standards set by the following laws of China: the Environmental Pollution 
Prevention and Control Law of the People's Republic of China, the Air Pollution 
Prevention and Control Law of the People's Republic of China, the Water Pollution 
Prevention and Control Law of the People's Republic of China, and the Solid Waste 
Pollution Environmental Prevention and Control Law of the People's Republic of 
China. JD.com has taken measures to optimize the treatment of sewage and other 
waste to reduce environmental pollution. In addition, JD.com abides by the Energy 
Conservation Law of the People's Republic of China and the Water Law of the People's 
Republic of China. JD.com strives to be resource-saving and eco-friendly enterprises 
in various scenarios like offices, parks and stores.
JD.com integrates resource conservation and environmental awareness into 
workplace management and construction, which is driven by standardized, intelligent, 
and efficient office models. The Group strives to optimize the workplace, office and 
commuting modes and is committed to building a sustainable green workplace.
We take energy-saving measures in terms of office space, electronic offices, and green 
mobility with the commitment to reducing energy consumption in our operational 
processes.
Our long-term goal is to achieve zero carbon 
emissions from our offices by 2030. This will be 
done by conserving energy, improving energy effi-
ciency, and increasing the use of renewable energy;
In 2022, JD.com achieved its annual energy con-
sumption target: reducing electricity and heat con-
sumption in the administrative office by 3% com-
pared to the previous year.
In 2022, multiple entities under JD.com have 
achieved ISO 14001 environmental management 
system certification and have not had any incidents 
with significant environmental impact.
Energy Consumption and Management


60
61
01
A Responsible Supply Chain 
Consolidates the Foundation 
of Responsibility
03
A Responsible Supply Chain 
Leads to Shared Development 
Outcomes 
04
A Responsible Supply Chain 
Promotes Good Consumption
Appendix
02
A Responsible Supply Chain  
Paves the Way for a Green Future
61
60
2022
Environmental, Social and 
Governance Report
Office Space
JD has set up a smart operation and maintenance system in its office building to monitor power usage data in real-time, evaluate 
energy consumption levels in office areas, and discover, locate and tackle high energy consumption processes. With the help 
of this system, we propose targeted plans for energy-saving and consumption reduction, utilizing energy-efficient equipment 
and intelligent sensor systems with energy-saving as the core for operations, to continuously improve the energy-efficiency 
transformation of office spaces.
In 2022, the JD.com headquarters made significant progress in energy-saving initiatives, including the installation of energy-saving 
lighting and the establishment of an intelligent sensor system. 
  
In Building No. 1, LED downlights have been installed in all public areas, and 8,500 
LED light panels have been installed in replacement in the office area. Each light has 
a decreasing power consumption of 44 W, and it is expected to save 1.5 million kWh 
of electricity yearly;
  
The brightness of the building's floodlighting has decreased by 30%, which will save 
100,000 kWh yearly.
Energy-saving 
lighting
Building an 
intelligent sensor 
system
Building No.1 and Building No.2 of JD.com Headquarter
  
Building No. 1 has completed the lighting renovation in 126 computer rooms. The delayed 
shutdown feature of the lighting was set in accordance with regular inspection and 
maintenance needs and the lights turned on automatically when the door was opened, 
which saved approximately 90,000 kWh of electricity each year;
  
5,272 intelligent sensor lamps were replaced in the underground garage, which adjusts 
the brightness automatically upon the detection of people and vehicles. It operated at 
10% power consumption when not detecting people and 60% power consumption when 
detecting people, saving approximately 395,000 kWh of electricity throughout the year;
  
Installed an infrared sensor device on the lighting of the fire passage for automatic light 
adjustment to turn lights off when people leave, saving 43,000 kWh of electricity throughout 
the year;
  
Efficiently managed the operating hours of electronic devices such as exhaust fans, elevator 
information displays, and lighting fixtures in the lobby, which reduced unnecessary night time 
power consumption when detecting no people at night, saving 185,000 kWh of electricity 
throughout the year;
  
The TV sets in over 900 conference rooms are equipped with an auto sleep feature, which 
activates after 3 minutes of non-use. This saved approximately 100,000 kWh of power 
annually.
Electronic Office and Green Commuting
JD.com takes proactive measures to reduce unnecessary energy consumption 
during daily office activities. We actively encourage employees to use their personal 
drinking cups instead of disposable cups at meetings. We have implemented seasonal 
lighting controls to maximize natural lighting while working, and have prominently 
posted signs of "turn off the lights" to enhance employees' awareness of electricity 
conservation. We also take active steps during times of energy scarcity to reduce 
energy use at source.
In regards to procuring office paper, JD uses photocopies that meet the standard of 
the PAS 2060:2014 Specification for the Demonstration of Carbon Neutrality.
JD.com has reduced the carbon footprint generated by travel and business trips by establishing a telecommuting system to 
provide online support and execution for important meetings. We continue to build an information technology (IT) system 
suitable for remote operations, establish a VPN-based telecommuting architecture, and gradually improve the system's 
availability, covering online conference systems, security accreditation systems, assistance to telecommuting users, and other 
solutions. At the same time, JD has also created its own remote conference platform Joymeeting for online meetings. It has 
been used for many kinds of meetings including supplier conferences, online interviews, and a plethora of other scenarios. "JD 
Dong Dong" is also used for voice or video conferences with vendors and users, thus facilitating communication and exchange 
between buyers and sellers.
JD makes use of online document collaboration, including online storage, editing, and transmission, to save physical storage 
space, lowering the amount of repeated document downloads and transmission time. Compared to using traditional methods 
of local documents, this online method can effectively reduce power consumption and carbon emission by devices.
In response to the concept of green commuting, JD.com continues to increase its investment in NEVs and replace fuel-
powered shuttle buses, promoting more energy-efficient models for commuting and business-related scenarios. In 2022, JD 
upgraded green commuting, with the purchase of 37 new energy buses used by employees to commute to its headquarters in 
Beijing. As of the end of the reporting period, JD.com headquarters had 117 new energy buses, reducing carbon emissions by 
approximately 897 tonnes that year.
In addition, JD promotes carpooling among employees, cooperating deeply with ride hailing platforms to minimize the carbon 
footprint of travel; it reduces empty vehicles, makes reasonable route planning, and deploys clean energy vehicles. In 2022, 
the personnel in JD.com's headquarters took carpooling trips 267,214 person-times.
Certificate of Photocopy Carbon Neutrality
Employees at JD have logged in to work 
remotely through VPN
9,256,463 times
Number of online voice and video conferences 
through Joymeeting and JD Dong Dong 
conducted by JD employees
3,780,279
cumulative number of attendees
43,816,926
Number of online documents used in the 
workplace
3,311,765
In 2022


62
63
01
A Responsible Supply Chain 
Consolidates the Foundation 
of Responsibility
03
A Responsible Supply Chain 
Leads to Shared Development 
Outcomes 
04
A Responsible Supply Chain 
Promotes Good Consumption
Appendix
02
A Responsible Supply Chain  
Paves the Way for a Green Future
63
62
2022
Environmental, Social and 
Governance Report
JD.com attaches great importance to water conservation and comprehensive utiliza-
tion. In the building of its workplaces, all the regional headquarters parks of JD.com 
have rainwater collection and drainage designs in accordance with the construction 
requirements of "Sponge City". In 2022, the rainwater storage tank in the administra-
tive office building held 3,810 cubic meters of rainwater, not only achieving rainwater 
recovery but also effectively reducing pressure on municipal drainage system.
JD's headquarters has installed water-saving appliances that adhere to the Standard 
for Water-saving Domestic Water Appliances (CJ164-2002) in their workspaces and 
executed several water-saving renovation projects in order to improve the efficiency 
of water resource utilization. In 2022, we put several water-saving measures into 
effect, including the following:
In 2022, the sewage treatment station of Building No.1 at JD headquarters was put 
into use, converting sewage into reclaimed water. This year, some 0.0318 million 
tonnes of reclaimed water were recovered. We became a leader in water efficiency 
in the industry by increasing the amount of recycled water, lowering the use of city-
provided water, and reducing wastewater discharge.
In addition, we actively carry out water-saving campaigns in the workplace, posting 
signs and labels in restrooms, pantries and other areas, reminding employees to 
consciously save water and turn off faucets.
  
Adjusted the water flow of the faucet of the restrooms in the headquarters 
office building, which reduced water consumption by 1%;
  
Used sensor-equipped faucets and water-saving toilets to reduce water 
consumption in the restrooms;
  
Adopted water-saving equipment and technology to water office plants; 
used automatic sprinkler and drip irrigation water-saving systems; took 
water-saving control measures such as installing soil humidity sensors 
and automatic shutdown devices on rainy days, or planting plants that 
do not require permanent irrigation;
  
The rainwater collected in the park is recycled after being treated and sub-
sequently pressurized to water plants and greenery and clean basement 
car parks and outdoor pavement.
Water Management
Signs of "Water Conservation" at JD's Workplace
0.0318
million tonnes
of reclaimed recovered
Rainwater storage tank in the 
administrative office building held
3,810
cubic meters
of rainwater
In 2022, we reached 100% of 
our target for water conserva-
tion, meaning a decrease of 3% 
in the amount of water usage 
in all workplaces at headquar-
ters compared to 2021.
JD.com has set up garbage sorting stations in various office buildings, actively 
advocating and practising garbage sorting management. The non-recyclable waste 
is then transferred to government-designated professional waste treatment plants 
for incineration or landfill disposal; At the same time, hazardous and non-hazardous 
waste is recycled in an orderly manner, while trash such as printer toner cartridges, 
food waste is delivered to qualified outlets for recycling or disposal. Wastes will be 
reused based on wear and tear to achieve waste reduction.
In addition, to reduce paper waste generated in the office process, JD.com has embraced 
a paperless transformation approach for its business activities such as contract 
signing, filing, and invoices. This shift augments information management efficiency 
while reducing potential waste caused by misprints and omissions. In 2022, JD.com's 
continued effort to promote paperless office work helped reduce deforestation-induced 
environmental damage, and carbon emissions from papermaking.
Conducted maintenance on unused furniture and put processed furniture back 
into demanded operations such as first-line logistics. Exactly 491 office desks, 
1,212 chairs, and 250 file cabinets were recycled.
Folded and stored the packaging boxes of purchased items to promote efficient 
recycling and reuse for future moving projects and turnover. A total of over 20,00 
cardboard boxes were recycled and reused.
Carried out old battery recycling activities, collected batteries that haven't worn 
out from the office, and distributed them to employees for use in daily electronic 
devices, such as mice, keyboards and remote controls, to enhance battery 
utilization rate and thereby reduce battery waste.
Waste Management
Non-hazardous  
waste recycling 
and utilization
Hazardous  waste 
recycling and 
utilization
JD personnel documents are all electronically signed, including employee induction 
procedures, resignation procedures, renewal of labor contracts, and signing of 
affordable housing loan agreements, and government subsidized housing rental 
agreements. In 2022, JD.com's employees signed 1.23 million personnel documents 
online.
As one of the pioneers in the adoption of electronic invoicing in China, JD has been 
actively promoting electronic invoicing throughout its operations. In 2022, JD.com 
issued over 3.3 billion e-invoices.
JD, a company that has been acknowledged by the National Archives Administration 
for its pilot electronic file management services, continues to file documents away 
electronically. In 2022, JD.com eliminated the use of over 4 million printed vouchers.
Electronic invoicing
Electronic filing
Electronic 
document signing


64
65
01
A Responsible Supply Chain 
Consolidates the Foundation 
of Responsibility
03
A Responsible Supply Chain 
Leads to Shared Development 
Outcomes 
04
A Responsible Supply Chain 
Promotes Good Consumption
Appendix
02
A Responsible Supply Chain  
Paves the Way for a Green Future
65
64
2022
Environmental, Social and 
Governance Report
JD.com actively practices the concept of green development, increases the certifica-
tion of eco-friendly buildings in the park, improves the application of clean energy, 
boosts the recycling rate of waste in the park, and continues to promote the construc-
tion of green, ecological, and low-carbon environment of the park.
Green Park
We attach great importance to energy consumption within the park, and continuously 
optimizing the high-energy consumption process in the operation of office buildings 
and logistics warehousing, and promote green development of the park.
During the construction of new build-
ings, we strictly follow the construction 
requirements of energy-saving indica-
tors for two star green buildings. We use 
green building strategies and sustaina-
ble energy systems, such as daylighting 
adjustment systems and high-efficiency 
energy-saving lighting, to enhance the 
energy efficiency of office spaces.
In response to the country's initiative, JD vigorously deploys clean energy and pushes for the establishment of a clean, low-
carbon, safe, and efficient energy system. We have taken full measures since 2018 to establish a rooftop photovoltaic power 
generation capacity ecosystem, which comprehensively promotes, lay out, and applies clean energy, mainly photovoltaic 
power generation, in the Intelligent Industrial Park, and uses green electricity.
JD Property actively applies prefabri-
cated buildings to reduce energy con-
sumption and material consumption 
during construction. Research on the 
Comprehensive Benefit Analysis Method 
of Prefabricated Building indicates that 
the carbon emission of prefabricated 
buildings is 472.23kg/m² lower than that 
of traditional cast-in-place buildings, 
reducing carbon emissions by 30% to 
40% and leading to remarkable emission 
reduction.
 
 
 
Installing fluorescent tubes of high quality, energy efficiency and 
brightness, and equipping them with electronic ballasts of high 
power factor or energy-saving inductive ballasts;
  
 
Installing intelligent LED lights in long-term unoccupied sites such as 
underground parking lots, stairwells, corridors, restrooms;
  
 
Adopting automatic illumination or timed control methods for outdoor 
lighting such as those in streets, gardens, and lawns;
   Installing timed on/off control floor lights, and floodlights.
Energy Consumption and Management
Green Office Building
Green Warehousing
Distributed Photovoltaic Roof
In 2022, photovoltaic rooftops were com-
pleted in the industrial parks of JD Proper-
ty located in key cities such as Guangzhou 
and Xiamen. It will drive an estimated 
reduction of carbon emissions by an av-
erage of 42,200 tonnes annually, upon be-
ing put into operation. With this, we plan 
to continue to reinforce our investment 
in photovoltaic power generation capac-
ity to provide green energy to more JD 
Intelligent Industrial Parks; we also make 
the comprehensive deployment of new 
energy in the park in accordance with 
the actual usage needs of our enterprise 
customers, enabling customers to signif-
icantly reduce their energy consumption 
and decrease carbon emissions.
  
As of the end of 2022, JD had installed photovoltaic 
power generation systems in 23 Intelligent Industrial 
Parks. The rooftop distributed photovoltaic power 
generation system has a capacity of 132.5 MW;
  
JD Intelligent Industrial Park's rooftop distributed 
photovoltaic system supplied 81,970 MWh of green 
electricity in 2022.
  
Rooftop photovoltaic power generators in Xiamen 
have a lifespan of up to 25 years, with an estimated 
annual power generation of 12 million kWh and an 
average annual effective carbon reduction of 11,964 
tonnes;
  
In early 2022, Suqian Park completed the construction 
of a 3.5 MW distributed photovoltaic system for grid 
connected power generation and was equipped with 
a 300 kW/690 kWh energy storage system. As of now, 
the photovoltaic power generation in the park is 4.1 
million kWh, with a total carbon reduction of 4,087 
tonnes.
JD's "Asia No.1" Xi'an Intelligent Industrial Park earned a 
carbon neutrality certification issued by China Beijing Green 
Exchange and Centre Testing International (CTI), becoming 
the first carbon neutral logistics park in 2021 in China.
JD Langfang Industrial Park covers approximately 200,000 sqm and is equipped with multiple energy-saving facilities. 
The Park employs LED lighting fixtures both indoors and outdoors, providing more than 50% energy savings when 
compared with benchmark lighting; The Park utilizes inverters for water pumps and fans, resulting in 25% energy 
savings when compared with the benchmark; refrigeration systems make use of multi-line or level 1 energy efficiency 
splitter, ensuring optimal efficiency. Additionally, the Industrial Park features an energy-saving heat recovery system for 
all heat exchange ventilation and filtration facilities, that not only enhance indoor comfort but also increase no power 
consumption.
JD Built a Carbon Neutral Logistics Park
Green Building Design for JD Langfang Intelligent Industrial Park
Carbon Neutrality 
Certificate from CTI
Carbon Neutrality 
Certificate from China 
Beijing Green Exchange
We actively promote green building certification. As of 2022, the green certification status of JD Intelligent Industrial Park are:
  
JD (Langfang) Intelligent Park obtained the 
Gold LEED certification
  
JD (Hefei) Intelligent Industrial Park obtained 
the LEED certification
JD ANHUI E-COMMMERCE PARK PHASE II
Hefei City, China
LEED v4
BUILDING DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION: NEW CONSTRUCTION AND MAJOR RENOVATIONS
August 2021
HAS FULFILLED THE REQUIREMENTS OF THE LEED GREEN BUILDING RATING SYSTEM CERTIFICATION ESTABLISHED 
BY THE U.S. GREEN BUILDING COUNCIL AND VERIFIED BY GREEN BUSINESS CERTIFICATION INC. 
PETER TEMPLETON, PRESIDENT & CEO
U.S. GREEN BUILDING COUNCIL & GREEN BUSINESS CERTIFICATION INC. 
JD INTELLIGENT INDUSTRIAL PARK
LANGFANG
Hebei Province, China
LEED v4
INTERIOR DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION: COMMERCIAL INTERIORS
November 2022
JD Intelligent Industrial Parks (Hefei and Langfang) have been Awarded 
LEED Certification


66
67
01
A Responsible Supply Chain 
Consolidates the Foundation 
of Responsibility
03
A Responsible Supply Chain 
Leads to Shared Development 
Outcomes 
04
A Responsible Supply Chain 
Promotes Good Consumption
Appendix
02
A Responsible Supply Chain  
Paves the Way for a Green Future
67
66
2022
Environmental, Social and 
Governance Report
  
JD Property provides real-time monitoring and analysis of energy con-
sumption and carbon emissions of equipment that provides water, elec-
tricity, gas, photovoltaic, energy storage, and charging stations of the JD's 
"Asia No.1" Intelligent Industrial Parks in Daxing District of Beijing, Baqiao 
District of Xi'an, and Suqian. Also, it provides carbon reduction plans to 
effectively improve the efficiency of carbon emission management in the 
parks and tap the potential for energy conservation and carbon reduction 
in the parks;
  
JD Industrials has created a "dual carbon" monitoring platform for Chongqing 
Yuelai Group and provided services such as carbon inventory and visualiza-
tion. It can monitor the energy consumption in the project area in real time, 
control the carbon emission trend at different venues, and provide strong 
data support for building green exhibitions;
  
JD Industrials has helped build a carbon emission monitoring platform and 
a carbon inventory "dashboard" for the office building of Guangdong Textile 
Import and Export and two suppliers. An on-screen "dashboard" will display 
the carbon emissions and energy consumption data,  allowing enterprises to 
monitor their energy consumption structure and carbon emissions, and assist 
in achieving their carbon emissions targets.
Assisting in Building Multiple Carbon Neutral Logistics Parks with "Dual Carbon" Platforms
Moreover, we have crafted tailor-made construction services for BMW Regional After-Sales Spare Parts Center in Hefei, which 
has passed the LEED certification, making it the first "Green Warehouse" for BMW's after-sales parts in China to do so. Through 
energy-saving fans, water pumps, LED lighting and motion sensor systems, we are able to optimize energy use efficiency, 
implement carbon reduction and energy conservation from minute details of the building.
As the new-generation digital technology, such as big data and AI, is being used in various aspects including production, 
consumption, transport, operations, management, and trading, digital transformation becomes an important engine to drive low-
carbon operations within the industry and reduce emissions from enterprises. To this end, we have developed a comprehensive 
green carbon reduction capability through the application of energy efficiency optimization, resource recycling, green energy, and 
carbon neutrality digital panorama, empowering the green and low-carbon transformation of all industries in the supply chain.
JD Property Customizes BMW's First Green Parts Distribution Center in China
Xi'an Baqiao Project Won the Case of 
2022 for "Carbon Neutral Solution in 
Logistics Park" of China Green Point 
"Dual Carbon" Monitoring Platform
The waste generated in the construction of Building No.3 at JD Headquarters consists mainly of harmless waste such 
as construction debris. We strive to manage waste production with the goal of generating no more than 400 tonnes 
of construction debris for every 10,000 sqm. We monitor construction waste in real-time. Solid waste is sorted and 
disposed of by storing, consuming and recycling to guarantee all recyclable waste is recycled.
Waste Recycling and Utilization of Building No.3 Construction Project at JD.com's Headquarters
In 2022
JD.com conducts targeted treatment of wastes generated from park construction while standardizing various waste disposal 
processes and emphasizing recycling to extend the life cycle of waste. In addition, JD and construction companies are working 
together to minimize the negative impact of engineering on the environment. We call on the contractors to reduce waste emissions, 
specify them to enhance internal construction management when signing contracts, and advocate waste reduction and reuse.
Waste Management
7,900 cubic meters
of construction debris were collected and sent to authorized waste treatment facilities for disposal
This included
1,870 tonnes
of waste rebars
265,000 sqm
of waste boards
26,000 cubic meters
of waste wood
5 tonnes
of waste packaging materials
Types and Recycling Methods of Engineering Waste Involved by JD.com
Waste construction ma-
terials such as bricks, 
tiles, concrete, etc
After being crushed, screened, and cleaned, those construction wastes are used as 
raw materials to prepare low-grade recycled aggregate concrete for repeated use in 
foundation reinforcement, road engineering bedding, indoor flooring, and flooring 
bedding. Some of them are treated by qualified third parties.
Steel and other metal 
wastes
Those wastes are sorted and handed over to qualified recycling companies for recycling 
and refining in professional refineries.
Wood waste
After being processed, those wastes are reused as building templates and other materials.


68
69
01
A Responsible Supply Chain 
Consolidates the Foundation 
of Responsibility
03
A Responsible Supply Chain 
Leads to Shared Development 
Outcomes 
04
A Responsible Supply Chain 
Promotes Good Consumption
Appendix
02
A Responsible Supply Chain  
Paves the Way for a Green Future
69
68
2022
Environmental, Social and 
Governance Report
Green Store
JD.com's stores are using energy-efficient equipment and consistently enhancing 
energy use control internally, advocating for product recycling and promoting 
green and low-carbon products externally. While reducing the stores' energy 
use, we integrate the concept of low-carbon and sustainability into production 
and sales, striving to reduce environmental impacts from multiple aspects of the 
supply chain.
In our pursuit of energy efficiency, we are adhering to national policies such as 
"promoting the consumption of green and smart home appliances" and assisting 
consumers to reduce emissions by providing green product options. In 2022, the 
Group's companies such as Five Star Appliance and Dada offered a spectrum of 
environmentally friendly items, including green food and energy-saving household 
appliances and jointly distribute vouchers with merchants to further promote a green 
lifestyle vastly.
Energy Consumption and Management
As the initial step of our energy efficiency program, 
we renovated highly energy-consuming equip-
ment. This equipment is being used in stores like 
SEVEN FRESH and Huaguan Supermarket, which 
consumes a vast amount of energy, and frequency 
conversion control of compressors was installed 
to reduce energy conservation. In 2022, the fre-
quency conversion control of compressors in the 
cold chain has been successfully implemented in 12 
SEVEN FRESH stores and 2 Huaguan Supermarkets. 
We perform time-phased control on lighting, 
ventilators, and other equipment based on 
the demands in different operating periods, 
intelligently regulate the electricity and energy 
consumption in public areas, maximize energy 
efficiency during peak hours, and reduce the 
amount and intensity of use during off-peak hours 
to reduce unnecessary energy consumption. In 
2022, SEVEN FRESH adopted lighting control in 
10 stores, achieved frequency conversion control 
of fans in 9 stores, and JD Electrical Appliance 
carried out a trial operation of intelligent light 
control systems in 4 stores.
Use of energy-
saving equipment
Intelligent time-
phased control of 
devices
Waste Management
JD Five Star Appliance stores 
sell energy-efficient devices of 
the least energy consumption 
(namely, L1 and L2 energy effi-
ciency) to the citizens, and en-
courage the green smart home 
appliance boom through gov-
ernment consumption vouchers. 
In 2022, the "Green Smart Home 
Appliance Promotion" program 
of JD Five Star Appliance ex-
tended to the cities of Jiangsu, 
Ningbo, Hefei, Xi'an, Shenyang, 
Henan, Hunan and other places, 
directly subsidizing the purchase 
of more than 250,000 green 
smart home devices.
JD.com implements proper disposal of waste through two perspectives: store 
management and consumption promotion. JD collects and cleans up domestic 
wastes and other wastes generated in daily business operations and sends them to 
professional treatment companies. Some stores promote consumer participation in 
electronic and electrical waste recycling, incentivize trade-in activity, and improve 
their capacity for waste conversion and reuse while following the requirements of 
waste treatment. In 2022, JD Retail recycled over 5.9491 million disused appliances, 
including household appliances, mobile phones, computers, and digital products.
JD Five Star Appliance Sold Green Home Appliances to Help Consumers Reduce Emissions
Green Home Appliances Promotion in Stores of JD Five Star Appliance
In 2022, JD Retail recycled over 
5.9491million
disused appliances


70
71
01
A Responsible Supply Chain 
Consolidates the Foundation 
of Responsibility
03
A Responsible Supply Chain 
Leads to Shared Development 
Outcomes 
04
A Responsible Supply Chain 
Promotes Good Consumption
Appendix
02
A Responsible Supply Chain  
Paves the Way for a Green Future
71
70
2022
Environmental, Social and 
Governance Report
JD Five Star Appliance stores 
launched a trade-in program, offer-
ing customers financial incentives 
to exchange old appliances that 
are energy-inefficient, and poten-
tially hazardous for greener and 
more energy-efficient models. 
Moreover, JD Five Star Appliance 
collaborates with duly approved 
third-party recycling enterprises 
to handle electrical wastes safely 
and effectively, through harmless 
treatment, the metal, plastic, glass 
and other recyclable resources in 
disused electrical appliances can 
be effectively recycled and used, 
and reduced the carbon emissions 
generated from the production 
of raw materials for products. In 
2022, JD Five Star Appliance stores 
collected over 120,000 defunct ap-
pliances - including 90,400 units 
of large appliances - resulting in a 
reduction of carbon emissions of 
nearly 880 tonnes.
JD Five Star Appliance Launched a "Trade-In" Activity to Recycle Disused Electrical Appliances
JD Five Star Appliance's Return Plan for Used Home Appliances Promotes Trade-in 
Program in Communities
34 The total comprehensive energy consumption is calculated based on the General rules for Calculation of the Comprehensive Energy 
Consumption (GB/T 2589-2020) of the People's Republic of China.
JD.com's Resource Consumption in 2022
34
Indicator
Unit
Data in 2022
Direct energy consumption
MWh
9,032,385.11
Indirect energy consumption
MWh
2,112,765.45
Renewable energy consumption
MWh
31,247.92
Non renewable energy 
consumption
MWh
11,145,150.56
Comprehensive energy 
consumption
tce
1,369,687.91
Comprehensive energy 
consumption density
tce/RMB million
1.31
JD.com's Greenhouse Gas Emissions in 2022
35
JD.com's Water Consumption in 2022
Indicator
Unit
Data in 2022
Greenhouse gas emissions (Scope 1)
36 
tCO2e
2,399,143.89
Greenhouse gas emissions (Scope 2)
37 
tCO2e
1,197.932.19
Greenhouse gas emissions (Scope 3)
38 
tCO2e
3,069.18
Total greenhouse gas emissions
tCO2e
3,600,145.25
Indicator
Unit
Data in 2022
Consumption of fresh water
tonnes
7,280,056.58
Water consumption density
tonnes/RMB million
7.00
Consumption of reclaimed water
tonnes
31,921.34
Consumption of rainwater recycled
tonnes
7,070.00
35 The statistics of greenhouse gas emissions (Scope 1) and greenhouse gas emissions (Scope 2) include emissions from administrative offices, 
logistics transportation, and warehousing in the Retail, Logistics, Property, and Dada's business. The statistics of greenhouse gas emissions 
(Scope 3) include emissions from shuttle bus commuting by JD's employee in Beijing, Chengdu, Shanghai, Shenzhen, and Suqian operating 
areas; Greenhouse gas emissions accounting includes three types of greenhouse gases: carbon dioxide, methane, and nitrous oxide.
36 The calculation of greenhouse gas emissions (Scope 1) in 2022 is based on the 2006 IPCC Guidelines for National Greenhouse Gas Inventory, 
and GWP is calculated by converting the consumption of gasoline, diesel, natural gas, and kerosene in accordance with the IPCC's Sixth 
Assessment Report (AR6).
37 The calculation of greenhouse gas emissions (Scope 2) in 2022 is calculated by converting purchased electricity and purchased heat with 0.5703t 
CO2/MWh, an average emission factor of the national power grid in 2022 which is stated on the Notice on Management of Greenhouse Gas 
Emissions Reports for Enterprises in the Power Generation Industry from 2023 to 2025, and the Accounting Methods and Reporting Guidelines 
for Greenhouse Gas Emissions of Enterprises in Other Industrial Industries issued by the National Development and Reform Commission of the 
State Council.
38 The calculation of greenhouse gas emissions (Scope 3) in 2022 is based on the 2006 IPCC Guidelines for National Greenhouse Gas Inventory 
and the Notice on Management of Greenhouse Gas Emissions Reports for Enterprises in the Power Generation Industry from 2023 to 2025.


72
73
01
A Responsible Supply Chain 
Consolidates the Foundation 
of Responsibility
03
A Responsible Supply Chain 
Leads to Shared Development 
Outcomes 
04
A Responsible Supply Chain 
Promotes Good Consumption
Appendix
02
A Responsible Supply Chain  
Paves the Way for a Green Future
73
72
2022
Environmental, Social and 
Governance Report
Green Logistics
JD.com is committed to creating sustainable packaging, continuously improving 
packaging recycling efficiency through innovation and R&D, reducing the waste of 
packaging materials, effectively controlling resource consumption, and avoiding 
environmental pollution. We stress the importance of energy conservation and 
emission reduction in transportation, continue to expand the usage of new 
energy-powered logistics vehicles, comprehensively optimize transportation 
globally, and provide support to the green and low-carbon transformation of the 
logistics business.
As the express delivery sector continues to grow, the consumption of logistics 
packaging resources is enormous, and the careless or inappropriate disposal of 
discarded packaging undeniably leads to environmental pollution. In response to 
this, JD.com's "Green Stream Initiative" adheres to the philosophy of sustainable 
development throughout the entire process of packaging material selection and 
application throughout full chain management from manufacturing to use and 
treatment. The "Green Stream Initiative" plans to improve the utilization efficiency 
of packaging materials by eliminating and reducing non recyclable items, as 
well as recycling and reusing them, with the aim of bringing about a green 
transformation of the value chain of packaging.
Green Packaging
Programs to Phase Out Single-Use Plastic Packaging
JD.com's single-use packaging is predominantly made up of plastic materials. 
In order to mitigate the environmental damage caused by single-use plastic 
packaging waste, we are committed to transitioning our packaging to green 
materials and carrying out measures, such as optimizing packaging material, 
recycling reusable packaging, and promoting the substitution of single-use 
packaging with eco-friendly materials, phasing out single-use plastic packaging.
Target：
Use 100% environmentally friendly and renewable packaging 
materials by 2030
70 million
Recycled insulated boxes are regularly and widely used, and nearly
disposable EPS foam boxes were reduced in 2022
Reduced Packaging
JD continues to promote packaging reduction through packaging design and 
improvement and helps reduce packaging resource waste caused by excessive and 
frivolous packaging by using lightweight and functional packaging.
We adopt a mode of "direct procurement from the place of origin, direct delivery 
of primary packaging, and direct shipment of aggregate orders". That method 
integrates product and packaging to reduce secondary packaging in the supply 
chain and lower the use of express packaging at the source. Among them, JD 
Logistics provides preferential warehousing policies to upstream vendors to 
promote DWOP and encourages brands such as Procter&Gamble and Unilever to 
strengthen DWOP work to cut down on the waste generated by intermediary links 
due to dual packaging.
20 million trees
90,000
"Green Stream Initiative", the green 
supply chain strategic action, has 
collaborated with partners to carry out 
cardboard box recycling activities in 
more than 100 cities since its initiation 
five years ago. In 2022, it recycled nearly
cardboard boxes every month
In 2022, we released the industry's first DWOP certification standard to expand the 
scope of packaging reduction actions to a wider range.
	
● 
The DWOP must pass the testing requirements of JD Logistics transportation standards to 
ensure the safe delivery of orders;
	
● 
The packaging's interspace ratio should not exceed 20% to reduce material waste and 
avoid excessive packaging;
	
●
 
Packaging should use environmentally friendly and recyclable materials; polystyrene 
(EPS), excessive heavy metal and harmful substance residues are not allowed.
In 2022, 
JD Logistics teamed up with multiple 
partners to release a new target of 
green packaging:
By the end of 2022, JD Logistics achieved 
direct delivery of tens of thousands of 
stock keeping units (SKUs) delivered 
with original package (DWOP) and was 
expected to reduce disposable pack-
aging by some 10 billion, equivalent to 
reduced logging of some
to deliver over
80% of products  
sold through e-commerce channels  
with DWOP by 2030


74
75
01
A Responsible Supply Chain 
Consolidates the Foundation 
of Responsibility
03
A Responsible Supply Chain 
Leads to Shared Development 
Outcomes 
04
A Responsible Supply Chain 
Promotes Good Consumption
Appendix
02
A Responsible Supply Chain  
Paves the Way for a Green Future
75
74
2022
Environmental, Social and 
Governance Report
Packaging Recycling and Reusing 
In a bid to increase the proportion of recyclable packaging, JD has applied secondary 
use standards for the packaging carton. We have tailored a Used Carton Recycling 
Management System for personnel in various single warehouses across the country. 
The system stipulates that recycling personnel should eliminate unusable cartons 
according to the Order Outbound Packaging Standards and recycle those that meet 
the reuse standards into a designated area for reused cartons. Then those recycled 
cartons should be handed over to the consumables administrator to process them 
according to the established criteria and feed the refined boxes back into the logistics 
chain for reuse.
JD.com played an early and active role in the "Pilot Project for Recycling and Reuse of Plastic Flexible Packaging for 
Consumer Goods" headed by the China National Resources Recycling Association and the Green Recycling Plastic 
Supply Chain Group (GRPG). We promote the use of recyclable plastics, such as transparent bags, PE waterproof 
bags, and wrapping films in logistics packaging, with an aim to reduce pollution caused by waste plastic packaging 
to the environment and enhance the green and environmental value of packaging.
In 2022, we made full use of bagasse, 
a food-grade residue from sucrose 
production, to make mooncake boxes. 
The entire process neither contains 
synthetics such as ink and plastic nor 
generates wastewater. The boxes, if 
discarded, are biodegradable and 
decompose in six months.
Eco-friendly canvas bags used to carry 
those mooncake boxes are processed 
with plastic bottles recycled from 
oceans. The 2.5 million plastic bottles 
salvaged are processed into environ-
mentally friendly particles after sorting, 
disinfection, drying, and crushing, and 
then made into nylon and woven into 
over 400,000 customized green canvas 
bags. While actively recycling and reus-
ing those packaging, JD aims to reduce 
the pollution of plastic waste in the 
ocean and its harm to marine creatures.
JD.com Built a Pilot Project for Recycling Plastic Flexible Packaging
JD Employed Bagasse and Recycled Marine Plastic Bottles to Make Mooncake Boxes
Packaging Box Made of Bagasse
Eco-Friendly Bag Made of Recycled 
Marine Plastic Bottles
When it comes to packaging recycling and reusing, JD always uses reusable materials 
such as circular boxes, foldable insulated containers, and circular plastic bags for 
transit purposes. Our application for the Pilot Plan for Wide Use of Recyclable Parcel 
Packaging has already been approved by highly-regarded entities such as the State 
Post Bureau of China, the National Development and Reform Commission of China, 
and the Ministry of Commerce of China, earning us the highest industry rank in terms 
of score. We plan to further collaborate with the industry's environmental protection 
platforms in efforts to promote circular packaging sharing pilot programs.
JD Logistics' circular insulated box is a pioneer in China, as it was one of the earliest pilot projects to apply the 2C
39 
circular packaging model and also one of the most successful cases of circular packaging in China. Instead of using 
traditional EPS
40 white foam boxes and disposable ice bags, JD Logistics has opted for VIP
41, which is combined 
with special thermal insulation materials made of canvas, as well as recyclable ice boards.
JD Logistics' circular insulated box is mainly used to deliver B2C
42 fresh food. By the end of 2022, 700,000 insulated 
boxes have been widely and regularly used in 18 cities, reaching more than 200 million uses, reducing the use of 
200 million foam boxes.
JD Logistics Piloted the Use of Circular Insulated Box
As of the end of 2022, 5 diverse series and 
specifications of reusable parcel packaging 
have obtained the
"Green Product Certificate 
for Parcel Packaging"
Green Product Certificate for Parcel  
Packaging
39  2C, to consumer.
40  EPS, Expanded Polystyrene.
41  VIP, Vacuum Insulation Panel.
42  B2C, business to consumer.
Recycling packaging such as "Green Stream" box-
es, which can be sealed upon logistics manifests, 
reached
20 million uses


76
77
01
A Responsible Supply Chain 
Consolidates the Foundation 
of Responsibility
03
A Responsible Supply Chain 
Leads to Shared Development 
Outcomes 
04
A Responsible Supply Chain 
Promotes Good Consumption
Appendix
02
A Responsible Supply Chain  
Paves the Way for a Green Future
77
76
2022
Environmental, Social and 
Governance Report
In 2022, JD Logistics jointly launched "Superbox", green environmental 
protection projects with merchants, foundations, news platforms and 
others. This initiative urged consumers in Shanghai, Hangzhou, Ningbo, 
Nanjing, and Hefei to participate in packaging recycling while providing 
free milk tea and carbon reduction energy as material incentives to those 
who provide reusable express boxes. The cumulative distribution of 
green carbon reduction energy has now exceeded 2 million grams. JD 
Logistics recycled and reused the packaging it collected after the event.
JD Logistics' "Superbox" Program Engaged Consumers in Packaging Recycling
Promotion of the "Superbox" Campaign
Sustainable Packaging R&D
As of 2022, JD.com has pursued a green and low-carbon integrated supply chain by 
researching and exploring biodegradable material packaging. The ultimate goal is 
to achieve sustainable packaging practices across the entire operations. Notably, 
JD Logistics' Open Materials Laboratory, a key incubator for renewable materials 
innovation projects in universities, collaborates with other industry players to 
promote the use of sustainable materials and foster technological innovation.
In 2022, JD Logistics spearheaded pilot experiments on paper-based parcel packaging 
and inkless parcel envelopes with the intent of furthering technological advancements 
aimed at reducing and restricting plastic usage to achieve the objective of achieving 
zero waste. JD Logistics has facilitated the regular usage of biodegradable packaging 
bags in multiple regions such as Hainan and Beijing, prioritizing the utilization of 
environmentally friendly materials like PBAT
43 and PLA
44 to aid in the composting 
degradation of packaging bags.
Product Certificate for Biodegradable 
Parcel Packaging
JD Logistics continues to develop its fleet of new energy vehicles (NEVs), and proactively 
explore energy-saving and emission-reducing methods that incorporate "fleet efficiency 
and comprehensive emission reduction", it also lessens the carbon footprint generated 
by the logistics process by substituting traditional vehicles with new energy ones 
nationwide. As of the end of 2022, JD.com has launched a fleet of 5,418 self-operated 
NEVs.
JD.com's Goals of  
Green Logistics:
Green Transportation
New Energy Logistics Vehicle
43  PBAT belongs to thermoplastic biodegradable plastics and is a copolymer of butylene adipate and butylene terephthalate.
44  
PLA or polylactic acid, is a type of polymer formed by the polymerization of L-lactic acid, a fermented product of microorganisms, as a monomer.
In October 2022, JD Logistics introduced the first batch 
of hydrogen-powered logistics trucks into operation. The 
trucks are 9.6 meters long with a loading capacity of 18 
tonnes in a single round. They can be refueled with hy-
drogen in just 3 minutes and have a range of 450 kilome-
ters on a single charge. Compared to traditional fuel-pow-
ered vehicles, these trucks can reduce carbon emissions 
by approximately 7.53 tonnes a month, leading to both 
significant savings in fuel costs and improvements in 
energy efficiency. JD Logistics has already successfully 
achieved "zero carbon" emissions in some portions of its 
supply chain transportation as of the end of 2022. That 
effort not only decrease the carbon footprint associated 
with logistics and transportation but also pushes forward 
with the establishment of "zero carbon transportation" 
steadily throughout the supply chain.
JD Logistics Launched the First Batch of Hydrogen-Powered Logistics Trucks
JD Logistics's Hydrogen-Powered Truck
To replace 100% of traditional logis-
tics transport vehicles with NEVs by 
2030;
To promote 50% of JD Logistics' 
suppliers to join the Science 
Based Targets initiative (SBTi) by 
2025.


78
79
01
A Responsible Supply Chain 
Consolidates the Foundation 
of Responsibility
03
A Responsible Supply Chain 
Leads to Shared Development 
Outcomes 
04
A Responsible Supply Chain 
Promotes Good Consumption
Appendix
02
A Responsible Supply Chain  
Paves the Way for a Green Future
79
78
2022
Environmental, Social and 
Governance Report
Autonomous Delivery Vehicles
In November 2022, the first group of autonomous 
battery swap systems and integrated control platforms, 
jointly developed by JD Logistics, JD Technology, and 
State Grid Integrated Energy Service Group Co., Ltd., 
were put into use. It takes only 15 seconds to fetch a fully 
charged battery from a locker at designated stations, 
which efficiently and conveniently benefits over a 
thousand couriers at major stations located in Beijing. 
This innovative system replaces the traditional charging 
mode with battery swap, which has the potential to 
significantly reduce carbon emissions during terminal 
logistics distribution and transportation. That system 
can improve the utilization rate of green energy while 
promoting the consumption of new energy and 
increasing regional distribution volume. In 2022, JD 
Logistics built 1,000 autonomous battery swap systems.
JD Logistics Launched the Autonomous Battery Swap System
JD's Autonomous Battery Swap Service Station
JD Logistics focuses on low-carbon development 
throughout the entire transportation process. This 
involves launching autonomous delivery vehicles, 
constructing autonomous new energy battery swap 
stations, and extending energy conservation and 
emission reduction efforts to the final leg of logistics 
distribution, known as the "last mile." We continuous-
ly refine the technology of our autonomous delivery 
vehicles, enhancing their autonomous driving capa-
bilities and speed to improve transportation efficiency 
and reduce carbon emissions. As of the end of 2022, 
JD Logistics had deployed over 700 unmanned vehi-
cles in 30 cities across China, including 600 autono-
mous delivery vehicles and more than 100 indoor de-
livery robots. These enable us to provide consumers 
with fast, reliable delivery services in "last mile" and 
"last 100 meters" distances, not only in residential and 
commercial areas but also connecting with multiple 
supermarket delivery systems like Sam and SEVEN 
FRESH. This allows us to provide unmanned real-time 
delivery services for supermarket orders.
Green Ecology
JD.com is strongly committed to the idea of "harmonious coexistence between 
humans and nature" and meticulously abides by the ecological red line while 
vigorously pursuing biodiversity and forest preservation. We attach great importance 
to reducing food waste and enhancing the awareness of food conservation among 
all employees with the goal of fostering a mutually beneficial relationship between 
humanity and nature.
JD.com places great emphasis on the preservation of biodiversity and the protection 
of forests. We actively protect, restore, and sustainably use terrestrial ecosystems, and 
take into account biodiversity considerations throughout the entire lifecycle of our 
projects. With our efforts, we are helping to build an ecological and environmental 
community with a shared future, and safeguarding green waters and mountains.
We actively adhere to the United Nations Sustainable Development Goals (UNSDGs) 
and the "Kunming-Montreal Global Biodiversity Framework" (GBF). We are committed 
to developing our business in an environmentally friendly manner and working 
together with stakeholders to transform sustainable production and consumption 
models.
Drawing on the Wildlife Protection Law of the People's Republic of China, the 
Implementation Regulations of the People's Republic of China on the Protection 
of Terrestrial Wildlife, as well as the Fisheries Law of the People's Republic of China 
and other relevant legislation, JD.com has established the Regulations on the 
Management of Prohibited Commodities and Information on the JD's Open Platform. 
As an e-commerce platform, we staunchly forbid any illicit trade of wild animals on 
our platform and we promptly eliminate all products linked to wild animals that are 
nationally-protected species or those prohibited by laws and regulations Any hunting 
tools that may be used to capture or kill protected wild animals is also prohibited 
on our platform The aims is to actively contribute to ecological protection and the 
construction of ecological civilization. We have also organized a specialized squad 
to scrutinize common illegal hunting and fishing tools and to combine manual 
inspections with technical strategies to curb the sale and circulation of wildlife 
products and tools that are illegal to sell on the JD platform. We are also members of 
the Working Group on Preventing and Combating Illegal Wildlife Trading. We share 
with other members of the group the measures we have taken and the results we have 
achieved in preventing the illegal trading of wildlife and the sale of banned hunting 
gear online to other enterprises.
Biodiversity and 
Forest Protection
Since its inception in 2017, "Collecting objects with love", JD's in-kind donation platform, has been catering to the 
requirements of public welfare organizations and government departments in terms of in-kind donations through 
an exclusive model of direct in-kind contribution. This innovative approach has spearheaded the building of an 
innovative, sunny, and efficient public welfare ecosystem. Collaboration between China Biodiversity Conservation 
and Green Development Foundation (CBCGDF) and JD's online charity fundraising platform has been initiated to 
promote ecological protection, green development, and the conservation of biodiversity.
CBCGDF's Project was launched on JD's online charity fundraising Platform


80
81
01
A Responsible Supply Chain 
Consolidates the Foundation 
of Responsibility
03
A Responsible Supply Chain 
Leads to Shared Development 
Outcomes 
04
A Responsible Supply Chain 
Promotes Good Consumption
Appendix
02
A Responsible Supply Chain  
Paves the Way for a Green Future
81
80
2022
Environmental, Social and 
Governance Report
Our warehouse development project ad-
heres to numerous laws and regulations 
concerning land development, such as the 
Land Management Law of the People's 
Republic of China. Prior to commencing 
land development and construction, we 
conduct due diligence and environmental 
assessment on the development site. This 
includes fully examining and evaluating 
the potential impact on animal and plant 
habitats and ecological red lines, and ensur-
ing that the project development process 
follows the principles of sustainable devel-
opment and minimizes the impact on the 
environment and ecology.
We have adopted various measures to 
safeguard the ecological environment and 
promote biodiversity while carrying out the 
project's construction.
At JD, we uphold strict adherence to the laws and regulations, such as the Forest Law of the People's Republic of China, and prohibit deforest-
ation across all business lines within the Group to actively safeguard forest resources against any infringement. In 2022, no construction land 
utilized by JD posed a risk of deforestation. We have made a commitment to environmentally friendly choices and sustainable procurement in 
terms of our logistics packaging materials and office paper. We only use office paper certified by the Forest Stewardship Council (FSC) to reinforce 
our efforts towards forest protection and to mitigate the risks of deforestation. 
In relation to our construction efforts, we are steadfast in our pursuit of green building practices. During the construction of JD.com's Building 
No.3 in 2022, we allocated approximately 30 workers every day to perform on-site cleaning and dust control, adding some RMB 3.15 million RMB 
to labor costs. We applied four car washing machines, two sprinkler trucks, and four mist cannons, as well as set up 140,000 square meters of 
dust netting. Our project has effectively met the requirements for the "Green, Safe, and Civilized Construction Site" acceptance in Beijing. Our 
environmental protection measures were highly praised by the Beijing Municipal Commission of Housing and Urban-Rural Development. The 
project earned a Three-Starred Construction Site Certification of the Beijing Green Building.
Green Construction Principles in the Construction Process
Impose limitations upon the general contracting firm 
to direct them to effectively curtail excess resource con-
sumption during the construction, while bolstering our 
efforts to manage the construction process and mini-
mize any potential harm to the natural environment.
Actively adopt energy-sav-
ing and environmentally 
friendly new technologies 
and materials to reduce 
waste;
Appoint full-time managers 
or cleaning personnel who 
were responsible for;
Establish flushing facilities at all site entrances 
and exits, with dedicated personnel assigned 
to wash all vehicles on site; use plastic woven 
or rain cloths to cover all vehicles and prevent 
dirt and debris from spilling on local roads 
and affect the surrounding environment.
Prioritize local plant species that 
can thrive in the local soil and 
climatic conditions, thus foster-
ing an optimum environment for 
their growth.
Plant an assortment of plants, 
including trees, shrubs, and 
grasses, to create multi-level 
landscaping, enhancing biodi-
versity within the ecosystem.
Integrate the concept of a "sponge city" into the project design, incorporate green rooftop 
spaces that can deal with water runoff following heavy rains and enhance the overall mi-
croenvironment; carefully select drought-resistant and waterlogging-tolerant plant species 
that can thrive in both rainy seasons and dry seasons to store and regulate rainfall as a 
"sponge city"; use permeable pavements throughout sidewalks, activity areas, and above-
ground parking lots within the site to significantly reduce water runoff caused by inclement 
weather.
Designate a full-time cleaner who will be 
responsible for collecting and transporting 
the cleaned waste to the designated location 
in accordance with local environmental 
protection regulations.
Arrange temporary facilities 
and protect surrounding 
greenery based on the 
specific conditions at the 
construction site;
Food Management
Food conservation and waste reduction are the key approach to ensuring stable 
food supplies. JD.com has taken a comprehensive approach by integrating these 
concepts throughout our entire food value chain, contributing to the maintenance 
of food security. To reduce losses caused by damage or expiration, we work closely 
with upstream and downstream parties across the supply chain, from procurement 
and warehousing to processing, sales, transportation, and distribution. We 
promote food conservation awareness among our employees through measures 
such as quantitative meal preparation, incentives and conservation campaigns in 
our daily operations, dedicated to reducing food waste.
In 2022, we took the following actions to reduce food loss and waste:
	
● 
Selected fresh food products based on actual demands and needs to improve the 
accuracy of order, preventing waste and excess;
	
● 
Strictly followed the standards for receiving goods in the warehouse, frequently 
checked shelf life, and ensured that products are organized for first-in, first-out 
(FIFO) inventory management;
	
●
 
Ensured that cold storage maintains the appropriate temperature, and worked 
with our supply chain partners to improve the transportation of products to 
maximize the freshness of food products and avoid transportation losses;
	
● 
Processed fresh foods in line with standards to prevent any losses that may result 
from substandard processing operations;
	
● Provided clear explanations regarding proper product storage and shelf life;
	
●
 
Established discount and promotion management regulations, created a designated 
special area for discounted best-by products; offered these products at lower prices to 
attract more consumers and reduce waste caused by expired food;
	
●
 
Placed visible signs for reducing food waste in the dining area, and reminded 
consumers to order the right amount of food to encourage consumers to reduce food 
waste and cultivate a culture of food conservation among our consumers.
	
● 
Collaborated with our suppliers and agreed to a frequency of 1-2 deliveries per week, 
reducing the amount of expired and damaged goods caused by overstocking;
	
●
 
Required our external catering suppliers to adjust their serving sizes by providing 
both large and small portion packages to cater to employees with different appetites, 
reducing food waste caused by excessive portions;
	
●
 
Labeled the calorie of each food item, installed a weight scale in the cafeteria, and 
displayed food-saving slogans to encourage employees to eat healthily;
	
● 
Carried out "Clean Your Plate" campaigns and rewarded those who demonstrate 
positively to incentivize saving behavior.
Reducing food loss and waste in stores
Reducing food loss and waste generated in canteens
Intricately combine trees, flowers, 
and other flora of varying shapes 
and varieties to create a harmo-
nious, organic blend of plant life 
by taking into account the unique 
biological features and ecological 
demands of each plant species.


82
83
02
03
A Responsible Supply Chain 
Leads to Shared Development 
Outcomes 
04
A Responsible Supply Chain 
Promotes Good Consumption
Appendix
A Responsible Supply Chain  
Paves the Way for a Green Future
01
A Responsible Supply Chain 
Consolidates the Foundation 
of Responsibility
2022
Environmental, Social and 
Governance Report
JD.com strives to build a diversified and integrated high-
quality employment environment that leads employees 
and partners to a win-win outcome. We empower our 
partners to build a reliable, efficient and sustainable 
supply chain, using our technologies and capabilities in 
constructing a social supply chain.
03
A Responsible Supply 
Chain Leads to 
Shared Development 
Outcomes


84
85
01
A Responsible Supply Chain 
Consolidates the Foundation 
of Responsibility
02
04
A Responsible Supply Chain 
Promotes Good Consumption
Appendix
A Responsible Supply Chain  
Paves the Way for a Green Future
03
A Responsible Supply Chain 
Leads to Shared Development 
Outcomes 
85
84
2022
Environmental, Social and 
Governance Report
JD.com is people-orientated, and employees are the motivation for our 
sustainable development. We always protect the legitimate rights and interests 
of our employees, continuously optimize our talent development system, 
and implement employee health and welfare, which enhances their sense of 
belonging and the cohesion of our employees. We are committed to building a 
diversified, inclusive, safe and harmonious work environment and strive to expand 
employment that will play a role in stabilizing employment throughout society.
Human 
Orientation
As a supply chain service company with both the genes and advantages of 
traditional enterprises and digital technology capabilities. JD.com's value is not 
limited to self-growth but lies in boosting the real economy. JD.com helps small 
and medium-sized businesses, individual entrepreneurs and new farmers with 
new opportunities for growth so as to empower stable growth and employment 
through digital capacity. 
At the end of the reporting period, 80% of JD Logistics' front-line employees came 
from rural areas. More than 200,000 rural families of front-line employees have 
improved their lives with the income and benefits they earn working for JD.com. 
We also facilitate the reshaping of the real economy with grids and digitalization. 
Our omni-channel business has covered 3.67 million offline stores of multiple 
types, including pharmacies, specialty stores, supermarkets, convenience stores, 
auto repair stores and flower stores, which directly and indirectly provide a large 
number of job opportunities. For the graduates in 2022, we opened new positions 
in aviation maintenance and aviation functions for the first time and increased 
the number of reserve positions for front-line managers, with 4,113 graduates 
successfully joining JD.com.
Quality Employment Promotion
The total number of front-line logistics 
employees in JD.com over
Percentage of front-line logistics 
employees from rural areas
370,000
80%
Committed to providing fairer employment opportunities and barrier-free working and living environments for 
the disabled, the "Sunshine Angel" program of JD.com Customer Service Center was officially launched in October 
2013. In our offices in Suqian and Chengdu, JD.com has set up special office areas, independent dining rooms, 
dormitories, and barrier-free restrooms and provides exclusive benefits like regular exclusive group building 
activities and psychological counseling sessions for the "Sunshine Angels".
During the 2022 JD.com merchant con-
ference on 618 sales day, we officially 
released the investment rules and mer-
chant support initiatives. Thirty merchant 
support initiatives of "three reductions 
and three optimizations" were adopted at 
the festival, focusing on helping small and 
medium-sized businesses improve at least 
20% of the input-output ratio through a 
series of initiatives for cost decreasing and 
benefit increasing. JD.com gave full play to 
the influence of small and medium-sized 
businesses in the activity, stabilizing the 
employment of more than 10 million peo-
ple working for small and medium-sized 
businesses.
"Sunshine Angel" on the Way to Employment
Small and Medium-Sized Businesses were Empowered to Build an Open Business Ecosystem
Group Photo of the "Sunshine Angels" Team
Merchant Support Initiatives of "Three Reductions 
and Three Optimizations"
The "Sunshine Angels" team in 
JD.com Customer Service Center 
has expanded from 12 people to 
nearly 100 people. JD.com has 
also joined hands with social 
forces to enrich the forms of em-
ployment assistance for people 
with disabilities and has provided 
thousands with technical training 
as customer service managers to 
encourage them to pursue their 
dreams.


86
87
01
A Responsible Supply Chain 
Consolidates the Foundation 
of Responsibility
02
04
A Responsible Supply Chain 
Promotes Good Consumption
Appendix
A Responsible Supply Chain  
Paves the Way for a Green Future
03
A Responsible Supply Chain 
Leads to Shared Development 
Outcomes 
87
86
2022
Environmental, Social and 
Governance Report
In accordance with relevant laws, regulations and declarations such as the 
Universal Declaration of Human Rights, the International Labor Organization 
Conventions, the Labor Law of the People's Republic of China, the Labor Contract 
Law of the People's Republic of China, JD.com has formulated internal policies, 
including the JD Group Management System for Preventing Sexual Harassment 
in the Workplace, and the JD group Employee Handbook. We practice fair, just, 
diverse and integrated employment policies, shape a workplace atmosphere 
that is inclusive and provides a sense of belonging that embraces employees' 
unique experiences and diverse backgrounds, which helps achieve the 
development of both JD.com and its employees.
We fully respect and protect the right and strictly implement the rules of  equal pay for 
equal work for all employees and eliminate any form of discrimination, harassment, 
or threat based on a person's gender, age, race, religion, family planning or disability.
On January 31, 2023, JD.com became the first Chinese company in the industry 
to be included in the Bloomberg Gender-Equality Index.
JD.com has developed a number of programs to enhance diversity in the workplace, 
including the implementation of anti-harassment and anti-discrimination training, 
which all employees took in 2022. We have also established the employee service ho-
tline 400 and a whistleblower email nicknamed bigear@jd.com and other reporting 
channels. We have promised employees the privacy and legal rights as whistleblow-
ers will be protected, the first time to investigate and deal with after they raise.
Diversity, Equality 
and Inclusion
JD.com was selected into the 2023 Bloomberg Gender Equality Index (GEI)
2022 Anti-harassment and anti-discrimination related 
employee DEI training coverage
100%
45  
The Bloomberg Gender Equality Index (GEI): The world's leading investment-referenced gender equality database that identifies and 
highlights companies improving transparency in gender reporting and promoting women's equality in the workplace. The index gives scores 
based on five key indicators of gender equality, including leadership and talent cultivation, equal pay and gender pay parity, inclusive culture, 
anti-sexual harassment policies and external branding.
Number of employees
47
Percentage of female employees
Number of employees with disabilities
Median gender pay gap in percentage
Number of minorities employees
445,268
22.1%
3,058
14%
26,920
In January 2023, JD.com "Sunshine Angels", customer service team made up 
mainly of employees living with disabilities, was selected by the Asia-Pacific 
Economic Cooperation(APEC) Women's Leadership Forum as the "Women's 
Innovative Empowerment" case of the year. Over 70% of the core team members 
of JD.com "Sunshine Angels" are women, greatly empowering women with 
disabilities. Many members of the team participate in volunteer activities and 
inspire others living with disabilities. Through programs such as "Sunshine Angel", 
we support the development of the disabled, especially women, by providing 
them with equal work and living environments.
"Sunshine Angels" Team was Selected as APEC
46 Excellent Case
JD.com won the APEC "Women's Innovative Empowerment" Annual Case Trophy
Over70%
JD.com's Diverse Employee Composition
46  
The APEC WOMEN LEADERSHIP FORUM is organized by the APEC China Business Council and serves as an important platform to promote 
Chinese business women's participation in the APEC process.
47  
The total number of employees only covers full-time employees of businesses directly managed by JD.com.
of the core team members of 
JD.com "Sunshine Angels" 
are women


88
89
01
A Responsible Supply Chain 
Consolidates the Foundation 
of Responsibility
02
04
A Responsible Supply Chain 
Promotes Good Consumption
Appendix
A Responsible Supply Chain  
Paves the Way for a Green Future
03
A Responsible Supply Chain 
Leads to Shared Development 
Outcomes 
89
88
2022
Environmental, Social and 
Governance Report
JD.com believes in placing the well-being of employees ahead of the interests 
of the enterprise and giving as much care to employees as it can. We value and 
protect the legitimate rights and interests of all employees. We have established 
diversified communication channels, and promote a sound and long-term 
incentive mechanism that guarantees the welfare and care of employees to help 
enhance their sense of identity and their happiness.
We fully respect and protect the rights and interests of our employees and have 
eliminated child labor and forced and compulsory labor. The JD Group Employee 
Handbook provides clear regulations on the requirements for hiring employees 
and prohibits the employment of employees under the age of 16. During the 
recruitment process, we verify the name, age, education, work experience and 
other information of the applicant in accordance with the JD Group Background 
Investigation System. We also screen for conditions that do not comply with the 
employment system, such as being blacklisted by China’
s Trust and Integrity 
Enterprise Alliance or having a conflict of business interests. If noncompliance 
is discovered, the company immediately takes measures to terminate contact 
with the individual in accordance with laws, regulations and other requirements. 
By the end of the reporting period, there were no cases of employment 
discrimination, child labor or forced and compulsory labor at JD.com.
We respect employees' right to freedom of association and collective bargaining, 
hold regular employee representative congresses, and promote democratic 
management. Employees are guaranteed the right to know, participate, and to 
expression, safeguarding employees' rights and interests. Currently, there are 
300 employee representatives at JD.com's employee representative congress, 
including one chairman and two vice-chairs of JD.com's trade union. In 2022, the 
second session of the first representative congress of JD.com was held online, 
with all 300 representatives attending the meeting.
Employee Rights 
and Care
Protection of Employees' 
Rights and Interests
Based on the Constitution of the All-China Federation of Trade Unions, 
the Trade Union Law of the People's Republic of China and resolutions 
passed at the first representative congress, we improved the Collective 
Contract of JD Group, the Collective Contract of JD Logistics, and 
entered on the record with the Human Resources and Social Security 
Bureau in 2022. All employees have signed the collective contract.
48
Collective contract 
employee coverage
100%
48  
The data does not include Deppon and Kuayue Express.
JD.com attaches great importance to employees' demands and opinions and is 
dedicated to building a sound employee communication mechanism. We have 
diversified employee feedback channels that include the employee service hotline, 
the confidential email address bigear@jd.com and the employee forum, etc. We also 
divide responsibilities according to the system and set up a mechanism for handling 
problems of different levels according to the types of employee feedback, which 
achieve closed-loop management and efficient response to employee demands. 
JD.com currently has two emails jdw_radar@jd.com and globalhrssc@jd.com to 
collect overseas employees' opinions. Suggestions, ideas and complaints will be 
followed up by local HR colleagues.
Facilitated by the JD.com employees' trade union, we have set up 10 special 
working groups to deal with issues frequently reported by employees, involving 
uniforms, attendance, remuneration and benefits, and other issues. The issues 
reported by employees are followed up by dedicated personnel who follow a 
prescribed process. In 2022, JD.com significantly reduced the rate of complaints 
through various governance measures.
Employee Communication 
Mechanism
General Events
Feedback within 48 hours
Emergencies Events
Feedback within one hour
Major Special Cases
Feedback to employees 
within seven workdays after 
investigation and verification 
Response Time for Problems of Different Levels
A survey of JD.com front-line logistics employees, which was managed by their trade union, provided suggestions 
and demands for new employee uniforms. Based on the feedback from the survey, we sorted out the suggestions 
and demands of employees on the application and distribution process of uniforms, uniform design and quality. 
Accordingly, we optimized solutions to the process, size design, and uniform material, which achieve double 
improvement of uniform quality and distribution service.
JD Logistics Transformed its Uniform Into an Environmentally Friendly and Trendy One
Optimized Uniforms for Front-Line Employees
300employee
representatives at JD.com's employee 
representative congress


90
91
01
A Responsible Supply Chain 
Consolidates the Foundation 
of Responsibility
02
04
A Responsible Supply Chain 
Promotes Good Consumption
Appendix
A Responsible Supply Chain  
Paves the Way for a Green Future
03
A Responsible Supply Chain 
Leads to Shared Development 
Outcomes 
91
90
2022
Environmental, Social and 
Governance Report
To promote an open feedback culture and mechanism and encourage employees 
to contribute more to JD.com's culture, we conduct quarterly employee satisfac-
tion surveys. In 2022, we conducted surveys in the form of questionnaires sent to 
office and front-line employees, with a annual score of 4.51 out of 5. The employee 
satisfaction rate of office employees was 4.44, a year-on-year increase of 6%, while 
front-line employees' scores remained unchanged from the year before at 4.58.
Satisfaction Evaluation Criteria of Different Position Sequences in JD.com
For JD.com office employees
For front-line logistics employees(excluding Kuayue, Deppon and 
international logistics)
JD.com is committed to providing employees with externally competitive and in-
ternally fair compensation and benefits. We have implemented a compensation 
incentive mechanism for all employees based on job performance evaluations.
JD.com's employee performance evaluation criteria consist of goal setting, 
performance reviews and evaluation as well as performance application. The 
performance management groups of the Group and each sub-business line jointly 
identify and align goals through business analysis meetings and goal-sharing 
meetings, and give timelier feedback on employee's development performance 
with the online system. The online system is also used to achieve bottom-up 
alignment of employee goals to help employees fulfill their potential and improve 
overall performance. We are improving our system of performance evaluation to 
adapt to the changing market and employee needs.
From July 1, 2021, to July 1, 2023, JD.com plans to take two years to gradually increase 
the employees' average annual revenue from a 14-month salary to a 16-month salary. 
JD.com has also established and implemented an industry-competitive employee 
equity incentive policy, which provides stock option incentives and pay raises to 
eligible critical employees. 
We evaluate the living standards and wage criteria of employees in different 
regions, and in accordance with national laws and regulations and the 
corresponding regional regulations, provide all regular employees who work 
during legal working hours with salaries higher than the bottom wage criteria 
set by local policies. We continue to improve our non-payroll benefits system 
by providing all regular employees with mandated benefits such as five social 
insurance and one housing pension and adding non-payroll benefits such as 
holiday care and annual medical checkups.
Employee 
Compensation and 
Benefits Care
The annual employee 
satisfaction rate of 2022 was
4.51out of 5
Amount paid for front-line logistics 
employees in salary and benefits 
in 2022 over
RMB44.6billion
talent
hard 
work
collabo-
ration
innova-
tion
decision-
making
incentive 
mechanism
elimination 
mechanism
work 
standards
work envi-
ronment
personal 
development
compensation 
incentives
team 
management
cultural 
atmosphere
JD.com employee benefits system is supported by three parts. By classifying employee benefits into "multiple scenarios", we 
implement the benefits system based on the universality of all employees, which is oriented to tilt scarce resources to core 
talents and improve the benefits of front-line employees. In this way, we are committed to promoting the happiness index of 
our employees and sharing development achievements with them.
JD Logistics has a large number of front-line employees working as couriers and warehouse sorters. The salary of our logistics 
employees is higher than other industry peers. We provide supplemental accidental commercial insurance and additional 
benefits such as supplemental medical insurance, annual medical checkups and meal subsidies. JD.com also contributes to 
employee social insurance and a housing pension for front-line employees. In 2022, JD.com's payroll to front-line logistics 
employees came to RMB 44.6 billion.
 Committed to placing the well-being of employees prior to the interests of the enterprise, JD.com cares for its employees 
in terms of their physical and mental health, career development and family life, helping them live a promising life. Benefits 
and the talent development mechanism are established to make employees feel respected, delighted and fulfilled.
—— JD Group Philosophy
JD.com Employee Benefits System of "Three Parts and Multiple Scenarios"
Strive to be a great enterprise creating value, bringing warmth and undertaking responsibilities.
JD.com Employee Benefits System
Build a "Three Pillars" approach and offer diverse employee benefits tailored to "Various Scenarios", which prioritizes not just 
employees' physical and mental wellbeing, but also professional development and family satisfaction."
Employee benefit policies are based on the universality of all employees and oriented to tilt scarce resources to core talents and 
improve the benefits of front-line employees.
An integrated benefit platform
An integrated tool for managing benefits systematically provides one-stop services, such as benefits distribution, a benefit board, 
policy documents and online processing, for employees to process benefit-related affairs.
physical and 
mental health
Mandated benefits
Supplement benefits
Featured benefits
basic necessities 
of life
a happy family
Leave benefits
Policy benefits
Cultural care
● 
Commercial 
insurance
● Medical check-ups
● Fitness centers
● 
Outdoors fitness 
areas
● 
Health counselling 
room
● 
EAP psychological 
counseling 
services
● Meal subsidies
● 
Dinner on 
workdays
● 
Commuting for 
overtime
● Shuttle buses
● Welfare housing
● Welfare coupons
● 
JD.com merchant 
discounts
● 
Housing security 
fund
● Assistance fund
● 
Children's 
playground
● Childcare centers
● Kindergarten
● Education
● Annual leave
● 
Paid maternity 
leave
● Paid sick leave
● Half-pay sick leave
● 
Other statutory 
holidays
● Seniority Reward
● Reward on values
● 519 Veterans' day
● 
JD.com's family 
gift
● Team building
● New Year in JD.com
● Social insurance
● Housing fund
● Residence permit
● 
Overseas 
graduates 
settlement
● 
Graduates 
settlement
● 
Talent 
introduction
● Talent programs
JD.com complies with 
the local and national 
requirements by providing 
basic benefits.
JD.com provides 
supplement benefits 
featured by the Business 
Group Business 
Unit(BGBU).
JD.com provides 
benefits featured by and 
representative of itself.
Multiple scenarios
Three parts


92
93
01
A Responsible Supply Chain 
Consolidates the Foundation 
of Responsibility
02
04
A Responsible Supply Chain 
Promotes Good Consumption
Appendix
A Responsible Supply Chain  
Paves the Way for a Green Future
03
A Responsible Supply Chain 
Leads to Shared Development 
Outcomes 
93
92
2022
Environmental, Social and 
Governance Report
Seniority Reward
JD.com's Family Gift
JD.com awards silver and gold medals to employees when they reach five and 10 years of employment. In 2022, 
we awarded more than 10,000 silver medals and 3,000 gold medals to our long-serving employees.
JD.com hands out customized 
holiday gift packs to its em-
ployees and partners during 
the two traditional Chinese 
festivals of the Mid-Autumn 
Festival and Spring Festival 
every year. In 2022, we distrib-
uted more than 900,000 holi-
day gift boxes to all employees 
and interns.
Multi-Scenario Employee Care Activities
JD.com's Chinese New Year Family Gift Box
In 2022
we awarded
10,000+
In 2022
we distributed more than
900,000
gold medals
3,000+
We attach great importance to the health and well-being of our female employees, and have implemented a benefit system for 
female employees:
Baby-Care Rooms at JD.com Headquarters
Childcare Center of the Group
Annual medical checkups, tailored to age, marital status, etc., for female employees
Additional commercial maternity insurance up to RMB 5,000
Baby-care facilities with private rooms equipped with diaper change tables, sofas, refrigerators, lockers and other 
facilities
Childcare center and children's playground at JD.com headquarters
Pregnant employees enjoy privileges such as priority queuing and parking
Women's change room with various amenities for pregnant women.
silver medals
holiday gift boxes


94
95
01
A Responsible Supply Chain 
Consolidates the Foundation 
of Responsibility
02
04
A Responsible Supply Chain 
Promotes Good Consumption
Appendix
A Responsible Supply Chain  
Paves the Way for a Green Future
03
A Responsible Supply Chain 
Leads to Shared Development 
Outcomes 
95
94
2022
Environmental, Social and 
Governance Report
JD.com provides benefit programs such as Settlement Plan, Education Support and Extra-long Maternity Leave, etc. 
to provide rear services to employees' families in all aspects and ensure employees' worry-free work and healthy and 
happy life.
JD.com's Measures Help Employees to Settle into Work
Staff Dormitory
Launched in 2012, the Settlement Plan is a benefit 
program that allows all employees meeting 
seniority requirements to apply for an interest-free 
loan of up to RMB 1 million for the purchase of their 
first home in the city in which they work. JD.com 
provided RMB 1.3 billion in interest-free loans from 
2017 to 2022, benefiting some 2,800 employees. 
JD.com has also provided 2,537 housing units for 
employees and nearly 20,000 dormitories for front-
line employees in need since 2016.
Settlement Plan & JD.com's Welfare Housing
When an employee becomes incapacitated or dies, their children can apply for grants to cover education costs from 
kindergarten to college. In 2022, 16 families benefited from this benefit program.
Child Support Program
Since 2017, JD.com has cooperated with Oriental Cambridge Education Group to set up a childcare center at 
JD.com's headquarters. In 2022, the nursery service benefited more than 1,700 person-times. JD.com also 
collaborated with Etonkids, a chain of high-end kindergartens, to build the kindergarten project together. More 
than 350 children of JD.com's employees were enrolled in 2022.
JD.com's Kindergarten Project
Supporting the government's "Notice of the Office of the National Medical Security Administration on Doing a 
Good Job in Supporting the Maternity Insurance of the Three-Child Policy" and other related policies, JD.com has 
launched its welfare policy. JD.com has provided an additional 30 days of maternity leave beyond the national and 
local maternity-leave requirement since 2015. In provinces and cities that have not extended national maternity 
leave, employees can extend maternity leave in accordance with JD.com's maternity leave plan. JD.com's maternity-
friendly policy cover all employees.
Ever since the release of the State Council's "Decision on Optimizing Birth Policy to Promote Long-term Balanced 
Population Development", parental leave in all related provinces in China has been extended or added. JD.com actively 
responds to the call for national and local policies. As such, JD.com adjusted and improved the company's vacation 
system as well as its leave application process.
Fertility-Friendly Policy
JD Logistics Subsidized RMB 500 Million for Front-Line Employees on Duty During the Spring Festival
Rich Employee Activities
JD.com organizes an annual Sports Season for its employees. JD employees with different 
hobbies and of different age form teams to compete in games of football, badminton, 
and e-sports. In 2022, JD.com organized 11 events, including badminton, tug-of-war and 
e-sports competitions, among which e-sports competitions attracted 550 teams in 110 
cities nationwide. Through a series of cultural and sporting activities, we aim to enrich the 
recreational life of our employees and enhance communication and team cohesion.
JD.com's E-sports Participants
In 2022
JD.com arranged various 
BGs in organizing
11
Since 2019, JD.com has continued to implement its Employee Assistance Program. By the end of 2022, the EAP care 
program has served 1,612 person-times.
Employee Assistance Program (EAP)
JD Love Assistance Fund endeavors to provide economic aid to deserving employees and families in distress. The forms 
of aid range from assistance to personnel enduring serious illness, those disabled or deceased employees, educational 
fees for children of the deceased employees, and reimbursement for losses caused by house destruction. From 2016 to 
2022, the Love Assistance Fund has issued a cumulative total of 2,288 aid packages, amounting to RMB 89.38 million.
Love Assistance Fund 
JD Logistics is the first responsible supply chain company in the industry to carry out "Spring Festival Delivery". Spring 
Festival 2023 marked the eleventh consecutive year that JD Logistics has carried out this project. To support front-line 
employees who continued to work during the Spring Festival holiday period, JD Logistics provided the workers with 
allowances and benefits valued at RMB 500 million, higher than the national legal criteria. In addition to overtime pay, 
the company also provided bonuses.
JD Logistics provided a Spring Festival atmosphere in warehouses, sorting centers, express business offices and other 
places across the country through a series of cultural activities such as making dumplings and giving gifts. The children 
of employees who worked through the holiday were invited safely to spend Spring Festival at their parents' workplaces 
while they were on duty.
sports events


96
97
01
A Responsible Supply Chain 
Consolidates the Foundation 
of Responsibility
02
04
A Responsible Supply Chain 
Promotes Good Consumption
Appendix
A Responsible Supply Chain  
Paves the Way for a Green Future
03
A Responsible Supply Chain 
Leads to Shared Development 
Outcomes 
97
96
2022
Environmental, Social and 
Governance Report
Employee Training 
and Development
JD.com is committed to the promotion of employees' personal career development 
which helps propel the development of the company. JD.com has established 
multiple channels to assist the professional development of employees.
JD.com has developed an open and transparent recruitment system. JD.com uses 
artificial intelligence to analyze candidates' resumes to improve job matching 
and recruitment efficiency. In 2022, we completed a talent review of nearly 50,000 
people through the use of 360 questionnaires, that helped identify nearly 10,000 
potential employees for management positions and other jobs, to meet the needs 
of JD.com's long-term strategic development.
JD.com continues to optimize its employee appraisal system and implement its 
"contributor-oriented" incentives. Integrating dimensions of employee professional 
proficiency and compliance on business conduct, and based on the digital talent 
management system, job nature and continuous assistance by managers, we 
set up differentiated appraisal criteria and cycles (at least once every quarter) to 
make employees identify their value and improve personal performance, which 
helps achieve the organizational strategic goals. When setting performance goals, 
strategy undertaking and goal alignment throughout the Group make employees 
fully informed of their roles and responsibilities in the organization. Our strategy of 
continuous performance improvement of employees requires managers to provide 
ongoing feedback and suggestions to help subordinate employees to improve 
and grow professionally. This helps us achieve efficient, well-aligned and healthy 
performance assessments.
Guided by JD Group's Employee Promotion Plan, job promotions are announced 
and dual career paths are provided in April and October. While giving promotion 
opportunities to outstanding talents, we design the promotion mechanism for 
different types of talents, in which assessors related to the business lines and 
HR examine the values, ability and quality, value contribution and other factors. 
We are committed to creating an open, fair and just promotion procedure. We 
offer promoted employees training and give them greater responsibilities and 
development space, helping them to succeed in their professional fields. In 2022, 
31% of JD.com's employees were given promotions, of which 7% were promoted 
to management positions. One percent were given "exceptional" promotions to 
higher positions.
Talent Development System
JD.com Talent Assessment System
360 Assessment
Talent Review System
A new questionnaire is developed according to the type 
of evaluation role and the scoring criteria and form of 
the questionnaire is continued to be optimized, guided 
by the diversity and complexity of the application 
scenarios. In 2022, more than 49,000 employees of 
JD.com completed the assessment, leading them 
to discover and tap into their greater potential and 
motivating them to maximize their personal value.
To enhance managers' ability to assess high-potential 
employees, an intelligent talent review system is devel-
oped that includes specific initiatives for talent develop-
ment.
By the end of the reporting period, over 50,000 em-
ployees of JD.com have participated in a talent review, 
helping managers accurately identify talent and build a 
sustainable talent team for JD.com.
In 2022
31%
of JD.com's employees  
were given promotions
To encourage employees to further study and improve themselves, JD.com 
has implemented a multi-dimensional training system of "online + offline" and 
"theory + practice" to encourage employees to continue their studies and self-
improvement, which focuses on professional development, leadership skills and 
ability to innovate. We also train the next generation of professionals to manage 
the enterprise and lead the technology of the digital intelligent supply chain.
Diversified Talent Training
By the end of the reporting period
Total hours of employee training
18,423,446
JD.com Training System
Coverage & Goal
Training Programs
Profession 
Training
Build and implement mechanisms for talent standards 
and career development paths by establishing 
committees for professional channels of  technology, 
products and functions
Learning Map
Leadership 
Training
Competency training program for on-the-job managers
Pengyuan Class, MAX, Canxing, Zhiyuan Class, 
Pinnacle Program and other programs
Training programs for future management personnel
Alfa, Sigma, Delta, Jingchi High Rise, Sanqing, 
Ride the Wave and other programs
Training on Next 
Generation of 
Professionals
Young talent development program for students
JD.com's Rising Star Program, "JDRUN" 
summer internship camp
High Potential 
Training
Training program for core management personnel 
selected by the company
Leadership training program TET, the DMT 
program for doctoral scientists, Pilot and 
the program of Rising Wave
Basic Force 
Training
For all employees
Compliance training and examination for all 
employees, JDX series-JDTalk (Perception-
Innovation-Change), JDVoice (Experience - 
Inheritance - Sharing), JDtech (Technology - 
Product -Applied Research)
JD.com conducted
2,442
in-person training courses
25,223
online training courses
100%
of employees were trained
41.5hours
Average training time per employee 


98
99
01
A Responsible Supply Chain 
Consolidates the Foundation 
of Responsibility
02
04
A Responsible Supply Chain 
Promotes Good Consumption
Appendix
A Responsible Supply Chain  
Paves the Way for a Green Future
03
A Responsible Supply Chain 
Leads to Shared Development 
Outcomes 
99
98
2022
Environmental, Social and 
Governance Report
Training of JD.com Employees
Average training hours per employee 
by gender
Average training hours per employee 
by employee category
Male 
employees
Management
39.9
35.3
47.1
41.9
Female 
employees
Employees
Average training hours per employee by type of function
Senior 
management
Middle 
management
Junior 
management
Technical 
employees
Production 
employees
Other 
employees
30.7
42.9
35.0
78.8
35.8
57.9
Percentage of employees trained by 
employee category
Percentage of employees trained by 
gender
Manage-
ment
Female 
employ-
ees
Employ-
ees
Male 
employ-
ees
94.2
77.8
5.8
22.2
Percentage of employees trained by type of function
5.4
2.6
0.3
0.1
14.5
77.1
Production staff
Middle management
Other employees
Senior management
Junior management
Technical employees
JD Group's Management System for Employee Continuing Education encourages all regulars to undertake further study and 
upgrade their qualifications by obtaining professional certificates. JD.com provides continuing education opportunities. 
Employees who pass the national examination and obtain qualify to study for a Master of Business Administration or Master of 
Engineering Management in top universities are offered interest-free loans to support their continuing education.
"Say Hello to JD.com" is a se-
ries of training courses for new 
employees, with three levels of 
courses: Gold, Red and Star. The 
courses allow trainees across 
the country to interact and learn 
different content of connect-
ed systems during online and 
in-person standardized training 
sessions. In 2022, 11,381 people 
took part in at least one of the 
170 training events.
JD.com Pooled New Forces for Their Transformation and Growth - "Say Hello to JD.com"
"Say Hello to JD.com" Training Site
请提供原图


100
101
01
A Responsible Supply Chain 
Consolidates the Foundation 
of Responsibility
02
04
A Responsible Supply Chain 
Promotes Good Consumption
Appendix
A Responsible Supply Chain  
Paves the Way for a Green Future
03
A Responsible Supply Chain 
Leads to Shared Development 
Outcomes 
101
100
2022
Environmental, Social and 
Governance Report
Occupational Health 
and Safety
JD.com follows laws and regulations 
including the Law of the People's 
Republic of China on Prevention and 
Control of Occupational Diseases and 
the Law of the People's Republic of 
China on Work Safety and attaches 
great importance to the physical 
and mental health and safety of em-
ployees. The JD Group Occupational 
Health and Safety Management Policy 
focuses on health and safety issues 
to actively establish a sound safety 
management system and occupation-
al health management system. We 
work with employees or employee 
representatives to conduct risk as-
sessments, establish action plans and 
determine occupational health and 
safety policies and objectives, creating 
a healthy, safe and comfortable work-
place.
JD.com has established an Occupa-
tional Health and Safety Committee 
chaired by the Chief Human Resourc-
es Officer. To ensure the healthy and 
safe operation of all of JD.com's 
businesses, the Occupational Health 
and Safety Committee coordinates 
and approves strategic planning on 
occupational health and safety, takes 
responsibility for implementing relat-
ed policies and constructing its risk 
control mechanism, and oversees all 
its issues. JD.com actively encourages 
subsidiaries to build safety manage-
ment systems and obtain relevant cer-
tifications to enhance JD.com's safety 
management system and ensure it is 
compliant with all safety standards. 
JD.com regularly requires all depart-
ments to identify safety factors and 
sources of potential danger and to 
prepare emergency plans and form 
teams equipped to handle emergen-
cy rescue. Excluding JD Logistics and 
JD Health, there were no work-related 
fatalities at JD.com from 2020 to 2022, 
with lost-time injury frequency rates 
(L
TIFR) of 1.08, 1.15 and 1.58 from 2020 
to 2022 respectively.
Training Items
Training Content
To ensure that JD workplace cafeterias 
and in-house restaurants meet food 
safety requirements, third-party food 
testing was conducted every month 
in 2022. We also collaborated with 
third-party testing organizations to con-
duct two training sessions on food safe-
ty for food suppliers, covering all food 
suppliers at our Beijing headquarters 
and workplaces in Chengdu, Shenzhen 
and Shanghai.
Employee Assistance Program by 
JD.com and third-party counseling 
agencies provide confidential psy-
chological counseling services to all 
employees. Available programs include 
emotional management support, cri-
sis intervention, and etc. Professional 
counseling is offered either in person 
or over the phone, and all counseling 
content is strictly confidential to ensure 
employee privacy. All employees can 
make appointments for counseling 
through the "JD ME" app.
2022 Occupational Health and Safety Training Partial Cases of JD.com
In 2022, JD Retail obtained  
the ISO 45001:2018  
Occupational Health and Safety 
Management System Certification
● Training on CPR and AED equipment 
application
● Online Special Session of First Aid 
Training
● Safety management knowledge training 
for those responsible for safety
● Training on the consciousness of 
responsibility for safety managers
● Education and training on safe 
production
● Traffic Safety Training
● Fire Safety Basics
● Safety training on forklift operations
● Training on electrical safety knowledge
● Training on preventive driving skills
● Training on delivery safety knowledge
At JD.com, each department must create 
a responsibility system to ensure safety, 
set health and safety objectives and 
assess their objectives. The objectives 
of each department are to ensure there 
are no fires, no injuries and no accidents, 
none of which occurred in 2022.
To improve the occupational safety and 
health protection of our employees, 
we continue to invest in protecting the 
health of our employees, providing 
individual safety equipment and devel-
oping their safety awareness and skills. 
We provide helmets, reflective uniforms 
and other protective equipment to all 
our delivery staff. An "Advanced Driver 
Assistance System" has been installed 
in our vehicles. We regularly provide 
safety training and assessments for 
employees, and carry out terminal op-
eration safety month activities.
Regular safety drills for all employees 
twice a year are conducted to strength-
en their safety awareness and ability to 
handle emergencies. In 2022, JD.com 
conducted a wide range of occupation-
al health and safety training, including 
courses in First Aid, safe production and 
special safe employment, to protect 
and enhance employee's health and 
safety awareness. 
First Aid Training 
for Employees
Safe Production
Special Job Safety


102
103
01
A Responsible Supply Chain 
Consolidates the Foundation 
of Responsibility
02
04
A Responsible Supply Chain 
Promotes Good Consumption
Appendix
A Responsible Supply Chain  
Paves the Way for a Green Future
03
A Responsible Supply Chain 
Leads to Shared Development 
Outcomes 
103
102
2022
Environmental, Social and 
Governance Report
In 2022, JD.com offered Red Cross First Aid certifi-
cation training for all employees at its headquar-
ters and subsidiaries. All the trainees completed 
the training and passed its assessment to obtain 
the skill certificates of the Red Cross.
JD Logistics provides monthly training to our 
couriers to enhance their safety awareness and 
ensure their health and safety and the smooth 
delivery of goods. The training includes the use of 
safety protection equipment, start-of-shift vehicle 
inspection, proper driving etiquette and emer-
gency response.
JD.com Training for Red Cross First Aid Certification
JD Logistics Conducts Training on Delivery Safety Knowledge
Positioned as "a technology and services enterprise with supply chain at its core", 
JD.com knows a supply chain is indispensable to product quality, and considers 
its suppliers as important partners and strives to share with them development 
opportunities. JD.com cooperates with them to maintain a responsible supply 
chain system and create a stable, high-quality, efficient ecosystem generating win-
win outcomes.
Sustainable 
Supply Chain
JD.com has formulated The Green Procurement Management, incorporating envi-
ronmental protection and energy resource saving into the procurement process, 
which radiates throughout our supply chain.
When admitting suppliers, we collect certification documents from our suppliers 
related to the environmental management system and require suppliers to ensure 
strict environmental management.
JD.com continues to optimize the screening criteria for selecting green products 
and expanding the scope of green products. In 2022, we added low-carbon 
products to the four screening dimensions of product qualification function 
category, consumption scenarios and product packaging, and formed the "Green 
Alliance" with many well-known brands to launch more than 3 million green 
products. JD.com's "SEVEN FRESH" program works with organic food suppliers to 
launch the sale of more than 200 certified organic vegetables.
To identify and address potential sustainability risks in the supply chain, we take into 
full consideration the environmental and social risk management of suppliers, such 
as environmental protection, employment, health and safety in the production and 
operation of suppliers, when making procurement decisions. 
Responsible 
Procurement
Environmental Protection
We launched more than
3million
Green Product Categories
Low Carbon Products
Set four types of low-carbon products labels: carbon neutrality, carbon footprint products, paipai 
reused cell phones and low-carbon products in China
Product Qualification
Review whether the goods are qualified or assessed by domestic or foreign authorities, such as EU 
organic certification and geographical indications of agricultural products.
Function Category
Refillable, reusable materials
Consumption Scenario
Cover low-carbon consumption scenarios such as green travel, green home furnishing and energy 
saving
Product Packaging
Choose recyclable packaging materials free of any harmful substances
To ensure that JD.com's workplace cafeterias and in-house restaurants meet food safety requirements, third-party food testing 
was conducted every month in 2022. Third-party testing organizations also conduct two training sessions on food safety for 
food suppliers, covering all food suppliers at our Beijing headquarters and workplaces in Chengdu, Shenzhen and Shanghai. 
Employee Assistance Program by JD.com and third-party counseling agencies provide confidential psychological counseling 
services to all its employees. Counseling is offered in person or over the phone. To ensure employee privacy, that provides 
emotional support and therapy, and crisis intervention. Employees can make appointments for counseling through "JD.com ME".
types of green products 
more than
200
certified organic vegetables


104
105
01
A Responsible Supply Chain 
Consolidates the Foundation 
of Responsibility
02
04
A Responsible Supply Chain 
Promotes Good Consumption
Appendix
A Responsible Supply Chain  
Paves the Way for a Green Future
03
A Responsible Supply Chain 
Leads to Shared Development 
Outcomes 
105
104
2022
Environmental, Social and 
Governance Report
In 2022, JD.com's minimum inventory 
turnover days for self-operated commod-
ities reached a global leading level of 30.2 
days, optimizing inventory management, 
efficiently allocating internal resources 
and driving the efficiency improvement of 
the industry-wide supply chain.
In cooperation with the household ap-
pliance industry, we continue to reduce 
channel costs and improve R&D efficiency 
of new products, promoting a positive 
cycle of accelerated innovation and af-
fordable prices in the industry. In 2022, 
we held the JD.com Household Appliance 
Partners Conference to discuss future 
development opportunities of the indus-
try with various brands and empower 
high-quality sustainable growth in the 
household appliance market.
JD.com continues to invest in research and development(R&D) and innovation 
relating to supply chain technology, to achieve optimization and upgrading of our 
supply chain. This has improved the digital intelligence of the entire chain. The 
goal is to build a responsible supply chain that contributes to the high-quality 
development of the real economy, and coordinated regional development. We 
communicate with our partners to help them grow and to promote the sustainable 
development of the supply.
JD.com requires suppliers to abide by the Labor Law of the People's Republic 
of China and other laws and regulations and prohibits the use of child labor or 
forced and compulsory labor. Suppliers violating employment regulations will be 
blacklisted.
Labor Policy
Leadership in Supply Chain
JD.com defines the occupational health and safety requirements and responsibil-
ities of suppliers. We require new suppliers to disclose their occupational health 
and safety records, including the handling of accidents, over the past three years. 
We assess suppliers' occupational health and safety standards and give priority to 
suppliers with occupational health and safety certifications.
Health and Safety
JD.com distributed environmental, social and governance (ESG) questionnaires to our 
suppliers in 2022. We assessed their performance using five criteria: environmental 
protection, personnel administration, wages and benefits, health and safety and 
business ethics. The result of the questionnaires showed that 85.4% of the suppliers 
surveyed have achieved excellent or good ESG performance.
Supplier ESG Questionnaires
Supply Chain 
Leadership and 
Empowerment
JD.com's minimum inventory turnover 
days for self-operated commodities 
reached a global leading level of
30.2days
In 2022
Using JD.com's supply chain advantages, we continue to share access to digital intelligence services in our supply chain and 
integrate internal and external ecological resources and capabilities to build with all partners an ecosystem of the entire 
industry chain where we collaborate to innovate. This helps share information and create value together.
Supply Chain as Empowerment
Helping Transform the 
Rural Economy
Digital Intelligent Supply 
Chain
JD.com's logistics infrastructure 
and warehouse network, have 
enabled us to provide next-
day delivery service to 93% of 
districts and counties, and 84% 
of villages and towns in China. 
We also provide supply chain 
services to more than 1,000 
agricultural production zones, 
giving thousands of farm fam-
ilies a much needed income 
boost and transforming local 
industries.
JD Industrials makes the 
socialized inventory of over 
200,000 SKU industrial prod-
ucts visible, controllable and 
available through the digital 
intelligent supply chain, with 
the accuracy of intelligence 
sourcing in procurement for 
industrial enterprises increas-
ing to 89%.
JD.com places great emphasis on effective communication with suppliers. Through conferences and training courses, we help 
suppliers fulfill their responsibilities and ensure our mutual sustainable development.
Supply Chain Communication
C2M Intelligent Manufacturing Platform
Hundreds of Quality Factories Project
In 2022, JD.com's private label brands launched the Hundreds of Quality 
Factories Program during the 11.11 sales day. Over the next three years, 
we will focus on building more than 500 quality demonstration factories 
in industrial zones and promote factory sales growth by more than 600%.
JD.com's C2M intelligent manufacturing platform has reached C2M 
cooperation with more than 3,000 brands. By involving deeply in product 
R&D, it can help to manufacture factories save 75% of product pre-market 
research and accelerate the cycle of new products going on the market by 
67% compared to the past.
Mantianxing Project
JD.com's operations help SMEs expand their procurement market. A 
comprehensive service platform is specifically built in the Mantianxing 
Project for the integration and development of the enterprises, serving 
more than 1.6 million SMEs and benefiting over 32,000 specialized and 
innovative enterprises.
"Three Reductions and Three 
Optimizations" Merchant 
Support
In 2022, JD.com officially re-
leased 30 merchant support in-
itiatives of three reductions and 
three optimizations to minimize 
SMEs' pressure.
All-in-one solution
Using integrated supply chain 
solutions, JD Logistics has helped 
300,000 business customers re-
duce costs and increase efficien-
cy, which has improved supply 
chain efficiency and promoted 
high-quality development.


106
107
01
A Responsible Supply Chain 
Consolidates the Foundation 
of Responsibility
02
04
A Responsible Supply Chain 
Promotes Good Consumption
Appendix
A Responsible Supply Chain  
Paves the Way for a Green Future
03
A Responsible Supply Chain 
Leads to Shared Development 
Outcomes 
107
106
2022
Environmental, Social and 
Governance Report
Supplier 
Management
JD.com is committed to fulfilling our social responsibility and has developed rules 
and regulations for suppliers that are detailed in these documents: JD Group 
Supplier Code of Conduct, Bidding and Procurement Business Management 
Rules, Tripartite Performance Appraisal Procedure, Supplier Quality Exceptional 
Handling Procedure, Supplier Agreement Honoring Feedback and Handling 
Process. JD.com ranks its suppliers by grade and has established a management 
mechanism covering supplier admittance, assessment and exit. At the end of 2022, 
JD.com had 4,563 suppliers.
49
Number of Suppliers by Region in 2022
Number of Suppliers by Category in 2022
Mainland China
4,511
Tier-1 suppliers
4,251
Non Tier-1  suppliers
312
Significant suppliers in Tier-1
477
Significant suppliers in Non Tier-1
25
Overseas
40
Hong Kong, Macao and Taiwan
12
49The statistical scope for "total number of suppliers" refers to suppliers that are both registered under the "JD.com" organization of the Panshi 
Procurement Platform and have won the tender in 2022. The statistics of the supplier's location are conducted in terms of the registered 
address of the supplier in the business system.
To ensure smooth procurement and timely delivery of products and materials during an emergency, JD.com formulated the 
JD Group Operation Event Assurance Mechanism of Bidding, Procurement and Expense Management Department. We have 
set up an emergency stocking piling mechanism to reduce the severity of emergencies.
Process
Specific Content
Supplier Full Life Cycle Management System
● We have developed the Tripartite Performance Appraisal Procedure to evaluate the product 
quality and service capabilities of suppliers from multiple perspectives for Tier-1  suppliers 
and significant suppliers in non Tier-1.
● In 2022, we assessed and evaluated suppliers in key categories or with large purchases every 
six months grading them as excellent, good and unqualified.
● According to the assessment results, we suspend cooperation with unqualified suppliers and 
communicate with them to determine rectification measures.
● In 2022, we blacklisted 62 suppliers, blocked 206 suppliers and failed 14 suppliers due to 
non-compliant performance appraisals and breaches of confidentiality agreements.
● Suppliers can be shortlisted after completing registration on the JD.com procurement and 
bidding information platform and passing the screening mechanism of communication, 
inspection, sample testing and site survey.
● We screen our suppliers, according to customized screening requirements for different 
categories of suppliers and related qualifications such as ISO 14001, ISO 45001, and ISO 
9001. Suppliers can officially become our partners after they meet the requirements.
Supplier 
Admittance
Supplier 
Assessment
Supplier 
Exit
we regularly verify and update 
supplier information to devel-
op more supplier resources 
and drive each department to 
sort out demands and predict 
risks.
we initiate the emergency pro-
curement process and emer-
gency communication mech-
anism and develop a response 
plan.
we carry out a comprehensive 
analysis of our response and 
update our emergency meas-
ures procedures.
Before the event
At the event
After the event


108
109
02
03
A Responsible Supply Chain 
Leads to Shared Development 
Outcomes 
04
A Responsible Supply Chain 
Promotes Good Consumption
Appendix
A Responsible Supply Chain  
Paves the Way for a Green Future
01
A Responsible Supply Chain 
Consolidates the Foundation 
of Responsibility
2022
Environmental, Social and 
Governance Report
JD.com is committed to providing users with more 
comprehensive and high-quality products and services, 
continuously sharing its own supply chain infrastructure 
and digital technologies. We actively participate 
in community charity activities to give back to the 
community. JD.com provides users with a wide range of 
superior products and services, and helps people practice 
good consumption and live a good life.
04
A Responsible 
Supply Chain 
Promotes Good 
Consumption


110
111
01
A Responsible Supply Chain 
Consolidates the Foundation 
of Responsibility
02
03
A Responsible Supply Chain 
Leads to Shared Development 
Outcomes 
Appendix
A Responsible Supply Chain  
Paves the Way for a Green Future
04
A Responsible Supply Chain 
Promotes Good Consumption
111
110
2022
Environmental, Social and 
Governance Report
Serving 
Consumers
JD.com is focused on constructing a product quality system and improving 
product quality controls to become a company trusted by Chinese consumers. We 
serve the customer first by constantly optimizing customer service and providing 
a comfortable consumption experience.
Since its founding, JD.com has offered genuine licensed products by strictly 
controlling product quality, developing internal product quality management 
systems, and reviewing the quality and safety of products on sale throughout the 
process. We also insist on responsible marketing to ensure products are genuine 
and safe.
Product Quality 
Assurance
Quality Management System
In strict accordance with the Product 
Quality Law of the People's Republic of 
China, JD.com has formulated internal 
policies such as the General Principles 
of JD Group Marketplace Product Qual-
ity Inspection Sampling, JD Group Mar-
ketplace Product Shelf-Life Rules, JD 
Retail Counterfeit Accountability Rules 
and Food Safety Handbook to contin-
uously promote quality management 
and ensure the safety and quality of 
products.
We continue to promote quality man-
agement in various business scenarios 
by setting up internal quality control 
and experience groups or commodity 
compliance groups as quality supervi-
sion and executing agencies to strictly 
control the quality of products on 
the platform. To ensure standardized 
quality management, the following 
subsidiaries of JD.com have been ver-
ified by the International Organization 
for Standardization(ISO) 9001: Beijing 
Jingdong Century Information & Tech-
nologies., Shanghai Yuanmai Trading, 
Guangzhou Jingdong Trading, Chengdu 
Jingdong Century Trading, Xi'an Huax-
unde Trading, Shenyang Jingdong Cen-
tury Trading and Wuhan Jingdong Shiji 
Commerce and Trade. Nine of JD.com's 
SEVEN FRESH grocery stores have been 
verified by the Food Safety System Cer-
tification (FSSC), and Huaguan Science 
& Technology has been verified by both 
the quality management system and 
FSSC 22000 food safety system.
To continue to consolidate product 
quality and safety in all business seg-
ments, we have established a safety 
prevention and control system covering 
all areas of goods sold and marketing 
practices, which integrates quality con-
trol, platform governance, online rights 
protection and brand protection to 
achieve full coverage of the four areas 
of intellectual property protection, food 
safety, drug safety and prohibited and 
restricted goods. We have developed 
a quality management system cover-
ing the whole process of qualification 
standards for settled platforms, product 
inspection sampling, accountability for 
counterfeit goods and violation man-
agement to build up the e-commerce 
compliance system, control merchant 
qualifications and product quality and 
assure the superior experience of mer-
chants and consumers.
Qualification 
Management
Product Inspection 
and Sampling
Violation 
Management
Accountability for 
Counterfeit Goods
● 
JD Group Marketplace 
Investment Qualifica-
tion Standards
● 
Qualification Man-
agement Rules for JD 
Group Retail Business 
Suppliers
● 
General Principles of 
JD Group Marketplace 
Product Quality In-
spection Sampling
● 
General Principles of 
JD Group Retail Busi-
ness Supplier Product 
Quality Inspection 
Sampling
● 
JD Group Marketplace 
Merchant Violation 
Credit Management 
Rules 
● 
JD Group Supplier 
Violation Management 
Rules
● 
JD Retail Counterfeit 
Accountability Rules
Product Responsibility
JD.com constantly promotes quality management and control and continues to 
optimize its product quality system. Our quality management, which includes quality 
inspection and product recalls, aims to provide consumers with safe, secure and 
worry-free quality products.
JD.com continues to improve how it deals with unqualified products and product recalls. JD.com and its subsidiaries have 
formulated policies such as Product Recall Control Procedure and JD Industrials Recall and Withdrawal Management Procedure. 
We have developed an emergency plan mechanism for product recalls. We investigate the cause of each recall and put in place 
corrective measures to prevent a repeat recall. In 2022, there were no recalls of products sold by JD.com's private label brands.
In February 2023, JD.com held its first Product and 
Safety Compliance Forum in Beijing. Representatives 
from regulators, law enforcement agencies, brand 
rights holders and industry associations discussed 
how to promote product safety. The participants 
agreed that security management will promote the 
development of righteous and innovative enter-
prises. JD.com also believes taking a no-tolerance 
approach to counterfeit goods and conducting win-
win cooperations consistently are key to high-quality 
development of the industry and society.
JD.com held the first JD.com Product and Safety Compliance Forum
2022 Product Quality Inspection and Sampling Initiative
JD Retail
Huaguan 
Supermarket
● Product sampling inspections
SEVEN FRESH 
Supermarket
● Special Quality Inspection
● 
Control of residual pesticides and antibiotics
● 
Fresh aquatic food management
JD Industry
● Cooperate with several domestic and foreign testing organizations to inspect 
and report on products of 13 types on sale.


112
113
01
A Responsible Supply Chain 
Consolidates the Foundation 
of Responsibility
02
03
A Responsible Supply Chain 
Leads to Shared Development 
Outcomes 
Appendix
A Responsible Supply Chain  
Paves the Way for a Green Future
04
A Responsible Supply Chain 
Promotes Good Consumption
113
112
2022
Environmental, Social and 
Governance Report
After finding a lack of product standards for puncture proof protective 
clothing, JD Industrials contacted the China National Garment Association 
to put forward new standards for such garments. In 2022, JD.com released 
JD.com's standards-Quality-Based Selection Standards for Puncture Proof 
Protective Equipment. The standards also provide references for setting other 
standards.
Since then, JD Industrials has assisted in providing the China National 
Garment Association with standards and their relevant bases. On December 
28, 2022, T/CNGA 45-2022 Flexible Testing Methods and Assessment of 
Puncture-Proof Materials was officially released.
JD Industry Helped China National Garment Association Set 
Standards
Content Specification and 
Management of Marketing 
Management of Marketing
JD.com is committed to advertising and marketing practices that comply with 
laws and regulations, social norms and ethical standards. We strictly abide by the 
Advertisement Law of the People's Republic of China. 
● Provide true and accurate information about products and services to 
avoid deceiving and misleading consumers;
● Forbid exaggerating the social and environmental impact of products 
and services and their marketing;
● Focus on protecting groups that have difficulties in accessing business 
information, such as the elderly, children, and people with disabilities;
● Forbid denigrating and discrediting competitors.
JD.com has published the JD Group Brand Management Regulations, JD Group 
Marketplace Product Labeling Sampling Rules and JD Group Retail Business 
Supplier Product Labeling Sampling Rules. We insist on responsible marketing and 
continuously make product information more standard to guarantee information 
accuracy and avoid consumers being misled.
JD.com Ethical Marketing Commitment
Advertising Governance
We have formulated the JD Group Advertising Audit Rules to continuously improve 
the rules of advertising content security and ensure that advertisements are free from 
concealment, exaggeration and deception through algorithm and manual auditing, 
an inspection mechanism, advertiser audits, advertiser training and regular research 
and surveys to ensure compliance, truthfulness and accuracy of advertising content.
● Algorithm and manual auditing:
We guarantee compliance of advertising content through human-computer audits. Setting prohibited categories 
and aiding the interception of sensitive words, JD.com can effectively screen non-compliant advertisements and 
intelligently classify and control all types of advertisements. In 2022, JD.com intercepted over 10 million illegal 
advertisements.
● The inspection mechanism:
We conduct high-frequency investigations of advertisements to eliminate illegal advertisements in a timely manner.
● Advertiser training:
We rolled out online learning channels on Jing Dian Academy and Jing Mai Platform, and conducted training through 
various forms such as live streams, videos, cartoons, and articles to help advertisers improve their awareness of 
compliance marketing. In 2022, we organized 62 training sessions on advertising compliance for advertisers, covering 
nearly 10,000 advertisers.
● Regular research and surveys:
We keep track of advertisers' demands and feedback on advertising audit services through regular research and 
surveys, adjusting our auditing services and improving the quality.
In addition to protecting the environment where our products are sold, we promote 
and set standards in the clothing industry.


114
115
01
A Responsible Supply Chain 
Consolidates the Foundation 
of Responsibility
02
03
A Responsible Supply Chain 
Leads to Shared Development 
Outcomes 
Appendix
A Responsible Supply Chain  
Paves the Way for a Green Future
04
A Responsible Supply Chain 
Promotes Good Consumption
115
114
2022
Environmental, Social and 
Governance Report
High-Quality 
Customer Service
JD.com has driven high-quality development with high-quality services and 
adhered to the original intention of "customer first" by continuously upgrading 
service management mode and customer service management projects to provide 
consumers with a superior service experience.
JD.com's customer service team responds to customer needs in a timely manner through 
online communication, service calls and emails. JD.com ensures a timely response and 
efficient handling through "front-end control" and a "green channel." In the control, 
we identify potential risks and work out targeted solutions to prevent problems. In the 
channel, JD.com offers ongoing training for customer service personnel to improve 
problem-solving efficiency and enhance customer services. 
In 2022, we continued to upgrade our complaint process to ensure the fastest 
resolution of consumers' issues and requests for purchased products and to maintain 
smooth customer communication channels. We set a target score of 64.1 Net 
Promoter Score (NPS)
50 for the year and conducted NPS surveys inquiring consumers 
about JD.com brand credibility, delivery service and after-sales services. The 2022 
China Customer Satisfaction Index conducted by Chnbrand, a third-party research 
institute, showed JD.com topped e-commerce platforms for customer satisfaction.
While optimizing our own service capabilities, we are committed to promoting 
services to the whole supply chain, by providing references to industrial peers to 
create quality services for consumers.
2019
57.0
Customer NPS
60.7
62.3
65.5
2020
2021
2022
Optimizing Service Management
JD.com has built a customer 
service team of over 
20,000 
employees
2019-2022 JD.com Customer NPS Survey Results
50 NPS, or Net Promoter Score, is a metric used to measure a customer's willingness to recommend a brand/product/service to others (NPS = 
percent of promoters - percent of detractors).
All Categories for All Multitude
Price Protection
JD Retail's self-operated product 
SKU exceeds
10million
During the 11.11 sales event in 
2022, over 500 million products 
on JD.com's platform were price-
protected for 30 days, benefiting 
more than
380
million consumers
JD.com home appliance stores 
have covered
600,000
The Superior Service 
Experience
JD.com serves 3.67 million pharmacies, specialty stores, supermarkets, convenience 
stores, flower shops, auto repair centers and many other offline businesses, providing 
consumers with a huge range of products.
JD Retail provides online shoppers with over 10 million self-operated products 
covering tens of thousands of brick and mortar retail stores. JD.com Home Delivery 
can deliver products from beer to Skittles to urban consumers within an hour and 
sometimes in minutes. The number of JD.com home appliance stores nationwide has 
exceeded 15,000, covering 600,000 administrative villages.
JD.com has taken the lead in the industry to launch a price-protection service and 
set price protection standards according to product categories. Most of JD.com's 
self-operated online products, excluding gold and virtual products, are under price 
protection with the overall coverage exceeding 98%.
In 2022, we invested more to make consumers' favorite products more affordable. 
The function of One-Click Price Protection enables users to click to complete price 
protection applications for all orders on their accounts and automatically refund 
the difference in price for eligible orders.
administrative villages


116
117
01
A Responsible Supply Chain 
Consolidates the Foundation 
of Responsibility
02
03
A Responsible Supply Chain 
Leads to Shared Development 
Outcomes 
Appendix
A Responsible Supply Chain  
Paves the Way for a Green Future
04
A Responsible Supply Chain 
Promotes Good Consumption
117
116
2022
Environmental, Social and 
Governance Report
Fast Delivery
We have built a multi-level logistics infrastructure and warehouse network with 35 
"Asia No.1" smart mega logistics parks and more than 1,500 warehouses operating 
nationwide.
JD.com's Hourly Purchase and Home Delivery provides one-hour delivery of products 
purchased online from more than 200,000 physical retail stores nationwide. These 
physical retail stores provide convenient and efficient online shopping, using the 
services of JD.com and Dada Nexus Limited.
JD Retail has collaborated with over 150,000 offline physical stores of all categories 
nationwide including Walmart, China Resources Vanguard, Apple authorized dealer 
stores, Sephora, and Kidswant to bring consumers in over 1,700 counties and cities 
product delivery within an hour and sometimes in minutes.
We provide one-hour delivery of products purchased online from more than
physical retail stores nationwide
200,000
We bring consumers product delivery within one hour and sometimes in minutes in over
counties and cities
1,700
Senior-Friendly Services
"Life Passage" Project
Cross-Border Services
To help senior citizens we continue to optimize the "Senior Mode" function of JD.com's APP. It streamlines information 
and the operation process and includes a customer service team exclusively for seniors. Services for seniors include seven 
standards including providing them with 24/7 services to help them with any difficulty they might have understanding our 
APP's functions. In March 2023, the China Academy of Information and Communications Technology released its first report 
on senior-friendly and barrier-free Internet applications, citing JD.com's APP and services for their helpfulness.
JD.com takes the mental health of its users seriously. In 2020, JD.com launched "Life Passage" which provides real-time 
warning of mental crises and calls the police in emergencies. At the end of 2022, "Life Passage" has helped 574 users who had 
contemplated suicide.
JD.com provides one-stop, cross-border 
supply chain services for global mer-
chants, helping Chinese manufacturing 
go global and foreign products access 
China's vast market.
GLOBAL JD.com uses JD.com's website 
as its commercial infrastructure for 
transactions, payments, logistics, mar-
keting and other technologies to expand 
JD.com's services to overseas markets 
and export high-quality products to Chi-
nese people around the world.
GLOBAL JD.com provides consumers 
with high-quality products and is a 
bridge linking Chinese brands and the 
world, provides integrated solutions for 
exporting brands, and helps Chinese 
brands and products go global. Many 
brands extend their reach to Hong Kong, 
Macao, Taiwan and many overseas 
countries and regions through GLOBAL 
JD.com.
● With more than 100,000 varieties of senior-friendly products, JD Home has designed plans and packages for 
renovating senior-friendly spaces within 72 hours;
● JD Health continues to provide fast, efficient and comprehensive medical and health services for seniors by 
optimizing services such as JD.com Family Doctor, which provides remote consultations and home care.


118
119
01
A Responsible Supply Chain 
Consolidates the Foundation 
of Responsibility
02
03
A Responsible Supply Chain 
Leads to Shared Development 
Outcomes 
Appendix
A Responsible Supply Chain  
Paves the Way for a Green Future
04
A Responsible Supply Chain 
Promotes Good Consumption
119
118
2022
Environmental, Social and 
Governance Report
Giving 
Back to the 
Community
JD.com promotes the deep integration of its business strengths with philanthropy 
and fulfills its responsibilities in rural revitalization, disaster relief and epidemic 
prevention, with its philanthropic philosophy of giving back to the community.
JD.com provides strong support for the healthy development of philanthropy by 
carrying out public welfare activities in health care and assistance to disadvantaged 
groups, based on JD's online charity fundraising platform and JD Foundation.
By the end of the reporting period, JD Foundation had donated RMB 93.48 million 
and JD.com employees had volunteered more than 21,800 hours.
JD.com has collaborated with charities and caring enterprises to provide medical and 
health services and public welfare assistance to groups in need, and more resources 
for medical services and aid. This has promoted social welfare in health and benefited 
more user groups.
Philanthropy and 
Charity
JD Foundation had donated
JD.com employees had volunteered 
more than
RMB93.48million 21,800hours
By the end of the reporting period
JD Health's Rare Diseases Care Project was officially launched on 
February 27, 2021, to provide a one-stop solution platform integrating 
"medical consultations, medications, health insurance, and public 
welfare" for rare diseases patients to help alleviate difficulties in 
diagnosis, access to medicine and payment for rare diseases. In 2022, 
JD Health's Rare Diseases Care Project received more than 100 million 
views on Weibo, WeChat, media websites and other channels. As of 
the end of the reporting period, the program had raised over RMB 4.53 
million, assisted 296 patients with rare diseases, and organized 34 
public welfare activities for rare diseases.
In 2022, JD Health's Rare Diseases Care Project won "2022 Case Award" 
in the 17th Social Responsibility Award of People's Enterprises and 
the 2022 Public Welfare Program of Heath at the 2022 IFENG HEALTH 
SUMMIT.
In December 2022, the China Birth Defects Intervention Assistance Foundation, 
together with Nestle (China) Co., Ltd. and renowned experts in the field of 
neonatal care, launched a special fund program for premature babies called 
"Morning Angel". JD Health's "Morning Angel" provides users with online 
consultation services with experts in obstetrics and gynecology from A-level 
hospitals. It also provided an online advice column called "Premature Baby 
Parenting" for new parents. JD Health has also worked with partners to help 
meet the nutritional and health needs of more families caring for premature 
babies.
JD Health's Rare Diseases Care Program
"Morning Angel" Foundation Focuses on The Healthy Growth of Premature Babies
Social 
Responsibility 
Award of People's 
Enterprises ——
2022 Case Award
Certificate of Honor for Caring Enterprises from Morning Angel Foundation
2022 Public Welfare 
Program of Heath 
at the 2022 IFENG 
HEALTH SUMMIT


120
121
01
A Responsible Supply Chain 
Consolidates the Foundation 
of Responsibility
02
03
A Responsible Supply Chain 
Leads to Shared Development 
Outcomes 
Appendix
A Responsible Supply Chain  
Paves the Way for a Green Future
04
A Responsible Supply Chain 
Promotes Good Consumption
121
120
2022
Environmental, Social and 
Governance Report
In September 2022, Kuayue Express 
of JD Logistics worked with the 
family search platform to launch 
the "Search for Missing Children". 
Kuayue Express of JD Logistics 
printed information and photo-
graphs of missing children on its 
express packages that were sent 
across the country. With its strong 
logistics capability and dissemi-
nation effect, information about 
missing children is disseminated 
all over the country.
In 2022, JD.com conducted many internal "flea market" activities to buy and 
sell second-hand goods with the help of unused materials in the workplace. 
JD.com's employees participated and donated a total of RMB 88,208 to public 
welfare programs.
"Search for Missing Children" Program
"Flea Market" as An Employee's Public Welfare Activity
Kuayue Express's "Search for Missing Children" Package
JD.com encourages employees to participate in public welfare activities and help fulfill its social responsibility.
Certificate of "Flea Market" as a Public Welfare Activity
When the pandemic broke out again in Shanghai in April 2022, JD.com urgently 
mobilized its nationwide infrastructure to provide smooth distribution channels 
to ensure adequate supplies to support Shanghai's fight against the pandemic.
During the pandemic, 80,000 baby-care items, exceeding 150,000 toones, 
including infant milk powder, were delivered to Shanghai by JD Logistics' 
special vehicles and designated personnel. We deployed more than 5,000 
JD.com couriers to provide delivery services and ensure operational needs. 
JD.com contributed RMB 2 billion to fight the pandemic and for merchant relief.
JD Health urgently launched the Drug Demand Registration Platform and 
received 24,000 requests for drugs from chronic disease patients in Shanghai 
a week after its launch. JD Health collaborated with JD Logistics to spare more 
efforts to meet the need for people's medications in strict compliance with local 
pandemic prevention policies.
JD.com Mobilized All its Resources to Guard Shanghai Against the Pandemic
Anti-Pandemic and 
Disaster Relief
JD.com has vigorously supported pandemic prevention and relief in China, striving 
to ensure supplies for consumers, solving supply chain problems for enterprises and 
merchants and accelerating the resumption of work, production and business.
Accumulative delivery of over
 
150,000
tons of supplies
JD.com contributed
RMB2billion
JD.com Assisted in Transporting Pandemic Prevention Materials
to fight the pandemic  
and for merchant relief


122
123
01
A Responsible Supply Chain 
Consolidates the Foundation 
of Responsibility
02
03
A Responsible Supply Chain 
Leads to Shared Development 
Outcomes 
Appendix
A Responsible Supply Chain  
Paves the Way for a Green Future
04
A Responsible Supply Chain 
Promotes Good Consumption
123
122
2022
Environmental, Social and 
Governance Report
In 2022, in response to the increasing 
pharmaceutical orders and limit-
ed distribution capacity in Beijing, 
Chongqing and other areas, JD.com 
gave full play to its supply chain ca-
pabilities as its business lines jointly 
developed an emergency plan for 
adequate medical supplies.
In November 2022, JD Logistics 
in Chongqing started a new logis-
tics model to ensure around-the-
clock operations. JD Super set up 
a special team to ensure supplies 
in Chongqing, deployed more than 
daily use products of 200 varieties 
and launched "JD Super's Stable 
Price and Products" within 24 
hours. JD.com's Hourly Purchase 
and Home Delivery coordinated 
with merchants providing key sup-
ply assurances to update inventory 
and production information on a 
daily basis, and ensure adequate 
"vegetable packages". JD Health 
increased the number of full-time 
doctors on duty and gave access to 
the "Online Doctor Consultation for 
Family" to provide real-time medi-
cal consultation services.
In December, JD Logistics quickly 
mobilized over 1,000 couriers from 
all over China to arrive in Beijing 
to assist deliveries in Beijing. JD 
Super and JD.com's Home Delivery 
worked with merchants and stores 
to prepare essential daily-use items 
such as food, baby care products 
and disinfection-related products 
and expanded the inventory of 
supplies in high demand. To ensure 
stable supplies, JD Health urgently 
delivered all kinds of medicines and 
medical supplies, such as medical 
masks.
We gave full play to our stable and 
reliable supply chain and business 
lines to ensure that the business 
peak in the areas in need of dai-
ly-use items passes.
JD.com's Subsidiaries Pooled Resources to Ensure Adequate Supplies
Group Photo of JD Logistics' Xi'an Team Aiding Beijing
JD Logistics' "Jiuxianqiao Model" ensured deliveries in the area's epidemic control regions, which was successfully 
replicated in many places of the country. 
Autonomous delivery vehicles helped prevent the pandemic from spreading and safeguard supplies
Autonomous sorting machinery significantly improved the capacity of supplying fresh produce
In Beijing, last mile delivery was key to ensuring 
people's daily needs were met. JD Logistics 
created an innovative service model for last-
mile delivery. JD Logistics developed the 
"Jiuxianqiao Model" with neighborhoods and 
communities to safeguard delivery over the 
"last 100 meters" by means of short-distance 
shuttling services plus volunteer services. 
The model was then successfully replicated 
in communities in Beijing, Jinan of Shandong 
Province, Xining of Qinghai Province and other 
places.
JD Logistics provided intelligent technical 
support for safeguarding the delivery of an-
ti-epidemic supplies and epidemic preven-
tion and control. JD Logistics was committed 
to achieving safe epidemic prevention by 
building contactless stations, placing contact-
less delivery vehicles and double-sided intel-
ligent parcel lockers, to minimize the pressure 
on personnel and physical contact between 
delivery personnel and parcel recipients.
The significantly increasing online business in traditional fresh food supermarkets made it harder to ensure daily-use 
supplies. SEVEN FRESH Supermarket found it difficult to honor its promise on timely delivery because mistakes were 
easily made in sorting a huge range of products. JD Logistics deployed its latest self-developed and self-produced 
autonomous sorting machinery for SEVEN FRESH Supermarket to change its original sorting mode by replacing the 
traditional manual sorting operation with autonomous sorting machinery, which greatly improved the sorting and op-
erational efficiency.
JD Logistics Continues to Explore Innovative Models to Help Safeguard the Delivery of Essential Items
Beijing Jianwai Neighborhood Presented a Silk Banner to the JD Logistics 
Team Participating in the Volunteer Services of Guanghui Li Epidemic 
Control Areas
JD Logistics's Autonomous Delivery Vehicle Conducted Unmanned 
Delivery in the Community
The R&D Manager of JD Logistics Sorting Wall was featured in CCTV's 
"Half-Hour Economy" Program
SEVEN FRESH Supermarket has effectively 
enhanced its capacities of handling peak vol-
ume and overall production capacity through 
this machinery, with sorting efficiency in-
creasing by 200%, operating costs reduced by 
40% and the accuracy rate achieving 99.99%. 
The machinery played an important role in 
securing the supply of daily necessities.
China Central Television (CCTV) Finance Chan-
nel featured the project team of JD  Logistics' 
sorting machinery, which won acknowledg-
ment and appreciation.


124
125
01
A Responsible Supply Chain 
Consolidates the Foundation 
of Responsibility
02
03
A Responsible Supply Chain 
Leads to Shared Development 
Outcomes 
Appendix
A Responsible Supply Chain  
Paves the Way for a Green Future
04
A Responsible Supply Chain 
Promotes Good Consumption
125
124
2022
Environmental, Social and 
Governance Report
To mitigate the problem of insufficient medical supplies and avoid drug price increases and drug accidents, JD Health, 
and the China Non-prescription Drug Association, enterprises in the drug supply chain made every effort to ensure the 
market supply and price stability of anti-epidemic drugs and other drugs and medications. A week after the release 
of the 10 new measures for epidemic prevention and control, JD Pharmacy provided the public with more than 100 
million packages of affordable anti-epidemic medicine, cold medicine, pain relief medicine and digestive medicine.
JD Health Worked with Dozens of Pharmaceutical Companies to Ensure Continuous Supply and 
Stable Price
Since the launch of JD.com's rural revitalization "Benfu Plan" in October 2020, we have worked with farmers to launch 
a series of high-quality landmark agricultural products such as Suqian King Crabs, Xiuwen Kiwifruit, Wuzhou Liubao 
tea, Qianyang oranges and Kuancheng chestnuts. A positive circular industry chain was formed, in which higher 
quality and consumer satisfaction give a boost to farmers' income that in return is invested to make more high-quality 
produce. This helps farmers reduce costs and enhance their competitiveness.
JD.com Works with High-Quality Landmark Agricultural Products to Embark on the Journey to Wealth
To respond to the Chinese Farmers' Harvest Festival, JD.com held its first Shopping Festival of Agricultural Specialties 
in September 2022. At the Festival, coupons totaling RMB 1 billion were issued and 300,000 high-quality agricultural 
products were launched. JD.com brought into full play the advantages of digital technology, logistics and its supply 
chain to improve the quality and efficiency of modern agriculture and increase farmers' income.
JD.com Held its First Shopping Festival of Agricultural Specialties
Rural Revitalization 
and  
Common Prosperity
JD.com, as a new type of real economy-based enterprise and with an efficient 
digital and intelligent supply chain infrastructure, aims to promote the 
digitalization, branding, and industrialization of agriculture by empowering the 
entire agricultural industry,  so as to drive farmers to increase their income and 
become rich, and to facilitate rural revitalization as well.
During the reporting period, JD Logistics' "Asia No.1" Xi'an Intelligent Industrial Park Phase 2 was officially put into 
operation, together with Xi'an Asia No.1 Phase 1 and Wugong Warehouse, Ningxia's Yinchuan Smart Warehouse, 
Xinjiang's Urumqi Asia No.1 and Payzawat Warehouse, and Gansu's Lanzhou Asia No.1 under construction. The seven 
smart warehouses are distributed like the pattern of the Big Dipper. The warehouses have further improved the layout 
of intelligent logistics infrastructure in the northwest region.
The gradual operation of "The Beidou Seven Warehouses" of JD Logistics highlights the advantages of the industrial 
zone of origin in the northwest economic construction circle, which serves Shaanxi Province and northwest regions. 
Agricultural products, from Xinjiang Aksu, Korla, Gansu Tianshui, Pingliang, Qingyang and other places, are supplied to 
the warehouses for processing and sales. This has helped the promotion of agricultural products and the high-quality 
economic development of the northwest.
In August 2022, JD.com's Intelligent Supply Chain 
Center of Xinjiang Autonomous Region officially 
opened its warehouse in Payzawat County. It is the 
largest intelligent supply chain center in Xinjiang and 
provides services for fruit procurement, refrigeration, 
processing, sorting, packaging, and logistics. 12 au-
tonomous intelligent sorting equipment lines were 
introduced to classify and grade different channels, 
which filled the gap of prune grading standards. 
During the reporting period, Xinjiang Payzawat prune 
cultivated area has covered 450,000 mu with its pro-
duction accounting for 60% of the country, which is the 
local regional characteristics. The supply chain center 
enables Payzawat prunes to be delivered to the whole 
country as soon as 48 hours, providing integrated sup-
ply chain support for prunes and other high-quality 
fruits to come into the market outside Xinjiang.
"The Beidou Seven Warehouses" Helps Northwest China's High-Quality Development
JD Logistics Intelligent Supply Chain Center 
of Xinjiang Origin Officially Opened its 
Warehouse
Relying on its supply chain, JD.com launched its new intelligent infrastructure "Logistics Netting Plan". The plan is to build a 
highly synergistic multi-level logistics infrastructure and warehouse network with 35 "Asia No.1" smart mega logistics parks 
and over 1,500 warehouses operating nationwide as the core.


126
127
01
A Responsible Supply Chain 
Consolidates the Foundation 
of Responsibility
02
03
A Responsible Supply Chain 
Leads to Shared Development 
Outcomes 
Appendix
A Responsible Supply Chain  
Paves the Way for a Green Future
04
A Responsible Supply Chain 
Promotes Good Consumption
127
126
2022
Environmental, Social and 
Governance Report
As express delivery and logistics bring agricultural products to the market, 
making farmers rich, rural revitalization focuses on infrastructure construction 
such as cold-chain logistics and digital countryside governance demanded by 
agricultural products.
With its harsh climate, high altitude, mountainous terrains and vast distances, 
Tibet had little or no free shipping for many e-commerce platforms. 
JD.com has made every effort to promote the construction of distribution 
infrastructure in Tibet. In 2022, JD.com built public logistics warehousing 
and distribution centers in Lhasa the capital of the autonomous region, 
the prefectures of Shannan and Chengdu that included eight logistics and 
distribution sites, and 43 county and district level delivery outlets in Tibet. 
Same-day delivery service has been achieved in Lhasa while next-day delivery 
service achieved in Linzhi, Shigatse, Shannan and other areas. Delivery to the 
more remote Ngari Prefecture has been reduced from 8 to 10 days to 3 to 4 
days.
Based on industrial revitalization, JD.com has established new agricultural 
talent training and education bases in several industrial zones to train a group 
of local management talents. In 2022, JD.com held thousands of training 
sessions to help the poor and farmers. We also conducted training sessions 
on e-commerce and agricultural technology for grassroots cadres, enterprise 
personnel and youth groups in poverty-stricken counties, engaging more 
than 180,000 trainees. JD.com established 103 youth e-commerce incubation 
centers that have attracted the majority of rural youngsters and college 
graduates to return to their hometowns to start their businesses.
Logistics Infrastructure is Improved to Achieve Same-Day 
Delivery to Areas Without Free Shipping
Talents are Attracted to Help Regional Development
More than
engaged on poverty alleviation training sessions
180,000trainees
JD Health, the National Rural Revitalization Administration and People's Daily 
jointly launched the "Rural Epidemic Prevention" Program, which focuses on 
the needs of 160 key counties for national rural revitalization. Taking multiple 
measures to ensure the health needs of rural residents, the program provided 
one-to-one assistance to 20,000 villages nationwide with 10 million tablets 
of fever-reducing medicine, and free online consultations and medication 
counseling services for millions of villagers and people returning to their 
hometowns.
"Rural Epidemic Prevention" Public Welfare Program
In 2022, JD.com and Akqi County of Xinjiang Uygur Autonomous Region built 6,000 mu of sea buckthorn orchards to 
cooperate deeply in industrial upgrading, brand building, talent training, R&D innovation and technology empowerment, 
and to explore the development of local digital agriculture together. Thus a new pattern of industrial development of "sci-
tech and brand drive agricultural development" was developed to improve the quality and efficiency of the sea buckthorn 
industry, push the majority of farmers and herdsmen to start businesses and increase income, and continuously promote 
the high-quality development of the local economy. 
In 2022, over 100 projects of JD Farm landed and digital bases covered nearly 26,667 hectares, driving the development of 
agricultural industries in more than 10 provinces and cities, covering 13 types of agricultural products such as rice, millet, 
canola oil, apples, oranges and Matrimony vine.
JD Farm Landed in Xinjiang Akqi to Help Develop "Small Seabuckthorn" into a "Big Industry"
Provided one-on-one assistance to 20,000 villages nationwide with
antipyretic tablets
10million 
Home Page of  
"Rural Epidemic Prevention" Program


128
129
03
A Responsible Supply Chain 
Leads to Shared Development 
Outcomes 
04
A Responsible Supply Chain 
Promotes Good Consumption
A Responsible Supply Chain  
Paves the Way for a Green Future
01
A Responsible Supply Chain 
Consolidates the Foundation 
of Responsibility
02
Appendix
129
128
2022
Environmental, Social and 
Governance Report
Appendix
ESG Key Performance Tables
The 2022 performance data changes with the changed scope of JD.com's 2022 environmental, social statistics. Consolidated 
statements of Deppon Logistics Co., Ltd and Dada Nexus Limited are added to the previous scope which is also expanded.
Environmental
Indicators
Unit
2022
Wastewater discharge
tonnes
4,625,741.99
Exhaust gas emissions
Total emissions
Kilogram
10,191,069.64
Sulfur oxides
Kilogram
14,586.38
Nitrogen oxides
Kilogram
9,776,193.41
Particulate matter
Kilogram
400,289.85
Greenhouse gas(GHG) 
emissions
51
Total emissions
tCO2e
3,600,145.25
GHG emissions (Scope 1)
tCO2e
2,399,143.89
GHG emissions (Scope 2)
tCO2e
1,197,932.19
GHG emissions (Scope 3)
tCO2e
3,069.18
GHG emission density 
(Scope 1 + Scope 2)
tCO2e/RMB million
3.44
Waste produced
Total waste
tonnes
122,532.51
Total waste density
tonnes/RMB million
0.12
Hazardous waste
tonnes
16.35
Non-hazardous waste
tonnes
122,516.16
Recycling of waste electrical 
appliances
Total appliances
million units
5.9491
Household appliances
million units
5.6150
Cell phones, computers, 
digital products, etc.
million units
0.3341
Energy use
Comprehensive energy 
consumption
tce
1,369,687.91
Comprehensive energy 
consumption density
tce/RMB million
1.31
Renewable energy 
consumption
MWh
31,247.92
Non-renewable energy 
consumption
MWh
11,145,150.56
Direct energy consumption
MWh
9,032,385.11
Indirect energy 
consumption
MWh
2,112,765.45
Environmental
Indicators
Unit
2022
Energy use
Purchased electricity
MWh
2,072,860.27
Purchased heat
GJ 
143,454.32
Gasoline
tonnes
102,581.63
Diesel
tonnes
648,778.17
Kerosene
tonnes
1,000.00
Natural Gas
cubic meters
9,243,637.97
Solar self-generated 
electricity
MWh
81,970.85
Water Use
Consumption of reclaimed 
water
tonnes
31,921.34
Consumption of rainwater 
recycled
tonnes
7,070.00
Consumption of fresh water
tonnes
7,280,056.58
Water consumption density
tonnes/RMB million
7.00
Use of packaging materials
Plastic
tonnes
114,241.75
Paper
tonnes
125,110.74
Other categories
tonnes
157.50
Total used package material
tonnes
239,509.99
Used package material 
density
tonnes/RMB million
0.23
Recycling of plastic 
packaging materials
Total plastics
tonnes
6,404.55
Recyclable plastics
tonnes
1,151.28
Compostable plastics
tonnes
5,253.27
Food losses and waste
52
Total food losses and waste
tonnes
2090.42
Density of food losses and 
waste
tonnes/RMB million
0.002
51  
In 2022, JD.com accounts for its GHG emissions, referring to the 2006 IPCC Guidelines for National Greenhouse Gas Inventory and the 
Greenhouse Gas Protocol: A Corporate Accounting and Reporting Standard.
52 
The statistical scope of food losses and waste cover JD Retail and its SEVEN FRESH Supermarket, Huaguan Supermarkets and Five Star 
Appliance. It includes food and fresh goods thrown away in operations due to expiration and damage.


130
131
03
A Responsible Supply Chain 
Leads to Shared Development 
Outcomes 
04
A Responsible Supply Chain 
Promotes Good Consumption
A Responsible Supply Chain  
Paves the Way for a Green Future
01
A Responsible Supply Chain 
Consolidates the Foundation 
of Responsibility
02
Appendix
131
130
2022
Environmental, Social and 
Governance Report
Social 
53
Indicators
Unit
2022
Number of employees
Person
445,268
Number of new employees
Person
153,843
Number of internal candidates filling vacant positions
Person
139,482
Number of employees with disabilities
Person
3,058
Number of minority employees
Person
26,920
Number of employees by employment 
type
Full-time
Person
445,268
Part-time
Person
7,566
Number of employees by gender
Male 
Person
347,021
Female 
Person
98,247
Number of employees by age
Under 31 years old
Person
185,871
31-50 years old
Person
255,551
Above 51 years old
Person
3,846
Number of employees by region
Mainland China
Person
444,953
Overseas, Hong Kong, Macao and 
Taiwan
Person
315
Number of employees by function type
Management
Person
28,352
Employees
Person
416,916
Percentage of female employees
%
22.1
Percentage of female managers
%
15.2
Percentage of female primary-level managers
%
13.5
Percentage of female senior managers
%
22.0
Percentage of female managers in revenue generation
%
16.5
Percentage of female managers related to STEM
54
%
11.3
Employee turnover rate
55
%
17.6
Employee turnover rate by gender
Male
%
17.3
Female 
%
18.6
Employee turnover rate by region
Mainland China
%
17.6
Overseas, Hong Kong, Macao and 
Taiwan
%
16.3
Employee turnover rate by age
Under 31 years old
%
23.4
31-50 years old
%
12.7
Above 51 years old
%
5.5
Total investment in training and 
development
Percentage of employees covered by 
talent development training
%
100
Amount invested  in talent 
development training per employee
RMB
90.2
Average training hours per employee 
by employee category
Management
Hour
35.3
Employees
Hour
41.9
Average training hours per employee 
by gender
Male
Hour
39.9
Female 
Hour
47.1
Social 
53
Indicators
Unit
2022
Average training hours per employee 
by function type
Senior management
Hour
30.7
Middle management
Hour
42.9
Junior management
Hour
35.0
Technical employees
Hour
78.8
Production employees
Hour
35.8
Other employees
Hour
57.9
Percentage of trained employees by 
employee category
Management
%
5.8
Employees
%
94.2
Percentage of trained employees by 
gender
Male 
%
77.8
Female 
%
22.2
Percentage of trained employees by 
function type
Senior management
%
0.1
Middle management
%
0.3
Junior management
%
5.4
Technical employees
%
2.6 
Production employees
%
77.1 
Other employees
%
14.5
Employee satisfaction survey
Employee satisfaction rate
/
4.51/5
Survey coverage
%
78
Average employment cost
RMB
599
Freedom of association
Percentage of employees covered by 
collective contract
%
100
Number of work-related fatalities
Person
35
Number of lost days due to work injury
Day
57,434
Lost Time Injury Frequency Rate  
(L
TIFR) - Employees
Case per 
million man 
hour
1.58
Number of suppliers
Total number of suppliers
Unit
4,563
Number of suppliers by region: 
Mainland China
Unit
4,511
Number of suppliers by region: Hong 
Kong, Macao and Taiwan
Unit
12
Number of suppliers by region: 
Overseas
Unit
40
53 
The total number of employees and other employee statistical data on the dimensions of gender, age, and function only cover full-time 
employees of businesses directly managed by JD.com.
54 
STEM stands for Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics. STEM positions include computer programmers, web developers, 
statisticians, engineers, physicists, scientists, etc.
55 The data related to employee turnover rate is based on the statistical scope of voluntary resignation.


132
133
03
A Responsible Supply Chain 
Leads to Shared Development 
Outcomes 
04
A Responsible Supply Chain 
Promotes Good Consumption
A Responsible Supply Chain  
Paves the Way for a Green Future
01
A Responsible Supply Chain 
Consolidates the Foundation 
of Responsibility
02
Appendix
133
132
2022
Environmental, Social and 
Governance Report
56 The statistical scope of "248 internally investigated corruption cases" excludes Deppon Logistics Co., Ltd and Kuayue Express.
57 
The statistical scope of "percentage of participants in training on business ethics and anti-corruption at all level" excludes Deppon Logistics 
Co., Ltd and Kuayue Express.
Social 
53
Indicators
Unit
2022
Incidents of corruption
Number and brief description of 
corruption related cases
Case
248 internally 
investigated 
corruption cases
56
Number of cases concluded
Case
21 concluded lawsuits 
against employee for 
corruption.
No lawsuits against 
or from JD.com  for 
corruption.
Business ethics and anti-corruption 
training hours per employee at all 
levels
Directors
Hour
1.00
Management
Hour
1.99
Employees
Hour
1.01
Coverage of participants in training on 
business ethics and anti-corruption at 
all level
57
Directors
%
100%
Management
%
100%
Employees
%
100%
Supplier Training
Suppliers anti-corruption training 
coverage for
%
60%
Total number of suppliers that 
attended  anti-corruption training
Unit
2,753
Number of sessions of supplier anti-
corruption training conducted
Session
3
Amount of R&D investment
RMB billion
16.893
Times of information security or cyber security violations
Time
0
Product recall of private-label brands
Times of product recalls
Time
0
Total number of recalled product
Unit
0
The percentage of products recalled 
for safety and health reasons in the 
total vehicles sold or delivered
%
0
Costs from product recalls
RMB
0
Total charity donation
RMB
93,480,000
Total hours of employee public welfare participation
Hour
21,800
Progress on the 
United Nations 
Global Compact
The United Nations Global Compact is an initiative advocated by the United Nations 
to promote enterprises' operation and strategy to meet ten fundamental principles of 
human rights, labor, environment and anti-corruption. JD.com became a member to 
the United Nations Global Compact in September 2021. We recognize and support the 
ten principles by taking strategic actions to achieve more sustainable development 
goals.
In February 2023, representatives of JD.com participated in and completed two 
training courses, the Target Gender Equality Accelerator (2022) and the Climate 
Ambition Accelerator (2022). In the training, JD.com learned from its peers and 
industry experts to get very deep insight into the Science Based Targets initiative (SBTi), 
net zero emissions, gender equality and the Women's Empowerment Principles. They 
are practiced in JD.com’s strategic planning and policies.
Category
Principle
Corresponding Chapter
Human rights
Principle 1: businesses should support and respect the protection of 
internationally proclaimed human rights
Diversity, Equality and 
Inclusion
Employee Rights and Care
Principle 2: make sure that they are not complicit in human rights 
abuses
Labor standards
Principle 3: businesses should uphold the freedom of association 
and the effective recognition of the right to collective bargaining
Employee Rights and Care
Principle 4: the elimination of all forms of forced and compulsory 
labor
Principle 5: the effective abolition of child labor
Principle 6: the elimination of discrimination in respect of 
employment and occupation
Diversity, Equality and 
Inclusion
Environment
Principle 7: businesses should support a precautionary approach to 
environmental challenges
Addressing Climate Change
Principle 8: undertake initiatives to promote greater environmental 
responsibility
Green Operation
Green Logistics
Green Ecology
Principle 9: encourage the development and diffusion of 
environmentally friendly technologies
Green Operation
Green Logistics
Anti-Corruption
Principle 10: businesses should work against corruption in all its 
forms, including extortion and bribe
Business Ethics


134
135
03
A Responsible Supply Chain 
Leads to Shared Development 
Outcomes 
04
A Responsible Supply Chain 
Promotes Good Consumption
A Responsible Supply Chain  
Paves the Way for a Green Future
01
A Responsible Supply Chain 
Consolidates the Foundation 
of Responsibility
02
Appendix
135
134
2022
Environmental, Social and 
Governance Report
Third Party Assurance Statement
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
SGS- CSTC’S REPORT ON SUSTAINABILITY ACTIVITIES IN THE JD.COM’S 
ENVIRONMENTAL, SOCIAL AND GOVERNANCE REPORT FOR 2022  
 
NATURE OF THE ASSURANCE/VERIFICATION 
SGS-CSTC STANDARDS TECHNICAL SERVICES CO., LTD. (hereinafter referred to as SGS) was 
commissioned by JD.com to conduct an independent assurance of the Chinese version of JD.com’s 
Environmental, Social and Governance Report for 2022 (hereinafter referred to as the Report). 
 
INTENDED USERS OF THIS ASSURANCE STATEMENT 
This Assurance Statement is provided with the intention of informing all JD.com’s Stakeholders. 
 
RESPONSIBILITIES 
The information in the Report and its presentation are the responsibility of governing board and related 
functions of JD.com. SGS has not been involved in the preparation of any of the material included in the Report. 
 
Our responsibility is to express an opinion on the text, data, graphs and statements within the scope of 
verification with the intention to inform all JD.com’ stakeholders. 
 
ASSURANCE STANDARDS, TYPE AND LEVEL OF ASSURANCE 
The SGS ESG & Sustainability Report Assurance protocols used to conduct assurance are based upon 
internationally recognized assurance guidance and standards, which including: 
• 
The principles of reporting process contained within the Global Reporting Initiative Sustainability 
Reporting Standards (GRI Standards) as: 
o 
GRI 1: Foundation 2021, for report quality 
o 
GRI 2: General Disclosure 2021, for organization’s reporting practices and other organizational 
detail 
o 
GRI 3: Material Topics 2021, for organization’s process of determining material topics, its list 
of material topics and how to manage each topic 
• 
and the guidance on levels of assurance contained within the AA1000 series of standards. 
 
The assurance of this report has been conducted according to the following Assurance Standards: 
• 
SGS ESG & SRA Assurance Protocols (based on GRI Principles and guidance in AA1000)  
 
Assurance has been conducted at a moderate level of scrutiny. 
 
SCOPE OF ASSURANCE AND REPORTING CRITERIA 
The scope of the assurance included evaluation of quality, accuracy and reliability of specified performance 
information as detailed below and evaluation of adherence to the following reporting criteria: 
• 
HKEX Environmental, Social and Governance Reporting Guide. 
 
ASSURANCE METHODOLOGY 
The assurance comprised a combination of pre-assurance research, interviews with relevant employees onsite 
at JD.com’ headquarters located at No. 18 Kechuang 11 Street, Beijing Economic-Technological Development 
Area, Beijing City, P. R. China. Documentation and record review and validation with external bodies and/or 
stakeholders where relevant. 
 
LIMITATIONS AND MITIGATION 
Financial data drawn directly from independently audited financial accounts has not been checked back to source 
as part of this assurance process.  
 
Data tracing on headquarters level, not including original data of all subsidiaries. 
 
The assurance process only involved interviews with the heads of relevant departments and certain employees 
of headquarters and consultation with relevant documents. No external stakeholder involved. 
ASSURANCE STATEMENT 
 
STATEMENT OF INDEPENDENCE AND COMPETENCE 
The SGS Group of companies is the world leader in inspection, testing and certification, operating in more than 
140 countries and providing services including management systems and service certification; quality, 
environmental, social and ethical auditing and training; environmental, social and ESG report assurance. SGS 
affirm our independence from JD.com, being free from bias and conflicts of interest with the organisation, its 
subsidiaries and stakeholders. 
 
The assurance team was assembled based on their knowledge, experience and qualifications for this 
assignment.  
 
FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS 
 
ASSURANCE/VERIFICATION OPINION 
On the basis of the methodology described and the verification work performed, the information and data 
contained within the Report verified is accurate, reliable, and provides a fair and balanced representation of 
JD.com’s sustainability activities in 2022. 
 
The assurance team is of the opinion that the Report has referred the KPIs disclosures of the HKEX listing rules 
appendix 27 ‘Environmental, Social and Governance Reporting Guide’. 
 
Reporting Rules 
 
Materiality 
JD.com presented the methodology for factors’ materiality research and analysis, via materiality analysis, the 
environmental, social and governance significant issues was reported to stakeholders, which could meet the 
materiality principle requirement.  
 
Quantitative  
JD.com conducted the statistics and analysis for KPIs, and reported the disclosures’ impacts and purposes. In 
the Report some datas were compared with historiacal years, which could better help stakeholders to evaluate 
the effectiveness of management systems and make decisions. 
  
Balance 
JD.com presented the balance reporting rule in the Report and reported the environmental, social and 
governance issues truthfully. 
 
Consistency 
JD.com disclosed the methodologies with consistency for report content and data statistics at all levels in the 
company, in addition, remarks and interpretations were marked in the Report to assist stakeholders make a clear 
comparison.  
 
Findings and recommendations 
Good practices and recommendations for ESG report and management process were described in the internal 
management report which has been submitted to the management of JD.com for continuous improvement. 
 
 
Signed: 
 
 
For and on behalf of SGS-CSTC 
 
David Xin 
Sr. Director – Knowledge 
16/F Century Yuhui Mansion, No. 73, Fucheng Road, Beijing, P.R. China 
 
May 31st, 2023 
WWW.SGS.COM 


136
137
03
A Responsible Supply Chain 
Leads to Shared Development 
Outcomes 
04
A Responsible Supply Chain 
Promotes Good Consumption
A Responsible Supply Chain  
Paves the Way for a Green Future
01
A Responsible Supply Chain 
Consolidates the Foundation 
of Responsibility
02
Appendix
137
136
2022
Environmental, Social and 
Governance Report
Report Indicator Index
Reporting 
Section
HKEX ESG Index
GRI
SDGs
About  
this Report
G2-4
Message from 
Chairman of 
the Board
G201
Statement 
from the Board
G2
About JD.com
G2-1, G2-2, G2-3
A Responsible Supply Chain Consolidates the Foundation of Responsibility
Corporate 
Governance
B7
G2-6, G2-9, G2-10, G2-11, G2-12, G2-13, G2-
14, G2-15, G2-16, G2-17, G2-18, G2-22, G2-23, 
G2-24, G2-25, G2-26, G2-27, G2-29, G3
  
Business 
Responsibility
B6, B7 
G205, G206, G418, G419
  
A Responsible Supply Chain Paves the Way for a Green Future
Addressing 
Climate 
Change
A4
G3, G305, G307
  
  
  
Green 
Operation
A2
G301, G302, G303, G305, G306
  
  
  
  
Green  
Logistics
A1
G2-28, G301, G302
  
  
  
Reporting 
Section
HKEX ESG Index
GRI
SDGs
A Responsible Supply Chain Paves the Way for a Green Future
Green  
Ecology
A3
G304
  
  
A Responsible Supply Chain Leads to Shared Development Outcomes
Human 
Orientation
B1, B2, B3, B4
G2-7, G2-19, G2-20, G2-21, G2-30, G202, 
G401, G402, G403, G404, G405, G406, G407, 
G408, G409, G410, G412
  
  
  
Sustainable 
Supply Chain
B5
G2-8, G203, G204, G308, G414
  
  
  
  
  
A Responsible Supply Chain Leads the Trends for Good Consumption
Serving 
Consumers
B6, B8
G2-28, G416, G417
  
  
Giving 
Back to the 
Community
B8
G203, G413, G415
  
  
  
  
  
  
Third Party 
Assurance 
Statement
G2-5


138
139
03
A Responsible Supply Chain 
Leads to Shared Development 
Outcomes 
04
A Responsible Supply Chain 
Promotes Good Consumption
A Responsible Supply Chain  
Paves the Way for a Green Future
01
A Responsible Supply Chain 
Consolidates the Foundation 
of Responsibility
02
Appendix
139
138
2022
Environmental, Social and 
Governance Report
ESG Policy List
ESG Indicator
Laws and Regulations Complied
Internal Policies
A1
Emissions
Environmental Protection Law of the People's Republic of China
Environmental Pollution Prevention and Control Law of the People's 
Republic of China
Air Pollution Prevention and Control Law of the People's Republic of 
China
Water Pollution Prevention and Control Law of the People's Republic of 
China
Solid Waste Pollution Environmental Prevention and Control Law of the 
People's Republic of China
JD Group Environmental Management Policy
A2
Use of Resources
Environmental Protection Law of the People's Republic of China
Energy Conservation Law of the People's Republic of China
Water Law of the People's Republic of China 
JD Group Environmental Management Policy
A3
Environment and 
Natural Resources
Land Management Law of the People's Republic of China
Forest Law of the People's Republic of China
Wildlife Protection Law of the People's Republic of China
Implementation Regulations of the People's Republic of China on the 
Protection of Terrestrial Wildlife
Fisheries Law of the People's Republic of China
Regulations on the Management of Prohibited Commodities and 
Information on the JD's Open Platform
JD Group Environmental Management Policy
A4
Climate Change
Annual Report on Actions to Address Climate Change (2022)
Opinions of the Central Committee of the CPC and the State Council on 
Working Guidance for Carbon Peaking and Carbon Neutrality in Full and 
Faithful Implementation of the New Development Philosophy
Notice by the State Council of the Action Plan for Carbon Dioxide Peaking 
before 2030
JD Group Environmental Management Policy
B1
Employment
Universal Declaration of Human Rights
International Labor Organization Conventions
Labor Law of the People's Republic of China
Labor Contract Law of the People's Republic of China
Constitution of the All-China Federation of Trade Unions
Trade Union Law of the People's Republic of China
JD Group Management System for Preventing Sexual 
Harassment in the Workplace
JD Group Employee Handbook
Collective Contract of JD Group
Collective Contract of JD Logistics
JD Group Background Investigation System
B2
Health and Safety
Law of the People's Republic of China on Prevention and Control of 
Occupational Diseases
Law of the People's Republic of China on Work Safety
JD Group Occupational Health and Safety Management 
Policy
B3
Development and 
Training
JD Group's Management System for Employee Continuing 
Education
JD Group's Employee Promotion Plan
B4
Labor Standards
Universal Declaration of Human Rights
International Labor Organization Conventions
Labor Law of the People's Republic of China
Labor Contract Law of the People's Republic of China
JD Group Employee Handbook
B5
Supply Chain 
Management
JD Group Supplier Code of Conduct
Bidding and Procurement Business Management Rules
Tripartite Performance Appraisal Procedure
Supplier Quality Exceptional Handling Procedure
Supplier Agreement Honoring Feedback and Handling 
Process
JD group Operation Event Assurance Mechanism of Bidding, 
Procurement and Expense Management Department
Green Procurement Management
ESG Indicator
Laws and Regulations Complied
Internal Policies
B6
Product Responsibility
Patent Law of the People's Republic of China
Trademark Law of the People's Republic of China
Rules for the Implementation of the Patent Law of the People's Republic 
of China
Copyright Law of the People's Republic of China
E-Commerce Law of the People's Republic of China
Rules on the Implementation of the Trademark Law of the People's 
Republic of China
Data Security Law of the People's Republic of China
Personal Information Protection Law of the People's Republic of China 
Cybersecurity Law of the People's Republic of China 
GB/T 35273 Information Security Technology Personal Information 
Security Specification
Measures for Determining the Illegal Collection and Use of Personal 
Information by Apps 
Provisions on the Scope of Necessary Personal Information Required for 
Common Types of Mobile Internet Applications
Product Quality Law of the People's Republic of China
Patent Management Measures of JD Group
Trademark Management Measures of JD Group
Copyright Management Measures of JD Group
Domain Name Management Measures of JD Group
Trade Secret Management Measures (Trial) of JD Group 
Information Security and Privacy Policy of JD Group
Data Classification and Grading Guide of JD Group
Data and Privacy Security Management Regulation of JD 
Group
Information Security Incident Grading Management 
Requirements of JD Group
Security Monitoring and Response Regulations of JD Group
Information Security and Privacy Management Code of JD 
Group
JD's Privacy Policy
JD Group Security Management Standards for Cross-border 
Data Flow Protection
General Principles of JD Group Marketplace Product Quality 
Inspection Sampling
JD Group Marketplace Product Shelf-Life Rules
JD Retail Counterfeit Accountability Rules
Regulations on the Management of Online Food Trading on 
the JD's Open Platform
JD Group Marketplace Investment Qualification Standards
Qualification Management Rules for JD Group Retail 
Business Suppliers
General Principles of JD Group Marketplace Product Quality 
Inspection Sampling
General Principles of JD Group Retail Business Supplier 
Product Quality Inspection Sampling
JD Group Marketplace Merchant Violation Credit 
Management Rules
JD Group Supplier Violation Management Rules
JD Group Marketplace Product Labeling Sampling Rules
JD Group Retail Business Supplier Product Labeling 
Sampling Rules
JD Group Advertising Audit Rules
B7
Anti-Corruption
Criminal Law of the People's Republic of China
Civil Code of the People's Republic of China
E-Commerce Law of the People's Republic of China
Cybersecurity Security Law of the People's Republic of China
Provisions on Ecological Governance of Network Information Content
Advertisement Law of the People's Republic of China
Product Quality Law of the People's Republic of China
Food Safety Law of the People's Republic of China
Law of the People's Republic of China on the Protection of Consumer 
Rights and Interests
Postal Law of the People's Republic of China
Provisional Regulations for Express Delivery in China
JD Group Employee Handbook
JD Group's Commitment to Anti-Corruption
Code of Business Conduct and Ethics of JD.com, Inc.
JD Group Anti-Corruption Regulations
JD Group Whistle-blower Protection and Reward System
JD Group Integrity Reward Policy
JD Group Active Filing Reward Policy (for Trial Implementation)
JD Group Gifts Management Regulations
Vendor Paid Travel and Business Dinner Regulations
Anti-Commercial-Bribery Agreement
JD Logistics Red Line Management System
JD Health Banquet Management System
Product Recall Control Procedure  
JD Industrials Recall and Withdrawal Management 
Procedure


Reader Feedback Form
Dear stakeholders:
We conduct this survey to better understand your expectations and needs for the ESG management and 
information disclosure of JD.com and to further improve our ESG performance. You are sincerely invited 
to fill out the survey. Thanks for your reading, opinions and suggestions.
For JD,com, your identity is:
□Shareholders   □Employees   □Consumers   □Supply chain partners   □Regulators 
□Other government departments   □Media   □Community   □Others (specify here)_____
Are you satisfied with this annual ESG report as a whole?
□Yes     □No     □Average
Is all the information you are concerned about mentioned in this annual ESG report?
□Yes     □No     □Average
What are your expectations or suggestions for the ESG report we will prepare and publish next year?
□ Innovative report topic   □ Innovative structure and ideas   □ Clear logical main thread  
□ Expanded scope of application of ESG standards   □ More user-friendly reading interface  
□ More approachable language style   □ Other (specify here) _____
What are your suggestions or expectations for the development of our ESG management?
□ Develop long-term ESG management plans   □ Set up more ESG management organizations 
□ Conduct extensive external communication   □ Plan new influential public welfare programs 
□ Other (specify here) _____
1
2
3
4
5


2021 年京东集团环境、社会及治理报告
109
Environmental considerations for report publication
Paper: Eco-friendly paper is used for printing
Ink: Eco-friendly ink is used to reduce air pollution
JD.com s Official ESG webpage