ORIGINAL PAPER
The role of glacier mice in the invertebrate colonisation of glacial
surfaces: the moss balls of the Falljo
¨kull, Iceland
S. J. Coulson • N. G. Midgley
Received: 26 March 2012 / Revised: 14 May 2012 / Accepted: 16 May 2012
 Springer-Verlag 2012
Abstract
Glacier surfaces have a surprisingly complex
ecology. Cryoconite holes contain diverse invertebrate
communities, while other invertebrates, such as Collembola,
often graze on algae and windblown dead organic material
on the glacier surface. Glacier mice (ovoid unattached moss
balls) occur on some glaciers worldwide. Studies of these
glacier mice have concentrated on their occurrence and
mode of formation. There are no reports of the invertebrate
communities. But, such glacier mice may provide a suitable
favourable habitat and refuge for a variety of invertebrate
groups to colonise the glacier surface. Here, we describe the
invertebrate fauna of the glacier mice (moss balls) of the
Falljo
¨kull, Iceland. The glacier mice were composed of
Racomitrium sp. and varied in size from 8.0 to 10.0 cm in
length. All glacier mice studied contained invertebrates.
Two species of Collembola were present. Pseudisotoma
sensibilis (Tullberg, 1876) was numerically dominant with
between 12 and 73 individuals per glacier mouse, while
Desoria olivacea (Tullberg, 1871) occurred but in far lower
numbers. Tardigrada and Nematoda had mean densities of
approximately 200 and 1,000, respectively. No Acari,
Arachnida or Enchytraeidae were observed, which may be
related to the difﬁculty these groups have in colonising the
glacier mice. We suggest that glacier mice provide an unu-
sual environmentally ameliorated microhabitat for an
invertebrate community dwelling on a glacial surface. The
glacier mice thereby enable an invertebrate fauna to colonise
an otherwise largely inhospitable location with implications
for carbon ﬂow in the system.
Keywords
Arctic  Colonisation  Dispersal
Introduction
Glacier surfaces are often considered barren and largely
devoid of life. But this assertion is beginning to be chal-
lenged with the observation of glacier ﬂeas such as Desoria
albicornis (Fjellberg 2010), ice worms, for example,
Mesenchytraeus solifugus (Hartzell et al. 2005), and the
diverse fauna and ﬂora of cryoconite holes (Wharton et al.
1985; De Smet and Van Rompu 1994). Moreover, the
importance of these ecosystems to nutrient ﬂuxes is
becoming appreciated (Hodson et al. 2005; Anesio et al.
2009). A new addition to this list is the fauna of the glacier
mouse or jo
¨kla-my
´s. Glacier mice (j}
okla-my
´s of Eytho
´rs-
son 1951), whether termed the unattached moss polsters of
Shacklette (1966) or the supraglacial globular moss cush-
ions of Porter et al. (2008), are ovate balls of moss found
on the surface of a few glaciers distributed throughout the
world including Iceland, North and South America, and the
Himalaya (Eytho
´rsson 1951; Heusser 1972; Perez 1991;
Porter et al. 2008). Such mice are comprised of moss balls
lying on the glacier surface. Moss is well known to harbour
a diverse invertebrate community and may form an espe-
cially important habitat in the extreme environments of
Arctic regions where moss vegetation may often dominate
(Jonsdottir 2005). Consequently, these glacier mice might
be expected to possess a characteristic invertebrate fauna.
Nonetheless, study to date of glacier mice has largely
focused on the physical composition and the mode of
S. J. Coulson (&)
Department of Arctic Biology, UNIS, pb 156,
9171 Longyearbyen, Norway
e-mail: steve.coulson@unis.no
N. G. Midgley
School of Animal, Rural and Environmental Sciences,
Nottingham Trent University, Brackenhurst Campus,
Southwell NG25 0QF, UK
123
Polar Biol
DOI 10.1007/s00300-012-1205-4


formation (Eytho
´rsson 1951; Heusser 1972; Perez 1991;
Porter et al. 2008), and the associated faunal constituent
has been ignored.
Typically, glacier mice are small balls of moss up to
10 cm in length, often ovate and with a pronounced
roundness. They appear to form when moss begins to
establish around a clast lying on the glacier surface. The
moss continues to grow and in time insulates the glacier
surface resulting in the moss becoming elevated on a
pedestal as the surrounding ice melts. Eventually, the moss
falls from this pedestal (Porter et al. 2008). In many cases,
the glacier mouse is lenticular in form with a pronounced
ﬂatter lower side but movement across the glacier surface
enables the glacier mouse to achieve a rounded form
(Shacklette 1966). The formation of the mice appears to be
a result of the unusual environment rather than speciﬁc
species of moss. Glacier mice are comprised of a wide
range of moss species including Drepanocladius berggre-
nii (Heusser 1972), Grimmia longirostris (Perez 1991),
Schistidium apocarpum (Shacklette 1966) and Racomitri-
um fasciculare and R. ericoides (Porter et al. 2008). With a
high organic content and ﬁne silt accumulated by trapping
aeolian dust, the glacier mice have a great water-holding
ability (Perez 1991). This moist organic environment
potentially provides a suitable habitat for many species of
invertebrate. For example, Rotifera, Tardigrada, Acari and
Collembola are all known to inhabit mosses in other Arctic
regions such Svalbard (European High Arctic) (Coulson
2007 and references there in; Dastych 1985; De Smet et al.
1988; De Smet and Van Rompu 1994).
Invertebrates are recognised to exploit habitats on the
surface of ice. Collembola are known from glacier surfaces
(Kopeszki 2000; Fjellberg and Bernard 2009; Fjellberg
2010). Enchytraeid worms, ‘‘ice worms’’ (Hartzell and
Shain 2009), are observed inhabiting the upper centimetres
of the glacial ice of a number of glaciers in Alaska and the
Himalaya (Hartzell et al. 2005; Hartzell and Shain 2009).
Moreover, cryoconite holes contain diverse communities
including Protozoa, Rotifera and Tardigrada (Wharton
et al. 1985; Sa
¨wstro
¨m et al. 2002; Porazinska et al. 2004).
Nonetheless, glaciers on the whole provide a poor habitat
for soil microarthropods being cold, exposed and, for the
most part, devoid of food resources. Glacier mice possibly
offer a potential habitat for the invertebrate colonisation of
local regions of the glacier surface feeding on ice algae and
allochthonous organic debris. Moreover, in addition to
providing a habitat in themselves, they create a potential
refuge enabling animals foraging on the glacier surface to
periodically retreat to shelter and hence exploit a greater
area of the glacier surface. Since these glacier mice can be
redistributed across the surface of the glacier via the action
of wind, water and movement of the ice (Porter et al.
2008), they may also offer a means of limited dispersal
across a generally hostile surface while remaining within a
favourable microhabitat. Nevertheless, the invertebrate
fauna inhabiting this novel microhabitat has not attracted
attention. We here describe the invertebrate fauna of gla-
cier mice from the Falljo
¨kull glacier in Iceland and con-
sider their importance to glacier ecology.
Materials and methods
Field site
Falljo
¨kull is an outlet glacier of O
¨ ræfajo
¨kull, which is part
of the larger Vatnajo
¨kull in south-east Iceland (the termi-
nus is located c. 63580N 16480W, Fig. 1). Falljo
¨kull
descends from the high plateau of O
¨ ræfajo
¨kull down a
steep highly-crevassed icefall with around 1.5 km length of
largely crevasse-free glacier snout below the icefall and the
terminal margin adjoining the adjacent Virkisjo
¨kull. The
terminus of Falljo
¨kull is predominantly debris-free ice,
with the exception of the south-east lateral margin of the
glacier, which has a thin supraglacial debris cover that is
laterally extensive. The north-west lateral margin of Fall-
jo
¨kull adjoins the adjacent Virkisjo
¨kull, which also has a
thin supraglacial debris cover that is laterally extensive
along its south-east lateral margin. Dead ice features in the
proglacial area indicate that both Falljo
¨kull and Vir-
kisjo
¨kull are currently experiencing rapid recession of the
Fig. 1 Location of the Falljo
¨kull, Iceland, with sampling site
indicated
Polar Biol
123


ice front. The merged Virkisjo
¨kull and Falljo
¨kull complex
was at its Neoglacial maximum as early as A.D. 1740
according to Chenet et al. (2010), but the lichenometric
dating studies have proved controversial (Da
˛bski 2010;
Chenet et al. 2011). Recession of around 1.5 km has
occurred since this Neoglacial maximum.
Climate
The climate of the area is characterised by high precipitation
and also by higher temperatures than a position adjacent to
the arctic circle might imply. The nearest Icelandic Meteo-
rological Ofﬁce weather station to Falljo
¨kull is at Fag-
urho
´lsmy
´ri with a monthly temperature and precipitation
data set from 1949 to 2007 (Fig. 2). From 1949 to 2007 at
Fagurho
´lsmy
´ri,
the
mean
annual
precipitation
was
1,814 mm and the mean annual temperature was 4.8 C.
Glacier mice characteristics
Five Onset HOBO Pendant G data loggers were each
placed within a glacier mouse to measure mouse motion on
an area of the glacier with an overall slope angle of c. 10.
The Pendant G data logger records combined x-axis, y-axis
and z-axis acceleration (g) and tilt (), so can be used to
detect
motion.
The
stated
accuracy
of
the
logger
is ±0.075 g at 25 C and ±0.105 g at -20 to ?70 C with
a resolution of 0.025 g. The size of each data logger
(58 9 33 9 23 mm) meant that larger glacier mice were
preferentially selected for observation with the aim to
minimise the impact that the addition of the data logger
would have on glacier mouse motion. A 30-s logging
interval was used for the duration of the logging period.
The acceleration values (g) from the three axes were
used to obtain a single change in angle value (h) using the
following dot product formula from one vector to the next:
h ¼ sin1

a  
b
a
j j b
j j

 180
p
A ternary plot (Graham and Midgley 2000) was employed
to describe the shape (Fig. 3). This plot describes the full
continuum of shape possibilities from equidimensional to
oblate or prolate. Inspection of this plot indicates a clear
tendency towards an equidimensional character with no
apparent differences in shape between those glacier mice with
accelerometers (diamond symbols), those extracted for the
invertebrate fauna (square symbols) and the glacier mouse
used to assess temperature characteristics (triangle symbol).
An Onset HOBO Pro V2 temperature logger was used to
measure air temperature at the frontal margin of Falljo
¨kull
between 27 July until 12 August 2010. There is a gap of 1 day
in the data due to logger malfunction. The air temperature
logger was mounted within a solar radiation shield at 1.25 m
above the glacier surface. An external probe from the tem-
perature logger was inserted centrally within the core of a
single glacier mouse and used to measure internal glacier
mousetemperature at the site.A 60-slogginginterval wasused
for both air and glacier mouse temperature measurements.
Invertebrate extraction
Ten glacier mice were sampled from the surface of the
Falljo
¨kull close to the terminus on 29 July 2010 (Fig. 4a, b)
Fig. 2 Climate data from 1949 to 2007 at the Fagurho
´lsmy
´ri weather
station (data supplied by the Icelandic Meteorological Ofﬁce). Mean
monthly temperature (solid line), mean monthly precipitation (bars)
Fig. 3 Ternary diagram (Graham and Midgley 2000) describing the
full continuum of glacier mice shape possibilities from: top
a = b = c = 1 equidimensional; bottom left a = b = 1 and c = 0
oblate; bottom right a = 1 and b = c = 0 prolate. Square symbols
indicate the glacier mice extracted for the invertebrate fauna, diamond
symbols the accelerometer samples and the triangle symbol the glacier
mouse with the temperature record
Polar Biol
123


from an area under 10 m2 and returned to the University
Centre in Svalbard (UNIS), Longyearbyen, Svalbard,
Norway. The microarthropod fauna of eight mice was
extracted in Tullgren funnels, while that of the remaining
two mice was extracted in Baermann funnels to collect the
Tardigrada, Enchytraeidae and Nematoda. The Collembola
are deposited in the reference collection at UNIS.
Age classes of the Collembola
The lengths of the extracted Collembola were measured
under a Leica MZ16 stereomicroscope to determine age
classes.
Moisture content
After the extraction of the invertebrate fauna, the mice
were placed in a drying oven at 70 C for 24 h until
thoroughly dry. Moisture content (q) was calculated as
(wet weight - dry weight)/dry weight.
Statistics
Spearman correlation and linear regression were performed
using SigmaPlot v. 11 (Systat Software Inc.) to determine
relationships between size, weight, moisture content and
total numbers of Collembola. Collembola were not ana-
lysed by species due to the overwhelming dominance of
one species. Samples extracted using Baermann funnels
were not inspected statistically due to the n size of two.
Results
Invertebrates
Two species of Collembola were found in the glacier mice;
Pseudisotoma sensibilis (Tullberg, 1876) and Desoria
olivacea (Tullberg, 1871) (Table 1). Pseudisotoma sensi-
bilis dominated the Collembola with numbers per mouse
varying between 0 and 73 individuals. Desoria olivacea
was represented by only three individuals from the eight
mice extracted in the Tullgren funnels. The age classes of
P. sensibilis are presented in Fig. 5. Two peaks in size
classes are present with a juvenile cohort centred on
1.0 mm and an adult peak at 2.6 mm.
Tardigrada were common in the two glacier mice wet
extracted with approximately 200 individuals in both
samples. While no Enchytraeidae were found, Nematoda
were common with over 1,000 individuals in mouse FJ-
2010-02 (Table 1). A small number of Collembola were
collected as a by-catch during the wet extractions.
Physical environment of the glacier mice
The mice were composed almost completely of the moss
Racomitrium with very little organic soil. It was not pos-
sible to determine which species of moss comprised the
glacier mice due to the unusual growth form of the moss
into the ovoid mice (Figs 3, 4a, b). The mice varied in size
from 5.4 to 12.1 cm long and a wet weight from 64.3 to
468.5 g (Table 1). Water comprised typically around 50 %
of the wet weight of the mice (Table 1). No statistically
signiﬁcant relationships, or relationships approaching sig-
niﬁcance, were observed between total Collembola num-
bers and wet weight, dry weight, volume or moisture
content (p [ 0.05).
The glacier mouse temperature has a maximum recorded
temperature of 12.4 C and a minimum recorded temper-
ature of 1.5 C, but typical glacier mouse temperature
ranged from just over 2 to around 6 C. Glacier mouse
temperature was predominantly lower than air temperature
during the observation period. On a single occasion, when
the glacier mouse temperature rose to the recorded
Fig. 4 a The glacier mice of the Falljo
¨kull, Iceland 2007, b glacier
mouse FJ-2010-03
Polar Biol
123


maximum of 12.4 C, it was 1.5 C warmer than the sur-
rounding air temperature at the time. Typical air tempera-
ture ranged from around 6 to 10 C but displayed strong
diurnal variation with a maximum recorded temperature of
14.7 C and a minimum recorded temperature of 5.3 C
(Fig. 6).
Movement of the glacier mice
Three types of glacier mouse motion are illustrated by the
accelerometer data sets: (1) stick; (2) creep; and (3) roll.
The stick motion behaviour type only appears after the
fresh placement of a glacier mouse and probably only
occurs following relocation to a fresh ice surface. The
creep motion type is of minimal important for motion,
whereas the roll motion type is the most signiﬁcant in terms
of glacier mouse movement.
Two types of creep are identiﬁed. Type 1 creep (roll
build-up) occurs immediately prior to a roll with a gradual
increase in the rate of rotation from close to 0 to over 6
per hour. This is followed by a roll of the moss ball. Type 2
creep (without roll) again shows a build-up similar to that
preceding a roll and elevated rotation rates occur over
around 90 min with rotation of up to 15 per hour
observed. This form of rotation is not followed by a sub-
sequent roll.
The minimum time before a roll occurred was only
12.2 h with a resulting roll of 41.8. The maximum time
before a roll occurred was 65.6 h with a resulting roll of
30.1. The biggest single roll that occurred was 154.8.
Typically roll events occur after 12 to 40 h and are between
around 30 to 60 of rotation. While some glacier mice did
not exhibit any roll events during the observation period, a
total of 5 roll events were recorded for a single glacier
mouse over a seven day observation period (Fig. 7). While
each roll is the rotation observed within a 30 s time win-
dow, the rotation is likely to occur over a period of a few
seconds at most.
Discussion
In the glacier, mice from Falljo
¨kull three invertebrate
groups were identiﬁed, Collembola, Tardigrada and Nem-
atoda. Nonetheless, and despite the apparent suitability of
the habitat for soil invertebrates, the fauna observed was
Table 1 The invertebrate fauna and the physical characteristics of the extracted glacier mice
Glacier
mouse
Collembola
Total
Collembola
Tardigrada
Nematoda
a-axis
(mm)
b-axis
(mm)
c-axis
(mm)
Wet
weight
(g)
Dry
weight
(g)
Moisture
content
(g water/g dry
weight)
P. sensibilis
D. olivacea
FJ-2010-01
49
0
49
–
–
81
71
49
247.8
127.9
0.94
FJ-2010-02
1
0
1
221
1,064
104
104
57
483.4
346.4
0.40
FJ-2010-03
39
1
40
–
–
75
62
45
194.2
92.7
1.09
FJ-2010-04
44
0
44
–
–
121
74
55
450.2
262.3
0.72
FJ-2010-05
64
1
65
–
–
59
54
23
79.2
34.7
1.28
FJ-2010-06
0
0
0
–
–
54
50
30
79.6
34.9
1.28
FJ-2010-07
53
0
53
–
–
81
73
55
263.7
124.1
1.13
FJ-2010-08
73
0
73
–
–
63
51
38
130.7
65.8
0.99
FJ-2010-09
12
0
12
208
807
106
85
73
500.7
278.1
0.80
FJ-2010-10
31
1
32
–
–
83
66
48
221.4
114.9
0.93
FJ-2010-11
130
107
70
The a-axis, b-axis and c-axis are the three orthogonal axes that relate to the longest, intermediate and shortest axis lengths of a mouse.
Temperature data were collected from glacier mouse FJ-2010-11, which was not extracted for the invertebrate fauna
Fig. 5 Size classes of P. sensibilis. Size classes of 0.4 mm with bars
centred on middle of each size class
Polar Biol
123


species poor. Although it should be recognised that the
fauna sampled, and described here, is partly a function of
the extraction techniques employed. Extraction efﬁciency
of differing taxa also varies with extraction procedure
(Southwood and Henderson 2000) and there will be some
unavoidable bias in the results. Only two species of Col-
lembola were present despite 149 species being recorded
from Iceland as a whole (Fjellberg 2007a). The Collembola
identiﬁed are both common Holarctic species (Babenko
and Fjellberg 2006; Fjellberg 2007b). Tardigrada and
Nematoda were numerous in the two glacier mice wet
extracted but these were not identiﬁed to species. No En-
chytraeidea were found, nor were there any Acari or Ara-
neae that might have been expected. The lack of Acari was
particularly surprising. Acari are well known from moss
habitats in other regions (Krantz and Walter 2009), and the
Oribatidae are often referred to as ‘moss mites’ (Walter and
Procter 1999). However, their absence, as well as that of
the Enchytraeidae and Aranaea, may well be accounted for
by the inherent difﬁculty of colonising small isolated
ephemeral habitats on the glacier surface.
The moss balls form at isolated supraglacial outcrops
from clasts and the aeolian deposition of sediment. How-
ever, glacier mice are not observed on all glaciers and their
development is likely dependent on the presence of both
suitable supraglacial material and the meteorological con-
ditions (Fig. 2), which enable moss growth. Given these
often remote and inaccessible growth locations, it seems
likely that the initial invertebrate colonisation route is a
random wind dispersal event. It is appreciated, or specu-
lated, that accidental anemochory may be important for the
colonisation of new habitats by some invertebrate groups
such as Collembola, spiders and mites (Pugh and McInnes
1998; Gjelstrup 2000; Hawes et al. 2007). The lack of
Enchytraeidae in the glacier mice may be explained by
potential difﬁculties of this taxon in colonising the isolated
supraglacial outcrops via wind dispersal.
The glacier mice provide a characteristic environment;
moist, relatively warm and with a ready food source.
Although anhydrobiotic Tardigrada are suspected of dis-
persing great distances in the Arctic via wind dispersal
(Pugh and McInnes 1998), desiccation susceptible taxa
such as Collembola (Block et al. 1990; Hodkinson et al.
1994; Makkonen et al. 2011) may face a greater challenge.
Collembola are recognised to exploit the surfaces of gla-
ciers (Fjellberg 2010) and glacier mice will provide these
animals with a habitat on the largely inhospitable glacier
surface from which they can emerge to graze on algae and
deposited organic material. Within the glacier mice, tem-
peratures rarely attain air temperature. This is in stark
contrast to other habitats in the Arctic where ground tem-
peratures may attain temperatures considerably above air
temperature (Coulson et al. 1993; Scherrer and Korner
2010). This seemingly anomalous result is likely due to the
high speciﬁc heat capacity of water and the high moisture
content of the moss thermally buffering the glacier mice
against the diurnal swings, the low angle of the sun at the
moderately high latitude of just under 64N and consequent
reduced solar insolation per unit ground area and, ﬁnally,
close contact with the ice of the glacier surface. However,
despite the temperature of the glacier mouse being sub-
stantially colder than that of the air, the internal tempera-
ture of the glacier mouse is nonetheless far greater than that
of the glacier surface at approximately 0 C. Hence,
compared with the glacier surface, the glacier mouse pro-
vides a thermally ameliorated environment. It must also be
appreciated that thermal input for the glacier mice must
come
from
a
combination
of
solar
radiation
and
Fig. 6 Air temperature (solid line) and internal glacier mouse
temperature (dotted line). Data are missing for the period 6 August
due to logger malfunction
Fig. 7 Vector of rotation of one glacier mouse. Glacier mouse roll
events over a 7-day observation period
Polar Biol
123


precipitation (as rain). Input of warm rain is interpreted to
be the cause of the highest glacier mouse temperature.
Hence, during the summer period, although cooler than air
temperature, the microhabitat within the glacier mice is
considerably warmer than that of the surface of the glacier.
Consequently,
the
glacier
mice
provide
a thermally
advantageous
microhabitat
amid
the
more
hostile
landscape.
Body length of Collembola is often used as a proxy
measure for individual age (Birkemoe and Sømme 1998;
Birkemoe and Leinaas 1999). While some care must be
employed in interpreting such data since Collembola with
poor food resources can display the phenomenon of de-
growth (Hopkin 1997), body size does nonetheless provide
a useful tool by which to observe age classes and elucidate
life histories (Birkemoe and Sømme 1998; Birkemoe and
Leinaas 1999). In addition, the two peaks we observed here
may be the result of random dispersal/colonisation pro-
cesses of windblown specimens. The numerically abundant
small juveniles may be more easily carried away from the
source area to the glacier mice than the larger size classes
rather than being hatched in the glacier mice. But, the two
peaks in body length of P. sensibilis indicate the presence
of adults and juveniles strongly suggesting a reproducing
population. It is therefore reasonable to assume that the
glacier mice are exploited as more than just a temporary
refuge, rather that the mice harbour resident populations.
The glacier mouse may also provide an additional
advantage for the inhabitants. The ovoid shape of the
glacier mice is a result of the gradual rolling motion of the
mice. The distances moved by the glacier mice, either self-
induced via growth imbalances or wind action, are
unknown. However, there is a clear potential for redistri-
bution on the glacier surface, although the main axis of
movement is likely to be down the prevailing slope towards
the glacier snout (Porter et al. 2008).
Glacier mice therefore form a novel, if limited, glacial
habitat for invertebrate faunas from a range of groups. For
taxa such as Collembola, glacier mice may provide a ref-
uge from the extreme environment of the ice surface for
individuals venturing out to exploit the organic material
and algae the glacial surface as a food resource. Moreover,
the glacial mice provide a semi-permanent habitat for other
taxa such as Nematoda and Tardigrada.
Acknowledgments
Fanny Dommanget for invaluable help in the
laboratory and Arne Fjellberg Entomological Research for identiﬁ-
cation of the Collembola. Michael Stech and Hans Kruijer from the
National Herbarium of the Netherlands, University of Leiden, for
identifying the moss and checking synonyms. Guðru
´n Þo
´runn
Gı
´slado
´ttir assisted with the provision of Icelandic Meteorological
Ofﬁce data sets. NGM received funding from Nottingham Trent
University to undertake ﬁeldwork in Iceland and was assisted by Oz
Godden, Karen Mather and Nikki Sandercock. Mike Pemulis is
thanked for advice on the use of the dot product operation. We are
also grateful to three anonymous reviewers and the Editor for their
constructive comments on the manuscript.
References
Anesio AM, Hodson AJ, Fritz A, Psenner R, Sattler B (2009) High
microbial activity on glaciers: importance to the global carbon
cycle. Glob Change Biol 15:955–960
Babenko A, Fjellberg A (2006) Collembola Septentrionala. A
catalogue of springtails of the Arctic regions. KMK Scientiﬁc
Press Ltd, Moscow
Birkemoe T, Leinaas HP (1999) Reproductive biology of the Arctic
collembolan Hypogastrura tullbergi. Ecography 22:31–39
Birkemoe T, Sømme LS (1998) Population dynamics of two
collembolan
species
in
an
Arctic
tundra.
Pedobiologia
42:131–145
Block W, Harrisson PM, Vannier G (1990) A comparative-study of
patterns of water-loss from two Antarctic springtails (Insecta,
Collembola). J Insect Physiol 36:181–187
Chenet M, Roussel E, Jomelli V, Grancher D (2010) Asynchronous
Little Ice Age glacial maximum extent in southeast Iceland.
Geomorphology 114:253–260
Chenet M, Roussel E, Jomelli V, Grancher D, Cooley D (2011) A
response to the commentary of M. Da
˛bski about the paper
‘Asynchronous Little Ice Age glacial maximum extent in
southeast Iceland’. Geomorphology 128:103–104
Coulson SJ (2007) The terrestrial and freshwater invertebrate fauna of
the high Arctic archipelago of Svalbard. Zootaxa 1448:41–58
Coulson SJ, Hodkinson ID, Strathdee AT, Bale JS, Block W, Worland
MR, Webb NR (1993) Simulated climate change: the interaction
between vegetation type and microhabitat temperatures at Ny-
A
˚ lesund, Svalbard. Polar Biol 13:67–70
Da
˛bski M (2010) A commentary to ‘Asynchronous Little Ice Age
glacial maximum extent in southeast Iceland’ by Chenet et al.
(Geomorphology 114 (2010) 253–260); a case of Fla
´ajo
¨kull.
Geomorphology 120:365–367
Dastych H (1985) West Spitsbergen Tardigrada. Acta Zool Cracov
28:169–214
De Smet WH, Van Rompu EA (1994) Rotifera and Tardigrada from
some cryoconite holes on a Spitsbergen (Svalbard) glacier. Belg
J Zool 124:27–37
De Smet WH, Van Rompu EA, Beyens L (1988) Contribution to the
Rotifera and aquatic Tardigrada of Edgeoya (Svalbard). Fauna
Norv Ser A 9:19–30
Eytho
´rsson J (1951) Correspondence. J}
okla-my
´s. J Glaciol 1:503
Fjellberg A (2007a) Icelandic Collembola. Revised checklist and
general comments. Insect Syst Evol 64:45–60
Fjellberg A (2007b) The Collembola of Fennoscandia and Denmark.
part II: entomobryomorpha and Symphypleona. Fauna Entomol
Scand 42:1–264
Fjellberg A (2010) Cryophilic Isotomidae (Collembola) of the
Northwestern Rocky mountains, U.S.A. Zootaxa 2513:27–49
Fjellberg A, Bernard EC (2009) Review of Agrenia Borner, 1906 with
descriptions of four new species from North America (Collem-
bola, Isotomidae). Zootaxa 2306:17–28
Gjelstrup P (2000) Soil mites and collembolans on Surtsey, Iceland,
32 years after the eruption. Surtsey Res 11:43–50
Graham DJ, Midgley NG (2000) Graphical representation of particle
shape using triangular diagrams: an excel spreadsheet method.
Earth Surf Proc Land 25:1473–1477
Hartzell PL, Shain DH (2009) Glacier ice worms. In: Shain DH (ed)
Annelids in modern biology. Wiley, Hoboken, pp 301–313
Hartzell PL, Nghiem JV, Richio KJ, Shain DH (2005) Distribution
and phylogeny of glacier ice worms (Mesenchytraeus solifugus
Polar Biol
123


and Mesenchytraeus solifugus rainierensis). Can J Zool 83:
1206–1213
Hawes TC, Worland MR, Convey P, Bale JS (2007) Aerial dispersal
of springtails on the Antarctic Peninsula: implications for local
distribution and demography. Antarct Sci 19:3–10
Heusser CJ (1972) Polsters of the moss Drepanocladius berggrenii on
Gilkey Glacier, Alaska. Bull Torrey Bot Club. 99:34–36
Hodkinson ID, Healey V, Coulson S (1994) Moisture relationships of
the High Arctic collembolan Onychiurus arcticus. Physiol
Entomol 19:109–114
Hodson AJ, Mumford PN, Kohler J, Wynn PM (2005) The High
Arctic glacial ecosystem: new insights from nutrient budgets.
Biogeochemistry 72:233–256
Hopkin SP (1997) Biology of the Springtails. Insecta: Collembola.
Oxford University Press, Oxford
Jonsdottir IS (2005) Terrestrial ecosystems on Svalbard: heterogene-
ity, complexity and fragility from an Arctic Island perspective.
P R Irish Acad B 105:155–165
Kopeszki H (2000) Auf der Suche nach rotten Gletscherﬂo
¨hen. Funde
hochalpiner Springschwa
¨nze (Collembola). Vorarlberger Naturs-
chau 8:133–144
Krantz GW, Walter DE (2009) A manual of acarology, 3rd edn. Texas
Tech University Press, Lubback
Makkonen M, Berg MP, van Hal JR, Callaghan TV, Press MC, Aerts
R (2011) Traits explain the responses of a sub-arctic Collembola
community
to
climate
manipulation.
Soil
Biol
Biochem
43:377–384
Perez FL (1991) Ecology and morphology of globular mosses of
Grimmia longirostris in the Paramo de Piedras Blancas,
Venezuelan Andes. Arct Antarct Alp Res 23:133–148
Porazinska DL, Fountain AG, Nylen TH, Tranter M, Virginia RA,
Wall DH (2004) The biodiversity and biogeochemistry of
cryoconite holes from McMurdo dry valley glaciers. Arct
Antarct Alp Res 36:84–91
Porter PR, Evans AJ, Hodson AJ, Lowe AT, Crabtree MD (2008)
Sediment-moss interactions on a temperate glacier: Falljo
¨kull,
Iceland. Ann Glaciol 48:25–31
Pugh PJA, McInnes SJ (1998) The origin of Arctic terrestrial and
freshwater tardigrades. Polar Biol 19:177–182
Sa
¨wstro
¨m C, Mumford P, Marshall W, Hodson A, Laybourn-Parry J
(2002) The microbial communities and primary productivity of
cryoconite holes in an Arctic glacier Svalbard 79N. Polar Biol
25:591–596
Scherrer D, Korner C (2010) Infra-red thermometry of alpine
landscapes
challenges
climatic
warming
projections.
Glob
Change Biol 16:2602–2613
Shacklette HT (1966) Unattached moss polsters on Amchitka Island,
Alaska. Bryologist 69:346–352
Southwood TRE, Henderson PA (2000) Ecological methods. Black-
well, Oxford
Walter DE, Procter HC (1999) Mites: ecology, evolution and
behavior. CABI International, Oxford
Wharton RA, McKay CP, Simmons GM, Parker BC (1985) Cryoc-
onite holes on glaciers. Bioscience 35:449–503
Polar Biol
123


Sediment–moss interactions on a temperate glacier:
Falljo
¨kull, Iceland
P.R. PORTER,1 A.J. EVANS,2 A.J. HODSON,3 A.T. LOWE,4 M.D. CRABTREE2
1Division of Geography and Environmental Sciences, University of Hertfordshire, College Lane,
Hatfield, Hertfordshire AL10 9AB, UK
E-mail: p.r.porter@herts.ac.uk
2School of Geography, University of Leeds, Leeds LS2 9JT, UK
3Department of Geography, University of Sheffield, Winter Street, Sheffield S10 2TN, UK
4Halcrow Group Ltd, Deanway Technology Centre, Wilmslow Road, Handforth, Cheshire SK9 3AB, UK
ABSTRACT. We present the results of preliminary investigations of globular moss growth on the surface
of Falljo
¨kull, a temperate outlet glacier of the Vatnajo
¨kull ice cap, southern Iceland. Supraglacial debris
has provided a basis for moss colonization, and several large (>500 m2) patches of moss growth
(Racomitrium spp.) are observed on the surface of the glacier. Each area of moss-colonized supraglacial
debris shows a downslope increase in sphericity and moss cushion size and a decrease in percentage
surface coverage of moss-colonized and bare clasts. It is suggested that moss growth on supraglacial
debris allows preferential downslope movement of clasts through an associated increase in both overall
mass and sphericity. Thermal insulation by moss cushions protects the underlying ice surface from melt,
and the resulting ice pedestals assist in downslope sliding and toppling of moss cushions. The
morphology and life cycle of supraglacial globular mosses is therefore not only closely linked to the
presence and distribution of supraglacial debris, but also appears to assist in limited down-glacier
transport of this debris. This research highlights both the dynamic nature of the interaction of mosses
with supraglacial sedimentary systems and the need for a detailed consideration of their role within the
wider glacial ecosystem.
INTRODUCTION
This study describes the general characteristics and distri-
bution of globular moss growth on the ice surface of
Falljo
¨kull, a valley outlet glacier of the Vatnajo
¨kull ice cap,
southern Iceland. The spatial distribution and physical
characteristics of globular moss growth are described,
together with an assessment of potential relationships
between moss growth and supraglacial sediment character-
istics and distribution. It is hypothesized that the morph-
ology and life cycle of supraglacial globular mosses is
closely linked to their action as an agent of supraglacial
sediment redistribution, and evidence supporting this hy-
pothesis is detailed. The potential importance of mosses to
the ecology and nutrient cycle of the wider supraglacial
ecosystem is briefly considered.
For some time, glaciers were incorrectly assumed to be
largely abiotic environments, and, as a result, the nature and
dynamics of glacier ecosystems received scant attention until
relatively recently. Recovery of microorganisms from deep
ice samples in East Antarctica (Abyzov, 1993) stimulated
great interest in the functioning of glacial ecosystems.
Published work to date includes examination of nutrient
budgets (e.g. Hodson and others, 2005), microbial assem-
blages (e.g. Skidmore and others, 2000; Sa
¨wstro
¨m and
others, 2002; Bhatia and others, 2006; Buford Price, 2007)
and micro-invertebrates (e.g. De Smet and Van Rompu,
1994; Shain and others, 2001). A review of microbial
habitats in glacial ecosystems is provided by Hodson and
others (in press).
However, the distribution and potential role of vegetation
in glacial systems has received even less attention, pre-
sumably due to a paucity of observational evidence. This is
despite the fact that cyanobacteria in glacial ecosystems fix
nitrogen and furnish the organic carbon for bacterial and
other microbially mediated processes in glacial environ-
ments (Kas
ˇtovska
´ and others, 2005; Hodson and others, in
press) providing the nutrient base necessary for plant life.
Morainic and other glacially transported debris is known to
provide a useful substrate for such activity (e.g. Sharp and
others, 1999; Hodson, 2006), and thus also allow coloniza-
tion by vegetation on the glacier surface and at its margins.
Mosses are well suited to the colonization of harsh glacial
environments, and the presence of mosses in nival and ice-
marginal environments is well documented (e.g. Collins and
Callaghan, 1980; Belland, 1983; Bergstrom and Selkirk,
1997; Hodkinson and others, 2003; Whinam and others,
2004; Lewis Smith, 2005). In glacial environments the
primary limiting factors for plant growth are likely to be
nutrient supply, dehydration during temperature minima,
and freezing during extreme low temperatures. Many moss
species, however, show great tolerance to dehydration and
desiccation, while the commonplace aggregation of mosses
into globular or lenticular cushions increases evaporative
resistance and reduces water losses (Longton, 1988). Many
species also have modest nutrient requirements, while
aggregation into cushions disrupts airflow and may allow
more effective sequestration of airborne dusts and organic
matter (Hodson and others, in press). Finally, the ability of
mosses to maintain photosynthesis and respiration under
conditions of both low temperature and low light allows
survival during winter snow burial and periods of sub-zero
surface temperatures experienced in early spring and late
autumn (Longton, 1988).
It is therefore unsurprising that extensive moss growth has
been observed at the margins of glaciers and ice sheets.
Annals of Glaciology 48 2008
25
https://doi.org/10.3189/172756408784700734 Published online by Cambridge University Press


However, although not studied in detail, moss growth has
also been previously observed on the surfaces of the
Icelandic glaciers Hru
´ta
´rjo
¨kull, Kvı
´a
´rjo
¨kull and Breiðamer-
kurjo
¨kull by Eytho
´rsson (1951) who named the observed
supraglacial globular moss cushions ‘Jo
¨kla-mys’, which
translates from the Icelandic as ‘glacier mice’. Globular
moss growth has also been observed on the surface of
Matanuska Glacier, Alaska, USA (Benninghoff, 1955). The-
oretically, supraglacial water and direct atmospheric de-
position will provide nutrient supply during the summer
months to sustain growth, while the insulating properties of
many moss species, together with water and nutrients from
snowpack melt, are likely to allow survival during annual
winter burial (Longton, 1988). This combination of factors
provides the potential for moss communities to thrive where
supraglacial debris and a source of colonizing material
(spores and/or vegetative fragments) are both present.
FIELD SITE
Falljo
¨kull is an outlet glacier of the Vatnajo
¨kull ice cap,
southern Iceland. The glacier is fed in its upper reaches by
the O
¨ ræfajo
¨kull ice dome via an extensively crevassed
icefall and has a southwest orientation. For the last 5.5 km,
the glacier splits into two lobes, separated by the Rauði-
kambur rock ridge; the western tongue becomes Virkisjo
¨kull,
while the eastern tongue retains the name Falljo
¨kull (Fig. 1).
In common with other glaciers in the area, Falljo
¨kull is
currently undergoing rapid retreat, together with thinning in
the lower reaches of the ablation zone. The glacier surface in
the study area is characterized by numerous dirt cones and
an extensive network of supraglacial streams, the largest of
which is deeply incised into the southeastern margin and
marks the edge of a large area of debris-covered dead ice
and morainic material. While not selected for detailed study,
this area also exhibits extensive moss coverage and is a
potential source for wind-blown spore dispersal onto the
surface of the glacier.
Fieldwork was undertaken in August 2005. The annual
average temperature that year at the closest meteorological
station (Skaftafell, approximately 11 km to the west and in a
similar katabatic setting) was 58C, with a summer maximum
of 15.18C recorded in late July and winter minima of –68C
recorded in early February. In the Skaftafell/Vatnajo
¨kull area,
daily mean air temperatures generally become consistently
positive from mid-April and consistently negative from early
October.
The geology of the Vatnajo
¨kull area comprises Tertiary
basalts, Upper Pleistocene formations comprising subaerial
lava flows, subglacial pillow lava, hydroclastic tuffs,
breccias, basalt and andesite lava flows (Thordarson and
Hoskuldsson, 2002). Extensive Holocene morainic and
fluvioglacial sandur deposits are a characteristic feature of
the Vatnajo
¨kull area. Clastic debris on the surface of
Falljo
¨kull in the study area comprises fragments of amor-
phous, fine-grained basaltic lava.
METHODS
Four areas of moss coverage were found on the surface of
Falljo
¨kull in the lower reaches of the ablation zone (Fig. 2).
Sampling revealed that Racomitrium fasciculare (Hedw.)
Brid., and Racomitrium ericoides (Brid.) Brid. had grown on
supraglacial clastic debris. Proportionally less Racomitrium
ericoides (Brid.) Brid. was observed in samples taken from
the field. However, on-site species identification was not
possible, so the relative abundance of these two species
(which display a similar growth habit) across the study site is
not discussed here. In many cases, moss coverage had
completely encompassed the clast, the internal clast only
being visible when deliberately teased out from within the
moss cushion (Fig. 2, inset A). Fragments of moss and
associated detritus were also observed in proglacial streams
down-glacier of the main areas of moss coverage.
The largest (approximately 575 m2) of the four moss areas
identified was selected for preliminary study during August
2005 (Fig. 2). A transect just under 30 m long was taken
through the centre of this moss area, and, where a moss
cushion encasing a clast abutted the transect line, its long-,
intermediate- and short-axis sizes were recorded. The
internal clast was then teased out and cleaned, and its
long-, intermediate- and short-axis size recorded (these
Fig. 1. Location map of the O
¨ ræfajo
¨kull ice dome and Falljo
¨kull outlet glacier. Smaller map shows the snout area of Falljo
¨kull and
approximate location of the main moss areas. The largest of the four areas shown on the map was selected for detailed investigation.
Porter and others: Sediment–moss interactions on a temperate glacier
26
https://doi.org/10.3189/172756408784700734 Published online by Cambridge University Press


clasts are subsequently referred to as ‘internal clast/s’). The
average surface slope of the study area was 9.68.
Sphericity was calculated for both moss cushions and
internal clasts following the analysis of Krumbein (1941):
 ¼
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
bc
a2
3
r
,
where  is sphericity ranging from 0 to 1.0 (a true sphere
having a value of 1.0), and a, b and c are long-,
intermediate- and short-axis lengths respectively.
In order to calculate and identify any downslope trends in
percentage cover of moss-free clasts and moss cushions,
vertical digital photographs were taken of 1 m2 areas of the
glacier surface at the top and bottom of the central 30 m
transect, and at four equidistant intermediate areas down the
transect. The outlines of all moss-free clasts and moss
cushions were manually digitized from these photographs
using Erdas Imagine1 software, and total area of moss
cushions, moss-free clasts and clear glacier ice calculated.
Finally, samples of moss cushions from the top, middle and
bottom of the transect were assessed for organic matter
content using the loss by ignition technique.
MOSS–DEBRIS ASSOCIATIONS ON FALLJO
¨ KULL
Initial visual inspection of the transect revealed a downslope
increase in size of moss cushions, but a downslope decrease
in the surface coverage of both moss cushions and non-
colonized clasts (Fig. 3). Subsequent quantitative analysis of
vertical photographs confirmed that in the downslope
direction, percentage surface coverage of both moss-free
clasts and moss cushions decreases, while percentage clear
ice cover increases (Table 1).
Fig. 2. Area of moss-colonized clasts on the surface of Falljo
¨kull. Glacier flow direction is from left to right. Inset (a) shows a moss cushion
that has been teased apart to reveal the internal clast around which the moss has grown. Inset (b) shows a profile view of a lenticular moss
cushion. The long and short axes are visible in this photograph, the moss cushion having been deliberately placed on its side. Long axis
length is approximately 0.11 m.
Fig. 3. (a) Glacier surface at the top of the transect. Note the relatively denser surface coverage compared with (b), and the prevalence of
moss-free clasts. (b) Glacier surface at the foot of the transect. Note the almost complete absence of moss-free clasts and the relatively large
area of exposed glacier ice. Each photograph shows an area approximately 1 m2.
Porter and others: Sediment–moss interactions on a temperate glacier
27
https://doi.org/10.3189/172756408784700734 Published online by Cambridge University Press


Non-colonized clastic elements make up >10% of the
surface cover at the top of the transect and only 0.2% at the
foot (Table 1). Similarly, moss cushions comprise 22.4% of
the surface cover at the top of the transect and 11.8% at the
foot. There are in fact considerably more moss-free clasts
than moss cushions at the head of the transect (Table 1), the
surface cover percentages being influenced by the larger size
of the moss cushions relative to moss-free clasts. However,
by the foot of the transect the situation has reversed and the
absolute number of moss cushions exceeds the number of
moss-free clasts (Table 1). Percentage clear ice cover within
each 1 m2 area increases from 67.2% at the top of the
transect to 88% at the base (Table 1). Although the overall
trend is for percentage moss cushion coverage to reduce
down-glacier, the trend is not systematic. An initial increase
in coverage in the down-glacier direction is apparent, with
percentage cover rising from 22.4% at the top of the transect
to 26% at point three, before then showing a systematic
decline to 11.8% at the base of the transect (Table 1).
Moss cushion intermediate-axis size shows an increase in
the downslope direction (Fig. 4). A correlation of r ¼ +0.70,
statistically significant at 95%, exists between moss cushion
intermediate-axis size and distance downslope, and
although removal of the obvious outlier shown in Figure 4
reduces the correlation coefficient slightly to +0.67, the
correlation remains statistically significant at 95%. This is
not matched by the relationship between internal clast
intermediate-axis size and distance downslope, which has a
weak correlation of r ¼ +0.2, not significant at 95%.
Although clearly there is a trend of increasing sphericity
of moss cushions in the downslope direction (Fig. 5), formal
statistical testing only yields a moderately strong correlation
of r ¼ +0.5, significant at the 95% level. Sphericity of
internal clasts shows no relationship with distance down-
slope, testing yielding a very weak correlation of r ¼ –0.1,
not significant at 95%.
In order to further investigate any potential relationship
between internal clast characteristics and moss cushion
characteristics, a simple estimate of the thickness of the
moss ‘envelope’ can be gained by subtracting moss cushion
intermediate-axis size from internal clast intermediate-axis
size. When this envelope thickness is correlated against
internal clast intermediate-axis size, a very weak correlation
of r ¼ +0.04 is yielded, not significant at 95%. Thus, there is
no relationship between internal clast size and moss
envelope thickness.
Logistical constraints in the field necessitated that sam-
ples for organic matter assessment were randomly gathered
from 1 m2 grids in the top, middle and slope-foot sections of
the transect rather than systematically down the whole
transect. Prior to ignition, the air-dried weight of samples
ranged from 23.4 to 99.8 g (slope foot, n ¼ 10), 10.7 to
39.4 g (mid-slope, n ¼ 7) and 5.3 to 25.1 g (top slope,
n ¼ 10). In terms of absolute mass of organic matter, slope-
foot moss cushions showed the highest mass, with an
average of 6.2 g (range 2–10.5 g). Mid-slope samples
comprised an average of 2.7 g (range 1.3–4.3 g), while top
slope samples comprised an average of 1.7 g (range 0.6–
2.8 g) organic matter (Fig. 6). These values reflect the
increasing size of moss envelopes with distance downslope.
However, despite this trend, the downslope decrease in total
cover of both clasts and moss cushions means that there is a
negative trend in the total mass of both organic and
inorganic material downslope.
DISCUSSION
Qualitative observation in the field showed that many moss
cushions were lenticular in shape, with a flat bottom and
domed top (Fig. 2, inset B). It was also apparent that many
moss cushions had ‘rolled’ into an inverted position, with
the domed section lying on the ice surface and the flat
section uppermost. This corresponds with observations of
moss growth on glaciers elsewhere (Eytho
´rsson, 1950;
Benninghoff, 1955). The presence of easily removed organic
and inorganic detritus on the uppermost surface of some
moss cushions suggests that ‘rolling’ and inversion has been
relatively recent, with a lesser amount of moss growth
present on the uppermost flat surface when compared to
other, more spherical, cushions that had apparently rolled
and experienced a longer period of growth on the exposed
upper surface. Small pedestals of ice were evident beneath
both larger moss-free clasts and moss cushions. It seems
plausible that moss cushions shield the underlying ice from
melt, with the majority of samples having an overall
intermediate-axis size greater than the critical threshold of
0.005–0.01 m, below which glacier surface debris will
Fig. 4. Plot of moss cushion intermediate axis against downslope
location. A strong correlation is apparent (r ¼ 0.7, significant at
95%). Upper and lower 95% confidence and prediction limits are
denoted by the dotted and dashed lines respectively.
Table 1. Percentage coverage of clear ice, moss cushion coverage
and moss-free clast coverage down the transect. n is absolute
number of moss cushions and moss-free clasts within each 1 m2
sample area. Distance from top slope to slope foot is approximately
30 m
% clear ice
% moss cushion
coverage
% moss-free
clast coverage
1. Top slope
67.2
22.4 (n ¼ 144)
10.4 (n ¼ 397)
2.
67.4
23.5 (n ¼ 111)
9.1 (n ¼ 202)
3.
68.6
26.0 (n ¼ 127)
5.4 (n ¼ 109)
4.
80.6
16.3 (n ¼ 110)
3.1 (n ¼ 126)
5.
86.3
12.9 (n ¼ 31)
0.8 (n ¼ 7)
6. Slope foot
88.0
11.8 (n ¼ 17)
0.2 (n ¼ 1)
Porter and others: Sediment–moss interactions on a temperate glacier
28
https://doi.org/10.3189/172756408784700734 Published online by Cambridge University Press


conduct heat sufficiently rapidly to accelerate melt of the
underlying ice surface (Østrem, 1959).
Movement of moss cushions
Given the evidence for recent inversion of moss cushions, it
is suggested that the formation of ice pedestals may be
responsible for eventually ‘toppling’ moss cushions and
initiating ‘rolling’, ‘sliding’ and general downslope motion
(Fig. 7). This downslope movement will likely be enhanced
by a greater degree of sphericity and overall mass as moss
growth progresses. Larger and more spherical moss cushions
may therefore experience greater degrees of net downslope
movement.
While pedestal formation does not inevitably mean a
downslope movement of either clastic debris or moss
cushions (upslope or cross-slope movement from a pedestal
is also possible), gravity will tend to skew movements
downslope. Observations in the field showed that recently
exposed ice pedestals generally have an upper surface
angled downslope, while upturned lenticular moss cushions
were generally found on the downslope side of recently
exposed ice pedestals. Furthermore, the relatively steep
(average 9.68) angle of the glacier surface is likely to be a
factor in enhancing toppling and rolling from ice pedestals
in the downslope direction.
The degree to which the presence of moss acts to
accelerate the speed of ice pedestal formation relative to
moss-free clasts is unclear. However, moss growth clearly
results in an increase in overall intermediate-axis size
relative to moss-free clasts. Radiative shielding of the
underlying ice is therefore likely to be increased in spatial
extent where moss exists, and this will create an increased
likelihood of pedestal formation and downslope movement.
The increased proportion of large moss cushions lower
down the slope, despite the lack of a downslope trend in
internal clast size, certainly suggests that mosses are active
in enhancing the general movement of supraglacial clasts
downslope, although, as discussed below, other processes
may contribute.
Size and sphericity variations
The increase in size and sphericity of moss cushions
downslope, without a concomitant increase in the size or
sphericity of the internal clasts, indicates that the morph-
ology of the mosses is not closely controlled by clast size or
shape. Indeed, as noted above, there is no apparent
relationship between the size of clasts and the thickness of
the moss envelope. Although no data were collected in the
field on the relative proportions of the two Racomitrium
species in the downslope direction, the size increase of moss
cushions with downslope distance and the general similarity
of growth habit of the two species argues against any
systematic downslope variation in the relative proportions of
the two species being a significant factor in the down-glacier
size distribution of moss cushions. Furthermore, the rela-
tively short length of the down-glacier axis of the moss patch
(30 m) and the limited change in ice surface morphology
Fig. 5. Plot of Krumbein sphericity against downslope location for
moss cushions. A moderately strong (r ¼ 0.5, significant at 95%)
correlation is apparent. Upper and lower 95% confidence and
prediction limits are denoted by the dotted and dashed lines
respectively.
Fig. 6. Organic matter content by weight of moss cushion samples
from the top, middle and slope-foot areas of the transect. Shaded
bars indicate the range, while the black horizontal line denotes the
average mass of organic matter in grams. Note the increase in both
range and average organic matter content in the downslope
direction.
Fig. 7. Conceptual model illustrating a potential mechanism for
downslope movement of moss cushions. Intermediate-axis size of
sampled moss cushions ranges from 0.03 to 0.16 m. At time 1 the
moss cushion rests on the glacier surface, protecting the underlying
ice from melt. At time 2, this protection from melt has allowed an
ice pedestal to form beneath the moss cushion. By time 3, the
pedestal has reached some critical height or angle such that the
moss cushion either slides or rolls from the elevated pedestal
position to rest once more on the ice surface. The cycle can then
begin again, the end result being a net down-glacier movement of
moss cushions.
Porter and others: Sediment–moss interactions on a temperate glacier
29
https://doi.org/10.3189/172756408784700734 Published online by Cambridge University Press


suggests microclimatic variations are an unlikely explana-
tion for the observed down-glacier increase in size of moss
cushions.
The progressive size increase of moss cushions down-
slope is likely to signal an increase in moss cushion age and/
or preferential movement of the larger moss cushions.
Clearly the source of supraglacial clastic debris may be
significant here. If supraglacial debris is being supplied from
an englacial source, any age-related trend in overall moss
cushion size could be explained by earlier melt-out and
colonization of clasts lower down the slope. However, such
a hypothesis necessitates additional mechanisms to explain
the lower concentration of clasts lower down the slope. An
alternative explanation may be that the clasts are melting out
of the ice and slowly moving downslope under gravity with
no influence from moss cushion growth. Again, however,
additional mechanisms would be required to explain the
lack of any downslope trend in clast size and the lower
concentration of clasts at the foot of the transect.
The observed downslope increase in moss cushion
sphericity indicates that more complex processes are at
work than extended growth-times downslope and, indeed,
also supports the notion that simple microclimate or
nutrient-controlled growth-rate variations are unlikely to
offer an explanation for the down-glacier increases in size. In
non-supraglacial environments, larger moss cushions tend to
be lenticular in cross-profile due to a lack of movement (e.g.
Beck and others, 1986). In contrast, on Falljo
¨kull larger moss
cushions tend to be more spherical than lenticular, suggest-
ing regular movement rather than prolonged in situ growth.
A comparison of the moss size distributions at either end
of the transect might be expected to distinguish between
models of development centred on age and those centred on
preferential movement. For example, the presence of the
largest moss cushions at the transect head might have argued
against time since melt-out being important. However, here
the data are inconclusive, as the largest size fraction of moss
cushions is missing at the slope head and this could equally
be the situation in either scenario. The downslope increase
in the proportion of clasts that are moss-covered (Table 1)
therefore fits more than one potential model of develop-
ment. Nevertheless, while factors like melt-out and move-
ment of moss-free clasts may have played a role in
developing the observed distribution of moss cushions, the
most parsimonious explanation for the evidence is that
larger mosses allow for easier transport downslope. This
explanation requires no complex sedimentary history and
fits the observed morphology of the moss cushions well.
Clearly any form of moss growth on the glacier surface is
limited by the presence and extent of supraglacial debris
cover, and moss will only colonize areas where the
sedimentary, structural and flow characteristics of the ice
are developed to supply such material. However, even with
a relatively short growing season and harsh environmental
conditions it is apparent that abundant moss growth is
possible on glacier surfaces where clastic debris is present
and that moss growth has some capacity to enhance the
transport of that debris. The dynamic nature of supraglacial
mosses indicated by the results of this study also provides
considerable potential for the redistribution of both organic
matter and nutrients around the glacier surface. The pres-
ence of supraglacial moss coverage may enhance both the
nitrogen fixing capacity of the wider supraglacial ecosystem
and the production of organic carbon for heterotrophic
bacterial activity. This potential capacity to enhance primary
and heterotrophic production in supraglacial environments
therefore demands further consideration from an ecological
perspective, especially as the very presence of mosses
suggests the existence of a more complex supraglacial
ecosystem than hitherto appreciated.
CONCLUSION
Preliminary inspection of globular moss growth on the
surface of Falljo
¨kull supports the notion that the downslope
transfer of supraglacial debris is assisted by the presence and
growth of mosses. Moss cushion growth not only shields the
underlying ice surface from melt, thereby allowing pedestal
formation to initiate motion, but also increases sphericity
and total mass relative to non-colonized clasts, allowing
more effective downslope movement. This process is
embodied in a downslope increase in both intermediate-
axis size and sphericity of moss cushions. The very presence
of mosses in supraglacial environments points to the need
for a detailed consideration of the role of vegetation in the
wider glacier ecosystem.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The authors gratefully acknowledge the assistance of
T. Blockeel for undertaking species identification, and
T. Sands for lithological description and identification of
supraglacial clasts. Meteorological data for Skaftafell were
kindly supplied by G. Gı
´slado
´ttir of the Icelandic Meteoro-
logical Office. Thanks are due to J. Elvy for assistance
with production of figures, and A. Burton for constructive
bryology and ecosystem discussions. The paper benefited
significantly from constructive comments provided by
D. Graham and an anonymous referee.
REFERENCES
Abyzov, S.S. 1993. Microorganisms in the Antarctic ice. In
Friedmann, E.I., ed. Antarctic microbiology. New York, etc.,
Wiley-Liss Inc., 265–295.
Beck, E., K. Ma
¨gdefrau and M. Senser. 1986. Globular mosses.
Flora, 178(2), 73–83.
Belland, R.J. 1983. A late snow bed bryophyte community in
western Newfoundland, Canada. Can. J. Bot./J. Can. Bot, 61(1),
218–223.
Benninghoff, W.S. 1955. Correspondence. ‘‘Jo
¨kla my
´s’’. J. Glaciol.,
2(17), 514–515.
Bergstrom, D. and P. Selkirk. 1997. Distribution of bryophytes on
subantarctic Heard Island. Bryologist, 100(3), 349–355.
Bhatia, M., M. Sharp and J. Foght. 2006. Distinct bacterial
communities exist beneath a High Arctic polythermal glacier.
Appl. Environ. Microb., 72(9), 5838–5845.
Buford Price, P. 2007. Microbial life in glacial ice and implications
for a cold origin of life. FEMS Microbiol. Ecol., 59(2), 217–231.
Collins, N.J. and T.V. Callaghan. 1980. Predicted patterns of
photosynthetic production in maritime Antarctic mosses. Ann.
Bot., 45(6), 601–620.
De Smet, W.H. and E.A. van Rompu. 1994. Rotifera and Tardigrada
from some cryoconite holes on a Spitsbergen (Svalbard) glacier.
Belg. J. Zool., 124(1), 27–37.
Eytho
´rsson,J.1951.Correspondence.Jo
¨kla-my
´s.J.Glaciol.,1(9),503.
Hodkinson, I.D., S.J. Coulson and N.R. Webb. 2003. Community
assembly along proglacial chronosequences in the high Arctic:
vegetation and soil development in north-west Svalbard. J. Ecol.,
91(4), 651–663.
Porter and others: Sediment–moss interactions on a temperate glacier
30
https://doi.org/10.3189/172756408784700734 Published online by Cambridge University Press


Hodson, A. 2006. Biogeochemistry of snowmelt in an Antarctic
glacial ecosystem. Water Resour. Res., 42(11), W11406.
(10.1029/2005WR004311.)
Hodson, A.J., P.N. Mumford, J. Kohler and P.M. Wynn. 2005. The
High Arctic glacial ecosystem: new insights from nutrient
budgets. Biogeochem., 72(2), 233–256.
Hodson, A.J. and 7 others. In press. Glacial ecosystems. Ecol.
Monogr.
Kas
ˇtovska
´, K., J. Elster, M. Stibal and H. S
ˇantru
˚c
˘kova
´. 2005. Mi-
crobial assemblages in soil microbial succession after glacial
retreat in Svalbard (High Arctic). Microbial Ecol., 50(3), 396–407.
Krumbein, W.C. 1941. Measurement and geological significance of
shape and roundness of sedimentary particles. J. Sediment.
Petrol., 11(2), 64–72.
Lewis Smith, R.I. 2005. Bryophyte diversity and ecology of two geo-
logically contrasting Antarctic islands. J. Bryol., 27(3), 195–206.
Longton, R.E. 1988. The biology of polar bryophytes and lichens.
Cambridge, Cambridge University Press.
Østrem, G. 1959. Ice melting under a thin layer of moraine, and the
existence of ice cores in moraine ridges. Geogr. Ann., 41(4),
228–230.
Sa
¨wstro
¨m, C., P. Mumford, W. Marshall, A. Hodson and J. Laybourn-
Parry. 2002. The microbial communities and primary product-
ivity of cryconite holes in an Arctic glacier (Svalbard 798 N). Polar
Biol., 25(8), 591–596.
Shain, D.H., T.A. Mason, A.H. Farrell and L.A. Michalewicz. 2001.
Distribution and behavior of ice worms (Mesenchytraeus
solifugus) in south-central Alaska. Can. J. Zool., 79(10),
1813–1821.
Sharp, M., J. Parkes, B. Cragg, I.J. Fairchild, H. Lamb and M. Tranter.
1999. Widespread bacterial populations at glacier beds and
their relationship to rock weathering and carbon cycling.
Geology, 27(2), 107–110.
Skidmore, M.L., J.M. Foght and M.J. Sharp. 2000. Microbial life
beneath a high Arctic glacier. Appl. Environ. Microbiol., 66(8),
3214–3220.
Thordarson, T. and A. Hoskuldsson. 2002. Iceland. Harpenden,
Terra Publishing.
Whinam, J., P.M. Selkirk, A.J. Downing and B. Hull. 2004. Return
of the megaherbs: plant colonisation of derelict ANARE station
buildings on sub-Antarctic Heard Island. Polar Rec., 40(3),
235–243.
Porter and others: Sediment–moss interactions on a temperate glacier
31
https://doi.org/10.3189/172756408784700734 Published online by Cambridge University Press


Vol.:(0123456789)
1 3
Polar Biology (2020) 43:735–744 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s00300-020-02675-6
ORIGINAL PAPER
Rolling stones gather moss: movement and longevity of moss balls 
on an Alaskan glacier
Scott Hotaling1   · Timothy C. Bartholomaus2   · Sophie L. Gilbert3 
Received: 29 June 2019 / Revised: 23 April 2020 / Accepted: 29 April 2020 / Published online: 14 May 2020 
© Springer-Verlag GmbH Germany, part of Springer Nature 2020
Abstract
Glaciers support diverse ecosystems that are largely comprised of microbial life. However, at larger, macroscopic scales, 
glacier moss balls (sometimes called “glacier mice”) can develop from impurities on ice surfaces and represent a relatively 
rare biological phenomenon. These ovoid-shaped conglomerations of dirt and moss are only found on some glacier surfaces 
and provide key habitats for invertebrate colonization. Yet, despite their development and presence being widely reported, no 
studies of their movement and persistence across years have been conducted. This knowledge gap is particularly important 
when considering the degree to which glacier moss balls may represent viable, long-term biotic habitats on glaciers, perhaps 
complete with their own ecological succession dynamics. Here, we describe the movement and persistence of glacier moss 
balls on the Root Glacier in southcentral Alaska, USA. We show that glacier moss balls move an average of 2.5 cm per day 
in herd-like fashion initially to the south and later towards the southwest, and their movements are positively correlated 
with glacier ablation. Surprisingly, the dominant moss ball movement direction does not align with the prevailing wind or 
downslope directions, nor with the dominant direction of solar radiation. After attaining a mature size, glacier moss balls 
persist for many years, likely in excess of 6 years. Finally, we observed moss ball formation on the Root Glacier to occur 
within a narrow, low albedo stripe downwind of a nunatak, a potential key source of moss spores and/or fine-grained sedi-
ment that interact to promote their formation.
Keywords  Cryobiology · Glacier mice · Glacier biology · Jokla-mys · Root glacier · Wrangell-St. Elias National Park
Introduction
Glaciers have long been overlooked as important compo-
nents of global biodiversity (Stibal et al. 2020), but it is 
now clear that they host thriving, multi-trophic ecosystems 
(Anesio and Laybourn-Parry 2012), supporting taxa from 
microbes to vertebrates (Rosvold 2016; Dial et al. 2016; 
Hotaling et al. 2017a, 2019). Most biological activity on 
glaciers occurs within surface ice where microorganisms 
take advantage of nutrients that are either wind-delivered 
or generated in situ (Hotaling et al. 2017a). In addition to 
a nutrient input, impurities on the glacier surface can drive 
the development of at least two potential “hotspots” of bio-
logical diversity on glaciers: well-studied cryoconite holes 
(depressions in the ice surface caused by local melt, Anesio 
et al. 2017) and glacier moss balls (ovular conglomerations 
of moss and sediment that move on the glacier surface, Coul-
son and Midgley 2012).
Often a small piece of rock or other impurity sets in 
motion the formation of a glacier moss ball [also referred 
to as “jokla-mys” (Eythórsson 1951), “glacier mice” (e.g., 
Coulson and Midgley 2012), or “moss cushions” (e.g., Por-
ter et al. 2008)]. On a local scale, glacier moss balls are 
typically distributed with some degree of local clustering 
(e.g., ~ 1 glacier moss ball m−2; Fig. 1). While immobile 
moss aggregations have been observed on glaciers elsewhere 
(e.g., East Africa, Uetake et al. 2014), true glacier moss balls 
Electronic supplementary material  The online version of this 
article (https​
://doi.org/10.1007/s0030​
0-020-02675​
-6) contains 
supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.
 
*	 Timothy C. Bartholomaus 
	
tbartholomaus@uidaho.edu
1	
School of Biological Sciences, Washington State University, 
Pullman, WA, USA
2	
Department of Geological Sciences, University of Idaho, 
Moscow, ID 83844, USA
3	
College of Natural Resources, University of Idaho, Moscow, 
ID, USA


736
	
Polar Biology (2020) 43:735–744
1 3
appear to be rare, having only been described on a few geo-
graphically disparate glaciers in Alaska (Shacklette 1966; 
Heusser 1972), Iceland (Eythórsson 1951), Svalbard (Bel-
kina and Vilnet 2015), and South America (Perez 1991). 
Many different moss species have been found in glacier 
moss balls (Shacklette 1966; Heusser 1972; Perez 1991; 
Porter et al. 2008), suggesting that they are not dependent 
on specific taxa, but instead their development is driven by 
the interaction of suitable biotic (e.g., availability of moss 
spores) and abiotic (e.g., growth substrate) factors. However, 
the specific steps and timeline of glacier moss ball genesis 
remains unclear.
An intriguing aspect of glacier moss balls, and one that 
is at least partially responsible for their “glacier mice” 
namesake, is their movement. It has been posited that moss 
balls move by inducing the formation of an ice pedestal, 
then rolling or sliding off of it (Porter et al. 2008). Under 
this process, moss balls first shield the ice beneath them 
from sunlight and locally reduce the ablation rate. As the 
surrounding ice melts, the glacier moss ball is left on an 
elevated pedestal. Eventually, a threshold is reached where 
the moss ball falls from its pedestal and the process begins 
anew, potentially including a “flip” of the moss ball that 
exposes what was previously their underside (Porter et al. 
2008). The speed and direction of moss ball movement has 
not been measured, though it has been suggested that their 
movements generally track the downslope direction of their 
local habitat (Porter et al. 2008).
Where they occur, glacier moss balls contribute to gla-
cier biodiversity by offering a thermally buffered, island-like 
habitat on the glacier surface that hosts an array of inverte-
brates (Coulson and Midgley 2012). On Icelandic glaciers, 
moss balls contain invertebrate communities dominated by 
springtails (Collembola), tardigrades (Tardigrada), and nem-
atodes (Nematoda; Coulson and Midgley 2012). While many 
potential food resources are available on glaciers (Hotal-
ing et al. 2017a, 2020), these are typically only exploited 
by invertebrates on the margins (e.g., springtails, spiders, 
grylloblattids), likely because suitable on-glacier habitat is 
lacking (Mann et al. 1980). Glacier moss balls may therefore 
provide key habitable islands on the glacier that facilitate 
wider resource exploitation versus glaciers without moss 
balls (Coulson and Midgley 2012). It is also possible that 
glacier moss balls, which have not been shown to be inhab-
ited by larger predatory insects (e.g., grylloblattids) may 
provide prey refuge that are sufficiently removed from the 
typical foraging areas of their predators. Either way, it is 
clear that glacier moss balls represent important habitat for 
Fig. 1   a Our study site (solid 
green square) on the Root 
Glacier in southcentral Alaska, 
USA, within Wrangell-St. Elias 
National Park. Contour lines 
are spaced every 100 m in 
elevation. The dashed square 
represents the field of view 
shown in panel (b). The inset 
map shows the location of the 
Root Glacier (white star) within 
Alaska. b Satellite image of the 
study site (green square) show-
ing the confluence of the Root 
and Kennicott Glaciers with the 
Donoho nunatak to the north-
west. The image was recorded 
on 19 June 2013. c A landscape 
view looking northwest of the 
study site dotted with glacier 
moss balls. d A close-up view 
of a glacier moss ball with the 
type of bracelet tag used in this 
study


737
Polar Biology (2020) 43:735–744	
1 3
glacier-associated fauna yet basic aspects of their ecology 
(e.g., longevity and movement) are unknown.
In this study, we took an integrated behavioral ecology 
and geophysical approach to the study of glacier moss balls 
to answer three questions: (1) How long do mature glacier 
moss balls persist on the landscape? (2) How quickly do they 
move and is their movement idiosyncratic or herd-like? (3) 
Are the movements of glacier moss balls linked to the abla-
tion of the glacier itself? Answers to these questions have 
implications for invertebrate fauna in glaciated ecosystems, 
nutrient cycling (both directly via moss ball decomposition 
and indirectly as supporting habitat for biotic communities), 
and feedback between glacier moss balls and local ablation 
rates. Beyond biotic interactions and ecosystem dynamics, 
glaciers are rapidly receding worldwide (Gardner et al. 2013; 
Larsen et al. 2015; Roe et al. 2017) and their diminished 
extents will almost certainly affect the persistence of glacier 
moss balls on local and global scales. Thus, it is important 
to better understand these unique micro-ecosystems before 
their habitats are lost.
Materials and methods
Study area
We conducted fieldwork over 4 years (July, 2009–July, 2012) 
on the lowest portion of the Root Glacier, a major tribu-
tary to the Kennicott Glacier, in the Wrangell Mountains in 
Wrangell-St. Elias National Park, Alaska, USA (Fig. 1a). 
Our study area (61.5076° N, 142.9172° W, ~ 700 m ele-
vation) spanned a ~ 15 × ~ 40 m (600 m2) area of glacier 
ice selected for its especially high concentration of moss 
balls. The site has a gentle slope, dipping 3° east-north-
east (N75°E) and is found between two medial moraines 
(Fig. 1b), each ~ 100 m away. Glacier surface speeds here 
are slow, typically 0.05 to 0.15 m d−1 during summer (Arm-
strong et al. 2016). Several, narrow (< 1 cm wide) and 
stagnant crevasses (manifesting as closed, linear, surface 
depressions) cross our study area, but did not significantly 
disrupt the otherwise consistent slope of the site. Moss ball 
concentrations decrease both up- and down-glacier and are 
absent from the coarse-grained (> 5 cm) rock that covers the 
adjacent medial moraines.
We estimated the proportion of fine-grained sediment 
cover on the ice within our study area by applying image 
processing techniques in the Python package scikit-image 
(Van der Walt et al. 2014) to two vertical photographs taken 
at a height of 1.5 m of representative ice surfaces. Pixel 
brightness contrasts between ice and sediment are most dis-
tinct within the blue band of the red–green–blue images, 
so we differentiated between sediment (dark pixels) and 
ice (bright pixels) by binarizing the blue band with Otsu’s 
thresholding method. We then performed a morphological 
opening to diminish the influence of light-colored sediment 
grains set within the otherwise dark sediment cover. Finally, 
we quantified the areal sediment cover as being approxi-
mately equal to the number of dark colored pixels relative to 
the total number of pixels in the binarized images.
Mark‑recapture
During the summer of 2009, we tagged 30 glacier moss balls 
with a bracelet identifier (Fig. 1d). We focused our efforts 
on “mature” moss balls that had reached at least ~ 10 cm in 
length on their longest axis and were ovoid with no obvi-
ous morphological irregularities. Each bracelet consisted 
of a unique combination of colored glass beads (~ 2–3 mm 
in diameter) threaded on aluminum wire. Bracelets were 
threaded through the moss ball center and pulled snug so as 
to not protrude beyond the moss ball’s exterior and interfere 
with movement. We returned eight times during the 2009 
season to re-survey moss balls and record their movements. 
We followed up our initial surveys with annual visits from 
2010 to 2012. During each survey, we visually inspected in 
and around the core study area multiple times in an effort 
to recapture moss balls. As part of this process, we visually 
inspected each moss ball in the area for any sign of a bracelet 
tag. After inspection, we replaced each moss ball in the exact 
location and orientation as it was found.
Moss ball movement and glacier ablation
We assessed moss ball movement over 54 days in 2009. As 
benchmarks for their movement, we installed three ~ 1.3 cm 
PVC tubes into the glacier. Each stake was drilled ~ 60 cm 
into the glacier. Stakes were installed in a triangle that 
spanned the study area and served two purposes. First, the 
stakes provided a reference against which the location of 
each moss ball was measured. Second, they allowed us to 
measure glacier ablation (i.e., the distance the ice surface 
moves vertically down) over the same study period so we 
could test for links between moss ball movement and the 
rate of glacier ablation.
To track glacier moss ball movement, during each site 
visit, we measured the distance between re-identified moss 
balls and each reference stake with a flexible, fiberglass 
measuring tape, pulled taught between the moss ball 
center and reference stake. Next, for each moss ball, we 
used trilateration to calculate three independent positions 
within our field site—one for each of the three pairs of 
reference stakes. We assigned the location of a surveyed 
moss ball to the mean of these three relative positions and 
constructed a location covariance matrix for each measure-
ment, to assign uncertainties to surveyed locations. After 
diagonalizing the covariance matrix, we identified the size 


738
	
Polar Biology (2020) 43:735–744
1 3
(eigenvalues) and orientation (eigenvectors) of an uncer-
tainty ellipse around each mean location. Major and minor 
axes of the uncertainty ellipse were defined as twice the 
square root of the eigenvalue lengths, such that each error 
ellipse represented a 2σ error window. Thus, assuming 
independent, normal errors, we are 95% confident that the 
true location of each moss ball fell within its error ellipse. 
The size of each error ellipse thus accounts for potential 
errors including failure to pull the tape completely tight in 
the face of katabatic winds or long measurement distances, 
or inconsistent identification of moss ball centers. While 
we used stakes for most of the measurement period, we 
were forced to switch to washers (~ 5 cm in diameter) laid 
flat on the ice surface later in the season, during a period 
when we were unable to drill the benchmark stakes suf-
ficiently deep to avoid melting out between visits. Before 
transitioning from benchmark stakes to washers, we tested 
the stability of the washers to ensure that they did not slide 
over the ice surface. Over a 5-day period in early August, 
we did not detect significant washer movement (outside of 
2σ uncertainty). Only the final measurements (11 August 
2009) and calculations were made relative to the wash-
ers. From moss ball position data, we calculated mean 
speeds and azimuths (travel directions) between position 
measurements for each moss ball. Moss ball velocities are 
reported relative to a reference frame that travels with the 
ice surface, into which the reference stakes were drilled 
and onto which washers were placed. Velocities are there-
fore unaffected by bulk glacier motion.
To quantify glacier ablation, the height of each stake 
above the local ice surface was re-measured during each visit 
and periodically re-drilled into the ice as necessary. Ablation 
reported in this study is the mean ice surface lowering rate 
calculated for each of the three stakes. As an assessment of 
ablation uncertainty, we also calculated the maximum devia-
tion of any single stake’s ablation rate from the overall mean.
We assessed the potential for East/West asymmetry in 
the direction of incoming solar radiation as a control on 
the direction of moss ball movement using a time series 
of solar radiation from a Remote Automatic Weather Sta-
tion (RAWS) located 15 km up-glacier from our study site 
and approximately 500 m higher in elevation. The RAWS 
site, at Gates Glacier (https​
://wrcc.dri.edu/cgi-bin/rawMA​
IN.pl?akAGA​
T), is located on a ridge above the Kennicott 
Glacier and records incoming solar radiation and other 
meteorological variables every hour. To evaluate the rela-
tive levels of solar energy arriving at our field site before and 
after solar noon, we integrated each afternoon’s solar radia-
tion and subtracted each morning’s integrated solar radia-
tion from it, thus arriving at a daily metric of the morning/
afternoon solar energy asymmetry. Values near 0 indicated 
equal amounts of energy arriving during mornings and after-
noons, positive values indicated more solar energy during 
the afternoons than mornings, and negative values revealed 
more incident energy during the mornings.
Persistence
We sought to understand how long mature glacier moss 
balls persist on the landscape, particularly across years. We 
hypothesized that mature moss ball longevity might vary due 
to differences in environmental conditions (e.g., precipita-
tion, freeze–thaw cycles) or random chance (e.g., a crevasse 
opening within a key area). Furthermore, we wanted to know 
not only how likely we are to detect glacier moss balls, given 
that they had persisted within the study area, but also if our 
detection probability varies among years. To do this, we 
fit capture-recapture models of annual survival to each gla-
cier moss ball included in the study. Because moss balls 
were individually marked but were not equipped with radio-
transmitters or other devices which would allow us to know 
their ultimate fates, we applied Cormack-Jolly-Seber (CJS; 
Lebreton et al. 1992) survival models. These CJS models 
develop a “capture history” of each moss ball to estimate 
apparent survival (i.e., the probability that an individual is 
in the population at time i and still in the population at time 
i + 1) and probability of detection if they persisted within 
our study area. Survival estimates from CJS models only 
represent apparent survival because emigration cannot be 
estimated from survival data with unknown fates (i.e., we 
did not know if a tagged moss ball had disaggregated, lost 
its identifying bracelet, or was no longer in the study area). 
Therefore, our estimates of apparent survival are likely to 
underestimate true survival (e.g., a moss ball might have 
lost its bracelet or moved out of the study site). In addi-
tion, CJS models also account for imperfect detection. In 
our case, if a moss ball persisted within our study area but 
was overlooked.
Using our individual moss ball annual detection data 
(1 = detected, 0 = not detected), we fit four competing CJS 
survival models, including the null model [no effect of year 
on apparent survival (ϕ) or detection probability (p); Model 
1)], an effect of year on ϕ (Model 2), an effect of year on p 
(Model 3), or an effect of year on both ϕ and p (Model 4). 
We then selected the model(s) best supported by our data 
using Akaike’s information criterion (AIC; Akaike 1998), 
adjusted for small sample size (AICc; Hurvich and Tsai 
1989). Our model selection approach was based on model 
likelihoods and models were penalized for extra parameters 
to favor parsimony.
Finally, we calculated the average life expectancy of a 
mature glacier moss ball. To do this, we used annual survival 
rates based on life-table analysis (Deevey 1947; Millar and 
Zammuto 1983), in which average life expectancy was cal-
culated as -1/ln(annual survival rate). Because this estima-
tion of life expectancy is quite sensitive to annual survival 


739
Polar Biology (2020) 43:735–744	
1 3
rate, we calculated it for both the lowest annual survival rate 
and the mean annual survival rate. Thus, the true average life 
expectancy might be substantially greater than the conserva-
tive values estimated here. This framework for estimating 
average life expectancy does not account for variable mortal-
ity rates when glacier moss balls are first forming or nearing 
the end of their lifespans.
Results
Study area
Our study area was located on a “bare ice” glacier surface, 
between two medial moraines covered by coarse-grained, 
angular, rock debris. However, two types of sediment distin-
guish the study area surface from what would be considered 
clean, pure, water ice. First, glacier moss balls were found 
amidst gravel and small boulders (< 30 cm diameter), spaced 
every ~ 1 m. Second, the ice surface has an unusually per-
vasive, fine-grained sediment cover, ~ 1–3 mm thick, which 
partially blankets the otherwise bare ice. Image processing 
indicated that this fine sediment covers approximately 70% 
of the study area surface. This low albedo sediment cover 
is visible in all inspected satellite imagery of the site and 
first appears at lower concentrations emerging from cleaner 
ice ~ 1 km northwest of the study site (Fig. 1b). Down-gla-
cier of the study site, the low albedo region extends ~ 1.7 km 
as a ~ 300-m-wide, rounded finger that spans adjacent medial 
moraines, in a manner consistent with wind-deposited dust, 
draping over underlying geomorphic features. Therefore, we 
interpreted the southeast (135°) trend direction of this low 
albedo finger to be the prevailing, down-glacier, katabatic 
wind direction. During the 26 days of glacier ablation meas-
urements, the ice surface lowered by 1.91 m due to melt 
and sublimation. Ablation rates ranged from 5.8 to 9.6 cm 
per day (cm ­
d−1) between measurement times and averaged 
7.3 cm ­
d−1.
Movement
Glacier moss ball movements varied systematically over the 
study period, with increases and decreases that coincided 
with changes in direction (Figs. 2 and 3). Median moss 
ball speed was 2.5 cm ­
d−1, but their rates varied widely 
throughout the season. The median speed started at 1.8 cm 
­
d−1 in late June, increased to 4.0 cm ­
d−1 at the start of July, 
then slowed to 2.0 cm ­
d−1 during late July/early August. 
The maximum observed speed for any glacier moss ball 
was 7.8 cm ­
d−1 during the 5-day period from July 9 to 14 
(excluding two outlier speeds that were more than 8 inter-
quartile ranges greater than the median, 14.2 and 21.0 cm 
­
d−1, and which were based upon particularly uncertain moss 
ball positions). The interquartile range of moss ball speeds 
was approximately 50% of the median speed; thus, these 
observed increases and decreases in speed reflect changes 
in the entire population of moss balls.
The direction of glacier moss ball movements was not 
random. Rather, glacier moss balls underwent clear changes 
in their direction of motion (i.e., azimuth) throughout the 
summer season (Fig. 3a). While individual moss balls moved 
in many directions, when viewed in aggregate, azimuths 
Fig. 2   a Locations of surveyed glacier moss balls throughout the sur-
vey period. Most likely locations of each moss ball are shown with 
small filled circles relative to an arbitrary, local grid system. Ellipses 
surrounding each moss ball indicate 2σ uncertainty (i.e., 95% con-
fidence) of their location. Thin black lines connect consecutive sur-
veyed locations for individual moss balls. The red rectangle identi-
fies the location of the large-scale view in panel (b). b A zoomed in 
view of movement patterns for six glacier moss balls (red square in 
a), showing their similar azimuths


740
	
Polar Biology (2020) 43:735–744
1 3
of the population clearly clustered over time. Early in the 
season, median moss ball motion was south-southeast 
(165°) but over the ensuing weeks azimuths progressively 
increased, such that at the end of the measurement period the 
median azimuth was west-southwest (240°; Fig. 3a).
Considering speeds and azimuths together, we see the 
moss ball population initially moving at 2 cm ­
d−1 to the 
south for 9 days, then the group nearly doubles its speed 
to 4 cm ­
d−1 while deviating slightly to the right (towards 
the west). After a week at these maximum speeds, speeds 
drop by 25% to 3 cm ­
d−1 while also deviating 45° fur-
ther towards the west for 5 days. During the next 5-day 
measurement period, speeds drop further, back to 2 cm 
­
d−1 while the azimuths turn another 10°–15° further 
west. Over the final 28-day measurement period, the azi-
muths remain stable, while speeds continued to fall. This 
decrease in speed is apparent in the decline of the upper 
quartile of speeds, despite our not making sufficient new 
measurements to influence the median speed.
Our fine-scale movement and ablation data allowed us 
to compare glacier moss ball speeds and azimuths with 
potential drivers of their motion. We find that more rapid 
moss ball speeds are associated with more rapid ablation; 
an ordinary least squares model between ablation rate and 
speed indicates that, on average, for every 1 cm of surface 
ablation, the glacier moss balls move horizontally 0.34 cm 
(Fig. 3b). However, the relationship between ablation rate 
and speed is relatively weak (R2 = 0.40). It should also 
be noted that during the course of our study, participants 
in a program hosted by the Wrangell Mountains Center, 
McCarthy, Alaska, visually confirmed the posited primary 
movement method described by Porter et al. (2008), when 
a glacier moss ball was observed rolling off its elevated 
pedestal and inverting in the process.
The directions of moss ball motion, however, are more 
puzzling. The southern and western directions of moss ball 
movement are clearly distinct from both the prevailing, 
katabatic wind direction as inferred from the dust plume 
(towards the southeast) or the downhill direction of the 
gently sloping ice surface (towards the east-northeast; 
Fig. 3a). The herd-like change in travel direction, from an 
initially southerly direction to a southwesterly direction 
late during our measurement period, could potentially be 
explained by a shift in the dominant direction of incom-
ing solar radiation. If, during the latter portion of July 
and August, 2009, the afternoons were sunnier than the 
mornings, then we would expect faster ice surface low-
ering on the southwest side of moss balls than on their 
northeast sides, and the moss balls would be more likely 
to roll off their ice pedestals towards the southwest, as 
observed. However, our analysis of solar radiation meas-
urements revealed no such asymmetry (Fig. S1). While 
some days experienced more solar radiation before or after 
noon, there was no pattern consistent with morning clouds 
and afternoon sun. We do not expect preferential melting 
on the southwest sides of moss balls during the latter por-
tion of July and early portion of August, 2009. Identical 
analysis using data from a boreal forest weather station 
site 20 km SE of our study site (RAWS site: May Creek, 
AK) revealed a very similar pattern of solar radiation to 
the Gates Glacier site, and the same lack of asymmetry in 
daily solar radiation timing. On average, during our 2009 
study period, the majority of solar radiation arrived at our 
site from the south (Fig. 3a). Thus, with the available data, 
we cannot explain the direction of moss ball motion.
Fig. 3   a A comparison of glacier moss ball movements versus the 
dominant solar radiation (dashed green line), wind (dashed red line), 
and downslope (dashed blue line) directions. Direction of each moss 
ball’s motion between measurement times is shown with thin gray 
lines, while the bold black line indicates the median direction of all 
glacier moss ball movements. b Glacier moss ball movement versus 
ablation rate. Median ablation rate is indicated with a bold red line, 
while the mean ± the maximum absolute deviation from the mean are 
shown with thin red lines. The median speed of glacier moss balls 
is shown with the bold blue line, while the 25th and 75th percentile 
speeds are shown with thin blue lines. Numbers in circles along the 
bottom of the plot represent the number of moss balls surveyed at 
each time point (single measurements not indicated)


741
Polar Biology (2020) 43:735–744	
1 3
Persistence
We initially tagged 30 glacier moss balls in 2009. We sub-
sequently recaptured 18 moss balls each in 2010, 2011, 
and 2012 (although this was not the same 18 moss balls 
each year). Recapture rates for individual moss balls were 
highly variable with some never seen again after the first 
year (n = 8) and others detected every year (n = 13). The 
best-fit survival model included differing apparent survival 
(ϕ) among years, but with constant detection probability (p; 
Model 2; Table 1). This model received 58% of AICc weight, 
compared to 26% for the null model (Model 1), and less than 
10% for the other models (Models 3 & 4; Table 1). The aver-
age annual rate of apparent survival, ϕ, based on the null 
model, was 0.86 [95% confidence interval (CI) = 0.75–0.93], 
and the average detection rate was 0.84 (95% CI 0.70–0.92). 
When parameterized by year, the annual apparent survival 
rate ranged from 0.74 in 2009–2010 to 1.0 in 2011–2012 
with a particularly large 95% CI for 2010–2011 (Table 2; 
Fig. 4).
Our detection rate estimates may underestimate actual 
glacier moss ball survival for several reasons. First, at least 
four glacier moss balls lost their marking bracelet after 
the first year because we found the marking bracelet on 
the ice, separate from a moss ball. Second, another moss 
ball partially obscured its bracelet by growing to cover the 
beads, but we were able to detect a single bead and then 
delicately “excavate” the bracelet. Since we did not destruc-
tively search glacier moss balls that did not have an obvious 
bracelet, it is possible that additional instances of lost mark-
ing bracelets or growth to cover beads may have impacted 
our detection. Third, between 2009 and 2010, two tagged 
moss balls fell inside of a shallow crevasse within the study 
area. The two crevasse-bound glacier moss balls persisted, 
and likely continued to photosynthesize and grow to some 
capacity for the remainder of the study. We continued to 
check crevasses in the study area carefully, but some moss 
balls could have fallen into deeper crevasses, or into shallow 
crevasses in a way that obscured their markings, and there-
fore persisted without detection.
Our estimate of average life expectancy for a mature moss 
ball varied depending on whether the lowest overall or mean 
annual survival rate were used. If using the lowest annual 
survival rate (0.74), average life expectancy was 3.3 years 
(95% CI 1.67–7.18). However, we expect this life expec-
tancy to be biased low to some extent, because we were 
only able to estimate apparent survival (e.g., some insecure 
tags fell off moss balls that likely still persisted). If using the 
mean annual apparent survival rate across the entire study 
(0.86), average life expectancy rose to 6.63 years (95% CI 
3.48–13.78). This estimate may be biased high because we 
did not tag any new moss balls in years 2 and 3 (2010 and 
2011), but simply recaptured existing (and therefore high 
survival probability) glacier moss balls. When thinking of 
lifespan, it is relevant to note that we also observed a glacier 
moss ball split roughly in half during the course of the study 
perpendicular to its major axis. The moss ball had become 
elongated and essentially pulled apart. This mechanism may 
Table 1   Apparent survival models for glacier moss balls tested in this 
study with their corresponding Akaike’s Information Criterion Scores 
that have been adjusted for small sample sizes (AICc)
Relative AICc scores (ΔAICc) model weight are also given. Lower 
ΔAICc and higher model weight indicate greater support for a given 
model. Model components: probability of detection (p), apparent sur-
vival (ϕ)
Model
Description
AICc
ΔAICc
Weight
1
Null; no year effect on p or ϕ
107.09
1.56
0.26
2
Year effect on ϕ
105.53
0
0.58
3
Year effect on p
108.92
3.39
0.10
4
Year effect on both p and ϕ
110.25
4.72
0.05
Table 2   Estimates of the apparent survival (ϕ) and detection prob-
ability (p) of glacier moss balls for the two best-fit models
Parentheses after estimates indicate 95% confidence intervals
Model
Parameter
Estimate
1
p
0.84 (0.70–0.92)
ϕ
0.86 (0.75–0.93)
2
p
0.82 (0.69–0.91)
ϕ (2009–2010)
0.74 (0.55–0.87)
ϕ (2010–2011)
0.98 (0.27–0.99)
ϕ (2011–2012)
1.0 (0.99–1)
Fig. 4   Estimates of apparent moss ball survival (ϕ; dark circles) with 
95% confidence intervals (thin dark lines) from model 2, the best-fit 
model, which included a year effect on ϕ. Year-long, bracketed time 
intervals labeled on the x-axis are identified by their starting year. For 
instance, apparent survival for 2009–2010 is shown as 2009


742
	
Polar Biology (2020) 43:735–744
1 3
contribute to keeping glacier moss balls ovular and represent 
a mode of moss ball genesis.
Discussion
Glacier moss balls are intriguing components of glacier 
ecosystems that integrate physical (e.g., debris cover) and 
ecological (e.g., invertebrate colonization) factors into a 
unique habitat type. Previous research has revealed a great 
deal about glacier moss ball biology (e.g., their invertebrate 
colonizers, Coulson and Midgley 2012) yet their move-
ment and longevity has remained unexplored. It has been 
speculated that glacier moss ball movement patterns likely 
follow the general downward slope of the glacier (Porter 
et al. 2008) and that they represent an ephemeral habitat type 
on glaciers, a factor that may limit colonization by specific 
invertebrate taxa (e.g., a lack of spiders; Coulson and Midg-
ley 2012). Our results did not align with these predictions of 
movement and persistence.
Movement
Even on the gently-sloped Root Glacier, glacier moss balls 
move relatively quickly (~ 2.5 cm ­
d−1) in similar directions 
and at similar speeds. Herd-like moss ball movements did 
not, however, follow the downward slope of the glacier, the 
dominant wind direction, nor the dominant direction of 
incoming solar radiation (Figs. 3, S1). Thus, we are left with 
a puzzling question: why do the azimuths of glacier moss 
balls appear to shift simultaneously throughout the summer 
season, resulting in the moss ball “herd” synchronously 
changing directions (Fig. 3a)? Moss balls began the season 
moving generally south and slowly transitioned towards the 
west. Given their movement independence from the domi-
nant wind direction and downhill direction of the glacier, we 
speculated that shifts in patterns of solar radiation drive this 
pattern. Perhaps the weather transitioned from clear mid-day 
skies during late June and early July (associated with the 
most rapid motion and southerly azimuths), to a different 
weather pattern in late July of morning clouds and afternoon 
sun. Such a change could drive enhanced ablation on the 
west sides of moss balls, and therefore preferential westward 
movement. However, we found no evidence for diurnal solar 
radiation asymmetry during the study period (Fig. S1).
The relative contributions of downslope gravity ver-
sus another factor (e.g., solar radiation) almost certainly 
depend on glacier steepness. Porter et al. (2008) posited a 
considerable effect of gravity on glacier moss ball move-
ment for a relatively steep (9.6°) Icelandic glacier which 
contrasts with our much flatter Root Glacier study area 
(~ 3°). Still, regardless of steepness, differential melt 
patterns create pedestals that moss balls rest upon and, 
eventually, enough ice melts below the moss ball causing it 
to fall and flip (Porter et al. 2008). Assuming glacier moss 
balls are, on average, ~ 10 cm in their intermediate axis, 
and their only means of movement is melt-induced flipping 
driven by pedestal emergence at the rate of 6–9 cm ­
d−1, 
their rates of movement would imply each glacier moss 
ball flips every ~ 2–4 days. However, we cannot rule out 
alternative modes of glacier moss ball movement. Many 
glacier moss balls have one side that is flattened and com-
monly faces down, while a more rounded, vegetated side 
faces skyward (Shacklette 1966). Given this orientation, 
an alternative scenario is that glacier moss balls also move 
by basal sliding over the wet glacier surface below.
Persistence
Glacier moss balls persist across multiple years as stable 
ecological units. On average, 86% of the mature glacier moss 
balls included in this study survived annually which trans-
lates to a lifespan of more than 6 years. Thus, with high rates 
of survival across multiple years, and relatively high detec-
tion rates, we consider glacier moss balls to be long-lived, 
rather than ephemeral, glacier features. Unlike living indi-
vidual organisms which can senesce as they age (e.g., Loison 
et al. 1999), moss ball survival rates are unlikely to decline 
with time in the traditional sense, nor should they exhibit 
density dependent survival (e.g., Festa‐Bianchet et al. 2003). 
However, unlike traditional systems, factors that control 
disaggregation are likely the key process underlying moss 
ball longevity. The temporal stability of moss balls means 
they could exist for long enough to develop complex biotic 
communities (e.g., Coulson and Midgley 2012). However, 
the degree to which geographic location (e.g., distance to a 
glacier margin), and not persistence, influences invertebrate 
colonization remains to be tested.
The limited scope of our mark-recapture data collection 
precludes us from drawing conclusions about the inter-
annual drivers of moss ball apparent survival. However, 
we can highlight factors that may influence it. First, it is 
possible that glacier moss balls moved more frequently out 
of the study area in one year versus others, perhaps due to 
exceptionally clear skies (and thus higher rates of glacier 
ablation). Second, we observed a number of fragmented 
moss balls. Fragmentation may be a normal part of moss 
ball growth trajectories, too frequent or intense freeze thaw 
cycles, or an as yet unknown factor. If glacier moss balls did 
survive within our study area, they had an 84% probability 
of being detected in a given year. This indicates that our 
bracelet and colored beads marking scheme was effective. 
However, for future studies, more robust marks should be 
considered (e.g., passive integrated transponder, PIT; Cas-
tro-Santos et al. 1996).


743
Polar Biology (2020) 43:735–744	
1 3
Genesis, growth, and disaggregation
Our results allow us to add new speculation about patterns of 
glacier moss ball growth as well as additional evidence for 
previous hypotheses regarding their genesis and disaggrega-
tion (e.g., Heusser 1972; Perez 1991). In terms of growth, 
our documentation of glacier moss balls rolling over a fine-
grained, wet, sedimentary substrate is consistent with growth 
through adherence of sediment to an existing moss ball. We 
observed “dirty” moss on some glacier moss balls in our 
study area. As the moss itself grows, this adhered sediment 
may become integrated within the fibrous material, increas-
ing the size of the glacier moss ball. Field observation of 
moss growth over and around our identification bracelets 
indicates that several millimeters of growth can occur within 
years. However, the observation that most bracelets were not 
engulfed by sediment accumulation and moss growth dur-
ing our 4-year study period suggests either generally slow 
growth or an upper limit on moss ball size.
Understanding year-to-year moss ball growth, however, 
does not explain moss ball genesis, nor disaggregation. It 
is well-established that fibrous moss provides the skeletal 
structure that allows moss balls to be cohesive, ovoid struc-
tures. A source of moss spores is therefore essential to moss 
ball genesis (in our study, putatively, the Donoho nunatak). 
The question, then, is how glacier moss balls begin to grow 
in the first place, and on what substrate. Eythórsson (1951) 
suggested that a “stone kernel” at their centers is key. How-
ever, later investigations (e.g., Shacklette 1966; Coulson and 
Midgley 2012) found mixed results that largely reflected a 
consensus that there is no general rule about rock cores at the 
center of glacier moss balls. Our exploratory testing of moss 
balls also indicated that some, but not all, moss balls con-
tained a ~ 1-cm gravel “kernel” at their centers. Potentially, 
these kernels, with adhered fine-grained sediment, provide 
a growth substrate for initially wind-deposited moss spores. 
In our study area, the co-occurrence of moss balls within 
an unusually extensive, fine-grained “plume” of sediment 
cover (Fig. 1b) aligns with a similar observation by Heusser 
(1972) for the Gilkey Glacier in southeastern Alaska, USA. 
The origin of this fine-grained sediment is unknown, but in 
satellite imagery (Fig. 1b), it appears to originate from the 
ice itself and may be a volcanic ash layer being carried down 
from the high, volcanic, Wrangell Mountain peaks.
We identified few glacier moss balls greater than ~ 15 cm 
on their long axis. Generally, moss balls appear to rarely 
exceed ~ 10 cm except for rare cases in Alaska where they 
have been reported up to 18 cm (Benninghoff 1955; Heusser 
1972). Why glacier moss balls in Alaska appear to grow 
larger than elsewhere in the world remains an open question 
but, regardless of location, there appears to be some size 
limiting process within the moss ball lifecycle. Shacklette 
(1966) suggested that the tensile strength of moss stems may 
be key. Exceeding this tensile limit may occur when the moss 
ball major axis grows too great relative to the intermediate 
axis. For instance, when a moss ball becomes too elongated, 
subtle variations in ice surface topography may lead the two 
ends of a moss ball to move in different directions and tear 
in the middle. During our study, we observed a splitting of 
a long, linear moss ball. While this process applies an upper 
limit to moss ball size it also circles back to inform ques-
tions regarding the presence of a rock kernel. If the upper 
size limit is reached and a moss ball splits, only one of the 
two remaining moss balls involved in this “cloning” process 
will retain the gravel kernel. This may explain why a number 
of moss balls do not appear to have any coarse-grained rock 
at their cores. However, it is worth noting that in the case 
of Coulson and Midgley (2012), none of the moss balls in 
the study had a rock core. Therefore, glacier moss balls can 
almost certainly form without a “seed” rock.
Conclusion
In this study, we extended previous research on glacier 
moss balls to quantify their movement and persistence on 
an Alaskan glacier. We showed that glacier moss balls move 
relatively quickly, at a rate of centimeters per day, in herd-
like fashion. However, we could not explain the direction of 
moss ball movement by considering the physical surface of 
the glacier (i.e., the downslope direction), the intensity of 
glacier ice ablation, and patterns of solar radiation. Thus, 
it appears a still unknown external force influences glacier 
moss ball movement on the Root Glacier. We also showed 
that mature moss balls are long-lived, with an average life 
expectancy of more than 6 years. The potential for glacier 
moss balls to act as relatively stable, long-term ecological 
units highlight their potential to act as key biotic habitat. 
Coulson and Midgley (2012) previously described inver-
tebrate colonization of glacier moss balls and suggested 
that a lack of Enchytraeidae and Aranea may be the result 
of the ephemerality of moss balls in glacier habitats. Our 
results contrast this idea. Instead, we postulate that selec-
tive invertebrate colonization of glacier moss balls depends 
instead on their locations and frequent movements or, as 
Coulson and Midgley (2012) noted, the variable dispersal 
capacities of colonizers. Given the importance of microbial 
diversity to carbon cycling (Anesio et al. 2009), ecosystem 
function (Anesio et al. 2017; Hotaling et al. 2017a,b), and 
even albedo (Ganey et al. 2017), future efforts to under-
stand the microbial ecology of glacier moss balls will further 
illuminate their ecological role in glacier ecosystems. Like 
cryoconite, the granular, darkly pigmented dust on glacier 
surfaces that drive hotspots of microbial activity (Cook et al. 
2016), glacier moss balls may have similar value at the eco-
system scale.


744
	
Polar Biology (2020) 43:735–744
1 3
Acknowledgements  S.H. was supported by NSF award #OPP-
1906015. We thank the Wrangell Mountains Center for logistical sup-
port and assisting with field measurements, and Dr. Billy Armstrong 
for providing the orthoimage of the study area.
Compliance with ethical standards 
Conflict of interest  The authors declare no conflicts of interest.
References
Akaike H (1998) Information theory and an extension of the maxi-
mum likelihood principle. Selected papers of Hirotugu Akaike. 
Springer, New York, pp 199–213
Anesio AM, Hodson AJ, Fritz A, Psenner R, Sattler B (2009) High 
microbial activity on glaciers: importance to the global carbon 
cycle. Glob Change Biol 15:955–960
Anesio AM, Laybourn-Parry J (2012) Glaciers and ice sheets as a 
biome. Trends Ecol Evol 27:219–225
Anesio AM, Lutz S, Chrismas NA, Benning LG (2017) The microbi-
ome of glaciers and ice sheets. NPJ Biofilms Microbiomes 3:1–11
Armstrong WH, Anderson RS, Allen J, Rajaram H (2016) Modeling 
the WorldView-derived seasonal velocity evolution of Kennicott 
Glacier, Alaska. J Glaciol 234:763–777
Belkina OA, Vilnet AA (2015) Some aspects of the moss population 
development on the Svalbard glaciers. Czech Polar Rep 5:160–175
Benninghoff WS (1955) Jökla-mýs. J Glaciol 2:514–515
Castro-Santos T, Haro A, Walk S (1996) A passive integrated tran-
sponder (PIT) tag system for monitoring fishways. Fish Res 
28:253–261
Cook J, Edwards A, Takeuchi N, Irvine-Fynn T (2016) Cryoconite: 
the dark biological secret of the cryosphere. Prog Phys Geog 
40:66–111
Coulson S, Midgley N (2012) The role of glacier mice in the inver-
tebrate colonisation of glacial surfaces: the moss balls of the 
Falljökull, Iceland. Polar Biol 35:1651–1658
Deevey ES Jr (1947) Life tables for natural populations of animals. Q 
Rev Biol 22:283–314
Dial RJ, Becker M, Hope AG, Dial CR, Thomas J, Slobodenko KA, 
Golden TS, Shain DH (2016) The role of temperature in the 
distribution of the glacier ice worm, Mesenchytraeus solifugus 
(Annelida: Oligochaeta: Enchytraeidae). Arct Antarct Alp Res 
48:199–211
Eythórsson J (1951) Correspondence Jökla-mys. J Glaciol 1:503
Festa-Bianchet M, Gaillard JM, Côté SD (2003) Variable age structure 
and apparent density dependence in survival of adult ungulates. J 
Anim Ecol 72:640–649
Ganey GQ, Loso MG, Burgess AB, Dial RJ (2017) The role of 
microbes in snowmelt and radiative forcing on an Alaskan ice-
field. Nat Geosci 10:754–759
Gardner AS, Moholdt G, Cogley JG, Wouters B, Arendt AA, Wahr J, 
Berthier E, Hock R, Pfeffer WT, Kaser G (2013) A reconciled 
estimate of glacier contributions to sea level rise: 2003 to 2009. 
Science 340:852–857
Heusser CJ (1972) Polsters of the moss Drepanocladus berggrenii on 
Gilkey Glacier, Alaska. Bul Torrey Bot Club 99:34–36
Hotaling S, Hood E, Hamilton TL (2017a) Microbial ecology of 
mountain glacier ecosystems: biodiversity, ecological connec-
tions and implications of a warming climate. Environ Microbiol 
19:2935–2948
Hotaling S, Finn DS, Joseph Giersch J, Weisrock DW, Jacobsen D 
(2017b) Climate change and alpine stream biology: progress, chal-
lenges, and opportunities for the future. Biol Rev 92:2024–2045
Hotaling S, Shain DH, Lang SA, Bagley RK, Lusha M, Weisrock DW, 
Kelley JL (2019) Long-distance dispersal, ice sheet dynamics, and 
mountaintop isolation underlie the genetic structure of glacier ice 
worms. Proc R Soc B 286:20190983
Hotaling S, Wimberger PH, Kelley JL, Watts HE (2020) Macroinverte-
brates on glaciers: a key resource for terrestrial food webs? Ecol-
ogy 101:e02947
Hurvich CM, Tsai C-L (1989) Regression and time series model selec-
tion in small samples. Biometrika 76:297–307
Larsen C, Burgess E, Arendt A, O’neel S, Johnson A, Kienholz C, 
(2015) Surface melt dominates Alaska glacier mass balance. Geo-
phys Res Lett 42:5902–5908
Lebreton J-D, Burnham KP, Clobert J, Anderson DR (1992) Modeling 
survival and testing biological hypotheses using marked animals: 
a unified approach with case studies. Ecol Monogr 62:67–118
Loison A, Festa-Bianchet M, Gaillard J-M, Jorgenson JT, Jullien J-M 
(1999) Age-specific survival in five populations of ungulates: evi-
dence of senescence. Ecology 80:2539–2554
Mann D, Edwards J, Gara R (1980) Diel activity patterns in snowfield 
foraging invertebrates on Mount Rainier, Washington. Arct Ant-
arct Alp Res 12:359–368
Millar JS, Zammuto RM (1983) Life histories of mammals: an analysis 
of life tables. Ecology 64:631–635
Perez FL (1991) Ecology and morphology of globular mosses of Grim-
mia longirostris in the Paramo de Piedras Blancas, Venezuelan 
Andes. Arct Antarct Alp Res 23:133–148
Porter P, Evans A, Hodson A, Lowe A, Crabtree M (2008) Sediment–
moss interactions on a temperate glacier: Falljökull, Iceland. Ann 
Glaci 48:25–31
Roe GH, Baker MB, Herla F (2017) Centennial glacier retreat as cate-
gorical evidence of regional climate change. Nat Geosci 10:95–99
Rosvold J (2016) Perennial ice and snow-covered land as important 
ecosystems for birds and mammals. J Biogeogr 43:3–12
Shacklette HT (1966) Unattached moss polsters on Amchitka Island, 
Alaska. Bryologist 69:346–352
Stibal M, Bradley JA, Edwards A, Hotaling S, Zawierucha K, Rosvold 
J, Lutz S, Cameron KA, Mikucki JA, Kohler TJ, Šabacká M, Ane-
sio AM (2020) Glacial ecosystems are essential to understanding 
biodiversity responses to glacier retreat. Nat Ecol Evol. https​
://
doi.org/10.1038/s4155​
9-020-1163-0
Uetake J, Tanaka S, Hara K, Tanabe Y, Samyn D, Motoyama H, Imura 
S, Kohshima S (2014) Novel biogenic aggregation of moss gem-
mae on a disappearing African glacier. PLoS ONE 9:e112510
Van der Walt S, Schönberger JL, Nunez-Iglesias J, Boulogne F, Warner 
JD, Yager N, Gouillart E, Yu T (2014) Scikit-image: image pro-
cessing in Python. PeerJ 2:e453
Publisher’s Note  Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to 
jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.