3 
ANNEX 
COMPET.1 
 
EN 
 
(1a) 
Given the complexity and the transnational character of net-zero technologies, 
uncoordinated national measures to ensure access to those technologies would have a high 
potential of distorting competition and fragmenting the Single market. Uncoordinated 
actions of Member States may result in imposing diverging regulation for market 
operators, providing different levels of access to supply of net-zero technologies across 
Member States, including by providing different levels of support to net-zero technology 
manufacturing projects, providing diverging rules and uncoordinated forms of 
procurement, diverging processes and durations in relation to permit-granting procedures, 
that would lead to obstacles to cross-border trade between Member States thus hindering 
the proper functioning of the internal market. Therefore, to safeguard the functioning of the 
Single Market it is necessary to create a common Union legal framework to collectively 
address this central challenge by increasing the Union’s resilience, and security of supply 
in the field of net-zero technologies. 


 
 
16521/23  
 
VF/ae 
4 
ANNEX 
COMPET.1 
 
EN 
 
(1b) 
At the same time, the Union has committed to the accelerated decarbonisation of its 
economy and ambitious deployment of renewable energy sources to achieve climate 
neutrality or net zero emissions (emissions after deduction of removals) by 2050. That 
objective is at the heart of the European Green Deal, the updated EU Industrial Strategy, 
and in line with the Union’s commitment to global climate action under the Paris 
Agreement3. To reach the climate neutrality goal, Regulation (EU) 2021/1119 of the 
European Parliament and of the Council4 sets a binding Union climate target to reduce net 
greenhouse gas emissions by at least 55% by 2030 compared to 1990. The proposed “Fit 
for 55”5 package aims to deliver on the Union’s 2030 climate target and revises and 
updates Union legislation in this respect. 
(1c) 
In addition, the Communication on the Green Deal Industrial Plan for the Net-Zero Age6 
sets out a comprehensive approach to support a clean energy technology scale up based on 
four pillars. The first pillar aims at creating a regulatory environment that simplifies and 
streamlines permitting for new net-zero technology manufacturing and assembly sites as 
well as facilitating the scaling up of the net-zero industry of the Union. The second pillar 
of the plan is to boost investment in and financing of net-zero technology production. The 
third pillar relates to developing the skills needed to make the transition happen and 
increase the number of skilled workers in the clean energy technology sector. The fourth 
pillar focuses on trade and the diversification of the supply chain of critical raw materials. 
That includes creating a critical raw materials club, working with like-minded partners to 
collectively strengthen supply chains and diversifying away from single suppliers for 
critical input. 
                                                 
3 
Council Decision (EU) 2016/1841 of 5 October 2016 on the conclusion, on behalf of the 
European Union, of the Paris Agreement adopted under the United Nations Framework 
Convention on Climate Change OJ L 282, 19.10.2016, p. 4. 
4 
Regulation (EU) 2021/1119 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 30 June 2021 
establishing the framework for achieving climate neutrality and amending Regulations (EC) 
No 401/2009 and (EU) 2018/1999 (‘European Climate Law’) (OJ L 243, 9.7.2021, p. 1). 
5 
Communication from the Commission to the European Parliament, the Council, the European 
Economic and Social Committee and the Committee of the Regions. 'Fit for 55': delivering 
the EU's 2030 Climate Target on the way to climate neutrality. COM(2021) 550, 14.7.2021. 
6 
Communication from the Commission to the European Parliament, the European Council, the 
Council, the European Economic and Social Committee and the Committee of the Regions: A 
Green Deal Industrial Plan for the Net-Zero Age, COM/2023/62 final, 01.02.2023. 


 
 
16521/23  
 
VF/ae 
5 
ANNEX 
COMPET.1 
 
EN 
 
(2) 
The Single Market provides the appropriate environment for enabling cross-border access 
at the necessary scale and pace to the technologies required to achieve the Union’s climate 
and energy ambition. The road to net-zero translates into strong opportunities for the 
expansion of the Union’s net-zero industry, making use of the strength of the Single 
Market, by promoting investment in technologies, allowing for the decarbonisation of our 
economic sectors, from energy supply to transport, buildings, and industry. A strong net-
zero industry within the European Union can help significantly in reaching the Union’s 
climate and energy targets effectively, as well as in supporting other Green Deal 
objectives, while safeguarding and creating quality jobs and growth. 
(7) 
To meet the 2030 climate and energy targets, energy efficiency needs to be prioritised. 
Saving energy is the cheapest, safest and cleanest way to meet those targets. ‘Energy 
efficiency first’ is an overall principle of EU energy policy and is important in both its 
practical applications in policy and investment decisions. Therefore, it is essential to 
expand the Union’s manufacturing capacity for energy efficient technologies, such as heat 
pumps, district heating and cooling, and smart grid technologies that help the EU reduce 
and control its energy consumption. 


 
 
16521/23  
 
VF/ae 
6 
ANNEX 
COMPET.1 
 
EN 
 
(8) 
The Union’s decarbonisation objectives, security of energy supply, digitalisation of the 
energy system and electrification of demand, for example in mobility and the need for 
additional and faster recharging points, require an enormous expansion of electricity grids 
in the European Union, both at transmission level and at distribution level. At transmission 
level, high-voltage direct current (HVDC) systems are needed, among other things, to 
connect offshore renewable energies; while at distribution level, connecting electricity 
providers and managing demand-side flexibility builds on investments in innovative grid 
technologies, such as electric vehicles smart charging (EVSC), energy efficiency building 
and industry automation and smart controls, advanced meter infrastructure (AMI) and 
home energy management systems (HEMS). The electricity grid needs to interact with 
many actors or devices based on a detailed level of observability, and hence availability of 
data, to enable flexibility, smart charging and smart buildings with smart electricity grids 
enabling demand side response from consumers and the uptake of renewables. Connecting 
the net-zero technologies to the network of the European Union requires the substantial 
expansion of manufacturing capabilities for electricity grids in areas such as offshore and 
onshore cables, substations and transformers. 
(9) 
Additional policy effort is therefore necessary to improve market conditions for those 
technologies that are commercially available as well as the security of supply for net-zero 
technologies and their supply chains, reduce market fragmentation, and safeguard or 
strengthen the overall resilience and competitiveness of the Union’s energy system, while 
having a good potential for rapid scale up to support the Union’s 2030 climate target. It 
includes access to a safe and sustainable source of best in class fuels, as described in recital 
8 of Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) 2022/1214. 


 
 
16521/23  
 
VF/ae 
7 
ANNEX 
COMPET.1 
 
EN 
 
(10) 
To achieve the 2030 objectives a particular focus is needed on some of the net-zero 
technologies, that are considered strategic, also in view of their significant contribution 
towards the path to net zero by 2050. These strategic net-zero technologies play a key role 
in the Union’s open strategic autonomy, ensuring that citizens have access to clean, 
affordable, secure energy. Given their role, these technologies should benefit from 
streamlined and efficient permitting procedures, obtain the status of the highest national 
significance possible under national law and benefit from additional support to crowd-in 
investments while still meeting EU and international obligations under nature Directives 
and the Aarhus convention. The strategic net-zero technologies should be commercially 
available net-zero technologies, have a good potential for rapid scale up and have reached 
technology readiness level of at least 8. Such technologies should strengthen the security of 
supply chains within the Union while contributing to decarbonisation objectives of the 
Union and improving the functioning of the Single Market. 
(10a) 
The list of strategic net-zero technologies also includes technologies that not all Member 
States accept as a source of clean and secure energy. This is in line with their right to 
determine their choice between different energy sources and the general structure of their 
energy supply as well as their industrial policy. To safeguard these rights, the list of 
strategic technologies is without prejudice to the funding allocation under the current 
Multiannual Financial Framework 2021-27 in particular in terms of allocation eligibility 
and award criteria related to energy technologies in Union funds, including those financed 
through ETS allowances or support by the EIB. A Member State should also not be obliged 
to recognise as strategic such projects supporting a value chain for a technology the 
relevant Member State does not accept as part of their energy mix. 
(11) 
In order to ensure that the Union’s future energy system is resilient this scaling-up should 
be carried out across the whole supply chain of the technologies in question, in full 
coherence and complementarity with the [Critical Raw Materials Act] and the Chips Act. 


 
 
16521/23  
 
VF/ae 
8 
ANNEX 
COMPET.1 
 
EN 
 
(11-b) This Regulation should complement the [Critical Raw Materials Act] by focusing on the 
manufacturing of net-zero technologies in terms of final products, key components, and 
specific machinery used to produce these. The [Critical Raw Materials Act] focuses instead 
on the upstream part of the supply chain, particularly critical raw materials, and their 
extraction, processing and recycling. These are indispensable for a wide set of strategic 
sectors including the net zero industry, the digital industry, aerospace, and defence sectors. 
By following the same logic of nurturing a business case, upgrading, and providing 
adequate skills, and supporting investments, this Regulation and the [Critical Raw 
Materials Act] work together to create regulatory support synergies across the entire supply 
chain of net-zero technology manufacturing in the Union. This Regulation clarifies that it 
also covers processed materials that are an essential component of net-zero technologies, 
excluding critical raw materials falling under the [Critical Raw Materials Act]. 
(11-a) 
Final products and specific components which are essential for the production of net-zero 
technologies are listed in Annex X in a non-exhaustive manner, these include final 
products and their components that are manufactured and traded by a company, including 
processed materials, but excluding raw materials covered under the [Critical Raw Materials 
Act]. In cases of integrated production facilities that cover production of materials falling 
both under the scope of the [Critical Raw Materials Act] and this Regulation, it should be 
the facilities’ final product that determines the scope under which that facility is regulated. 
Specific components and specific machinery not covered in Annex X may still fall under 
the scope of this Regulation in cases where based on evidence provided to a national 
competent authority, the project promoter can prove, for example via market studies or off-
take agreements, that the specific components or specific machinery are primarily used for 
the production of net-zero technologies, excluding critical raw materials falling under the 
scope of the CRMA. 


 
 
16521/23  
 
VF/ae 
9 
ANNEX 
COMPET.1 
 
EN 
 
(11a)  
To address security of supply issues while contributing to supporting the resilience of the 
Union’s energy system and decarbonisation and modernisation efforts, the net-zero 
technology manufacturing capacity in the Union needs to expand. The Union needs to 
ensure that the regulatory environment for manufacturers of solar photovoltaic (PV) 
technologies enables them to increase their competitive edge and improve security of 
supply perspectives, by aiming to reach at least 30 gigawatt of operational solar PV 
manufacturing capacity by 2030 across the full PV value chain, in line with the goals set 
out in the European Solar Photovoltaic Industry Alliance, which is supported under the 
Union’s Solar Energy Strategy7. The Union needs to ensure that the regulatory 
environment for manufacturers of wind and heat pump technologies enables them to 
consolidate their competitive edge and maintain or expand their current market shares 
throughout this decade, in line with the Union’s technology deployment projections that 
meet its 2030 energy and climate targets8. This translates into a Union manufacturing 
capacity for wind of at least 36 GW and, respectively, for heat pumps of at least 31 GW in 
2030. Union manufacturers of batteries and electrolysers need to find a regulatory 
environment that enables them to consolidate their technology leadership and actively 
contribute to shaping these markets. For battery technologies this would mean contributing 
to the objectives of the European Battery Alliance and aim at almost 90% of the Union’s 
battery annual demand being met by the Union’s battery manufacturers, translating into a 
Union manufacturing capacity of at least 550 GWh in 2030. For EU electrolyser 
manufacturers, the REPowerEU plan projects 10 million tonnes of domestic renewable 
hydrogen production and a further up to 10 million tonnes of renewable hydrogen imports 
by 2030. 
                                                 
7 
Communication from the Commission to the European Parliament, the Council, the European 
Economic and Social Committee and the Committee of the Regions: EU Solar Energy 
Strategy, SWD(2022) 148 final, 18.05.2022. 
8 
As per REPowerEU objectives set out in the REPowerEU Plan, COM/2022/230 final, and 
accompanying Commission Staff Working Document Implementing the Repower EU Action 
Plan: Investment Needs, Hydrogen Accelerator and achieving the Bio-Methane Targets 
Accompanying the Document : Communication from the Commission to the European 
Parliament, the European Council, the Council, the European Economic and Social 
Committee and the Committee of the Regions REPowerEU Plan, SWD/2022/230 final, 
18.05.2022. 


 
 
16521/23  
 
VF/ae 
10 
ANNEX 
COMPET.1 
 
EN 
 
To ensure EU’s technological leadership translates into commercial leadership, as 
supported under the Electrolyser Joint Declaration of the Commission and the European 
Clean Hydrogen Alliance, EU electrolyser manufacturers should be enabled to further 
boost their capacity, such that the overall installed electrolyser capacity being deployed 
reaches at least 100 GW hydrogen by 2030. 
Union manufacturers of aviation and maritime fuels need to further develop, produce and 
scale up sustainable alternative fuels in order to significantly contribute to the reduction of 
the transport sector’s greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions by 90% in 2050, as well as meeting 
the obligations set in [ReFuel EU aviation / Fuel EU maritime]. This is also strongly 
supported by the Renewable and Low-Carbon Fuels Value Chain Industrial Alliance. The 
Union needs to ensure that the regulatory environment and support framework for 
producers of sustainable aviation and maritime alternative fuels technologies enables them 
to increase their production capacities across the full fuels value chain, from the collection 
and supply of feedstock to blending, including conversion and refining capacities. 
(11b) 
Considering these objectives together, while also taking into account that for certain 
elements of the supply chain (such as inverters, as well as solar cells, wafers, and ingots for 
solar PV or cathodes and anodes for batteries), the Union manufacturing capacity is low. In 
order to help tackle import dependency and vulnerability concerns and ensure that the 
Union’s climate and energy targets are met, an overall benchmark for the manufacturing of 
strategic net-zero technology products in the European Union is put forward, while striving 
towards a similar benchmark for net-zero technologies. The Union net-zero technologies 
annual capacity should aim at approaching or reaching an overall annual manufacturing 
benchmark of at least 40% of annual deployment needs by 2030 for the strategic net-zero 
technologies considered as a whole. 


 
 
16521/23  
 
VF/ae 
11 
ANNEX 
COMPET.1 
 
EN 
 
(11d) 
At the same time, net-zero technology products will contribute to the Union’s resilience 
and security of supply of clean energy. A secure supply of clean energy is a prerequisite 
for economic development, as well as for public order and security. Net-zero technology 
products will also yield benefits to other strategically important economic sectors, such as 
farming and food production by securing access to clean energy and machinery at 
competitive prices, thus contributing sustainably to EU food security and to providing an 
increasing outlet for bio-based alternatives through circular economy. In the same way, the 
fulfilment of the Union’s climate ambitions will translate both into economic growth and 
social well-being. 
(11e) 
In order to maintain competitiveness and reduce current strategic import dependencies in 
key net-zero technology products and their supply chains, while avoiding the formation of 
new ones, the Union needs to continue strengthening its net-zero industrial base and 
become more competitive and innovation friendly. The Union needs to enable the 
development of manufacturing capacity faster, simpler and in a more predictable way, 
while reducing the administrative burden and eliminating cross-border obstacles. 
(11f) 
In order for net-zero technology manufacturing projects to be deployed or expanded as 
quickly as possible to ensure the Union’s security of supply for net-zero technologies, it is 
important to create efficiency in planning and investment certainty by keeping the 
administrative burden on project promoters to a minimum. For that reason, permit-granting 
processes of the Member States for net-zero technology manufacturing projects should be 
streamlined, whilst at the same time ensuring that such projects are safe, secure, 
environmentally sustainable, and comply with environmental, social and safety 
requirements. Union environmental legislation sets common conditions for the process and 
content of national permit-granting processes, thereby ensuring a high level of 
environmental protection. 


 
 
16521/23  
 
VF/ae 
12 
ANNEX 
COMPET.1 
 
EN 
 
 
Being granted the status of net-zero strategic project should be without prejudice to any 
applicable permitting conditions for the relevant projects, including those set out 
in Directive 
2011/92/EU 
of 
the 
European 
Parliament 
and 
of 
the 
Council9, Council Directive 
92/43/EEC10, Directive 
2000/60/EC of 
the 
European 
Parliament and of the Council11, Directive 2012/18/EU of the European Parliament and of 
the Council12, Directive 2004/35/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council13, and 
Directive (EU) 2010/75 of the European Parliament and of the Council14. 
(11g) 
At the same time, the unpredictability, complexity and at times, excessive length of 
national permit-granting processes undermines the investment security needed for 
the effective development of net-zero technologies manufacturing projects. Therefore, in 
order to ensure and speed up their effective implementation, Member States should apply 
streamlined and efficient permitting procedures. In addition, net-zero strategic projects 
should be regarded as urgent at national level and should therefore be given a priority 
status insofar and to the extent to which national law provides for such urgency procedures 
in all judicial and dispute resolution procedures relating to them, without preventing 
competent authorities to 
streamline 
permitting 
for 
other 
net-zero 
technologies 
manufacturing projects that are not net-zero strategic projects or more generally. 
                                                 
9 
Directive 2011/92/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council of 13 December 2011 
on the assessment of the effects of certain public and private projects on the environment (OJ 
L 26, 28.1.2012, p. 1). 
10 
Council Directive 92/43/EEC of 21 May 1992 on the conservation of natural habitats and of 
wild fauna and flora (OJ L 206, 22.7.1992, p. 7). 
11 
Directive 2000/60/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 23 October 2000 
establishing a framework for Community action in the field of water policy (OJ L 327, 
22.12.2000, p. 1). 
12 
Directive 2012/18/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council of 4 July 2012 on the 
control of major-accident hazards involving dangerous substances, amending and 
subsequently repealing Council Directive 96/82/EC. 
13 
Directive 2004/35/CE of the European Parliament and of the Council of 21 April 2004 on 
environmental liability with regard to the prevention and remedying of environmental damage 
(OJ L 143, 30.4.2004, p. 56). 
14 
Directive 2010/75/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council of 24 November 2010 
on industrial emissions (integrated pollution prevention and control) (recast) (OJ L 334, 
17.12.2010, p. 17). 


 
 
16521/23  
 
VF/ae 
13 
ANNEX 
COMPET.1 
 
EN 
 
(11h) 
Given their role in ensuring the Union’s security of supply for net-zero technologies, and 
their contribution to the Union’s open strategic autonomy and the green and digital 
transition, responsible permitting authorities should consider net-zero strategic projects to 
be in the public interest. Based on its case-by-case assessment, a responsible permitting 
authority may conclude that the public interest served by the project overrides the public 
interests related to nature and environmental protection and that consequently the project 
may be authorised, provided that all relevant conditions set out in Directive 2000/60/EC, 
Directive 92/43/EEC and Directive 2009/147/EC15 or in the [Nature Restoration 
Regulation] are met. 
(11i) 
In order to reduce complexity and increase efficiency and transparency, project promoters 
of net-zero technologies manufacturing projects should be able to interact with a 
designated contact point responsible for facilitating and coordinating the entire permit 
granting process and facilitate the issuance of a comprehensive decision within the 
applicable time limit. To that end, Member States should designate one or more single 
points of contact. If a Member State decides to designate more than one contact point it 
should provide clear information to the project promoters on which contact point is 
responsible for their project. It should be for the Member State to decide whether the 
designated contact point should also be an authority taking permitting decisions or not. The 
designated contact point should at least notify project promoters of the comprehensive 
decision. Depending on a Member State’s internal organisation, it may be possible for the 
tasks of the designated contact point to be delegated to a different authority, either at local, 
regional, or national level, subject to the same conditions. 
                                                 
15 
Directive 2009/147/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 30 November 2009 
on the conservation of wild birds (OJ L 20, 26.1.2010, p. 7–25). 


 
 
16521/23  
 
VF/ae 
14 
ANNEX 
COMPET.1 
 
EN 
 
(11j) In order to ensure clarity about the permitting status of net-zero strategic projects, Member 
States should ensure that any dispute concerning permit granting process is resolved in a 
timely manner. To that end, Member States should ensure that applicants and project 
promoters have access to a simple dispute settlement procedure and that net-zero strategic 
projects are granted urgent treatment in all judicial and dispute resolution procedures 
relating to them while ensuring respect for the rights of defence, if and to the extent, 
national law provides for such urgency procedures. 
(11k) 
In order to allow businesses and project promoters, including for cross-border projects, to 
directly enjoy the benefits of the internal market without incurring an unnecessary 
additional administrative burden, Regulation (EU) 2018/1724 of the European Parliament 
and the Council16, which established the Single Digital Gateway, provides for general rules 
for the online provision of information, procedures and assistance services relevant for the 
functioning of the internal market. The information that needs to be submitted to national 
competent authorities through the designated contact point, as part of the permit-granting 
processes covered by this Regulation are to be covered in Annex I of Regulation (EU) 
2018/1724 following its amendment by this Regulation, and the related procedures are 
included in its Annex II to ensure that project promoters can benefit from fully online 
procedures and the Once-Only Technical System Services. Designated contact points 
acting as points of single contact pursuant to this Regulation are included in the list of 
assistance and problem-solving services in Annex III of Regulation (EU) 2018/1724. 
                                                 
16 
Regulation (EU) 2018/1724 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 2 October 2018 
establishing a single digital gateway to provide access to information, to procedures and to 
assistance and problem-solving services and amending Regulation (EU) No 1024/2012 (OJ L 
295, 21.11.2018, p. 1). 


 
 
16521/23  
 
VF/ae 
15 
ANNEX 
COMPET.1 
 
EN 
 
(11l) 
Net-zero technology manufacturing projects undergo lengthy and complex permitting 
procedures of 2-7 years, depending on the Member State, technology and value chain 
segment. Considering the size of required investments – in particular for gigafactory-size 
projects which are needed to reach the expected economies of scale – inadequate 
permitting creates an additional and often detrimental barrier to increase net-zero 
technology manufacturing capacity in the Union. In order to provide project promoters and 
other investors with the security and clarity needed to increase development of net-zero 
technologies manufacturing projects, Member States should ensure that the permit-granting 
process related to such projects does not exceed pre-set time limits. For net-zero strategic 
projects the length of the permit-granting process should not exceed twelve months for 
facilities with a yearly production output of 1 GW or more, and nine months for those with 
a yearly production output of less than 1 GW. For all other net-zero technology 
manufacturing projects, the length of the permit-granting process should not exceed 
eighteen months for facilities with a yearly production output of more than 1 GW, and 
twelve months for those with a yearly production output of less than 1 GW. For net-zero 
technologies for which the GW metric is not relevant, such as grids and carbon capture and 
storage (CCS) or carbon capture and usage (CCU) technologies, the upper limits of the 
aforementioned deadlines should apply. However, the first step of the environmental 
impact assessment within the Environmental Impact assessment Directive (2011/92/EU), 
which consist of the preparation of an environmental impact assessment report, is often 
predominantly performed by the project promoter. This step should therefore not be 
integrated in the timelines which the Member States are bound upon as referred to in the 
permit granting process. In addition, in exceptional cases related to the nature, complexity, 
location or size of the proposed project, Member States should be able to extend the 
timelines. Such exceptional cases could include unforeseen circumstances triggering the 
need to add to or complete environmental assessments related to the project, or delays due 
to expropriation processes when required. 


 
 
16521/23  
 
VF/ae 
16 
ANNEX 
COMPET.1 
 
EN 
 
(11m) 
In addition, given the importance of net-zero strategic projects for the Union’s energy 
supply certain administrative restrictions should be partly lifted or simplified to speed up 
their implementation. 
(11n)  
The environmental assessments and authorisations required under Union law, including in 
relation to water, soil, air, ecosystems, habitats, biodiversity and birds, are an integral part 
of the permit granting procedure for a net zero technologies manufacturing project and an 
essential safeguard to ensure negative environmental impacts are prevented or minimised. 
However, to ensure that permit granting procedures for net zero technologies 
manufacturing projects are predictable and timely, any potential to streamline the required 
assessments and authorisations while not lowering the level of environmental protection 
should be realised. In that regard, it should be ensured that the necessary assessments are 
bundled to prevent unnecessary overlap and it should be ensured that project promoters 
and responsible authorities explicitly agree on the scope of the bundled assessment before 
the assessment is carried out to prevent unnecessary follow-up. 
(11o) 
Land use conflicts can create barriers to the deployment of net-zero technologies 
manufacturing projects. Well-designed plans, including spatial plans and zoning, that take 
into account the potential for implementing net-zero technologies manufacturing projects 
are prepared through public participation for which potential environmental impacts are 
assessed, have the potential to help balance the public interest and common good, 
decreasing the potential for conflict and accelerating the sustainable deployment of net-
zero technologies manufacturing projects in the Union. Responsible national, regional and 
local authorities should therefore be encouraged to include, where appropriate, provisions 
for net-zero technologies manufacturing projects, including net-zero strategic projects, 
when developing plans. 


 
 
16521/23  
 
VF/ae 
17 
ANNEX 
COMPET.1 
 
EN 
 
(11oa) Member States could also use other policy instruments to support the manufacturing of 
net-zero technologies and strategic net-zero technologies in specific geographical areas. 
These policy instruments may include but are not limited to the clustering of net-zero 
technology manufacturers, speeding up permit granting process, creating test facilities for 
net-zero technologies, allowing for regulatory sandboxes, assisting cross-border 
cooperation, facilitate electricity grid connection, physical and digital infrastructure and 
clean energy. These instruments should be designated by national or local authorities and 
could either be appointed to new areas or to existing industrial sites. 
(11p) 
It is also necessary to provide for measures to reach the Union’s target of 50 million tonnes 
of annual operational CO2 injection capacity by 2030, thereby supporting the 
decarbonisation of European industries and combating climate change. 
(13) 
The development of carbon capture and storage solutions for industry is confronted with a 
coordination failure. On the one hand, despite the growing CO2 price incentive provided by 
the EU Emissions Trading System, for industry to invest into capturing CO2 emissions 
making such investments economically viable, they face a significant risk of not being able 
to access a permitted geological storage site. On the other hand, investors into first CO2 
storage sites face upfront costs to identify, develop and appraise them even before they can 
apply for a regulatory storage permit. Transparency about potential CO2 storage capacity in 
terms of the geological suitability of relevant areas and all existing geological data, 
including raw and model data, in particular from the exploration of hydrocarbon 
production sites, can support market operators to plan their investments. Member States 
should, while taking into account confidentiality, national security and commercial 
sensitivities as well as adequate compensation for privately generated and owned data, 
make such existing data publicly available and report regularly in a forward-looking 
perspective about any progress in developing CO2 storage sites and the corresponding 
needs for injection and storage capacities, in order to collectively reach the Union-wide 
target for CO2 injection capacity. These transparency obligations are without prejudice to 
the right of Member States not to authorise or to limit the deployment of CO2 storage 
capacity on their territory. 


 
 
16521/23  
 
VF/ae 
18 
ANNEX 
COMPET.1 
 
EN 
 
(13a) 
To avoid stranded assets and ensure that the projected injection capacity will lead to CO2 
reductions it is recognized that full and individual CCS value chains including capture, 
transport and storage need to be established by 2030 with appropriate regulations 
guaranteeing competition and open access. 
(14) 
A key bottleneck for carbon capture investments that are today increasingly economically 
viable is the availability of operating CO2 storage sites in Europe, which underpin the 
incentives from Directive 2003/87/EC. To scale up the technology and expand its leading 
manufacturing capacities, the EU needs to develop a forward-looking supply of permanent 
geological CO2 storage sites permitted in accordance with Directive 2009/31/EU17 as well 
as CO2 transport infrastructure. By defining a Union target of 50 million tonnes of annual 
operational CO2 injection capacity by 2030, in line with the expected capacities needed in 
2030 and taking into account the companies operating primarily in Member States with 
very limited storage capacity due to legal, geological, geographical, technical or market 
constraints, the relevant sectors can coordinate their investments towards a European Net-
Zero CO2 transport and storage value chain that industries can use to decarbonise their 
operations. This initial deployment will also support further CO2 storage in a 2050 
perspective. According to the Commission’s estimates, the Union could need to capture up 
to 550 million tonnes of CO2 annually by 2050 to meet the net zero objective18, including 
for carbon removals. Such a first industrial-scale storage capacity objective will de-risk 
investments into the capturing of CO2 emissions as important tool to reach climate 
neutrality. When this regulation is incorporated into the EEA Agreement, the Union target 
of 50 million tonnes of annual operational CO2 injection capacity by 2030 will be adjusted 
accordingly. 
                                                 
17 
Directive 2009/31/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 23 April 2009 on the 
geological storage of carbon dioxide and amending Council Directive 85/337/EEC, European 
Parliament and Council Directives 2000/60/EC, 2001/80/EC, 2004/35/EC, 2006/12/EC, 
2008/1/EC and Regulation (EC) No 1013/2006 (Text with EEA relevance), (OJ L 140, 
5.6.2009, p. 114). 
18 
In depth analysis in support of the Commission Communication (2018/773) A Clean Planet 
for all. A European long-term strategic vision for a prosperous, modern, competitive and 
climate neutral economy. 


 
 
16521/23  
 
VF/ae 
19 
ANNEX 
COMPET.1 
 
EN 
 
(15) 
By defining CO2 storage sites and their transport infrastructure that contribute to the 
Union’s 2030 target as net-zero strategic projects, the development of CO2 storage sites 
can be accelerated and facilitated, and the increasing industrial demand for storage sites 
can be channelled towards the most-cost-effective storage sites. An increasing volume of 
depleting gas and oil fields that could be converted into safe CO2 storage sites are at the 
end of their useful production lifetime. In addition, the oil and gas industry has affirmed its 
determination to embark on an energy transition and possesses the assets, skills and 
knowledge needed to explore and develop additional storage sites. To reach the Union’s 
target of 50 million tonnes of annual operational CO2 injection capacity by 2030, a value-
chain approach should be fostered by actions taken both at EU and national level to 
facilitate licensees of oil and gas production in the EU to undertake the necessary 
investments and in order to develop viable business models for the entire carbon dioxide 
value chain. In order to ensure a timely, Union-wide and cost-effective development of 
CO2 storage sites in line with the EU objective for injection capacity, licensees of oil and 
gas production in the EU should contribute to this target pro rata of their oil and gas 
manufacturing capacity, while providing flexibilities to cooperate and take into account 
other contributions of third parties. 
(21a) 
Considering that in some Member States storage capacities covering the obligations of 
regulated entities are already being developed, those Member States may request the 
Commission to exempt entities obligated to contribute to the Union target of 50 million 
tonnes of annual operational CO2 injection capacity by 2030. The exemption would release 
entities from their individual contribution to the target in case the annual operational CO2 
injection capacity on the territory of that Member State exceeds the sum of the individual 
contributions that result from the relevant production activities. Additional capacities can 
be made available to other obligated entities in the form of agreements to the extent that 
they have not been accounted for to justify the exemption. 


 
 
16521/23  
 
VF/ae 
20 
ANNEX 
COMPET.1 
 
EN 
 
(22) 
Member States should submit updated drafts of their 2021-2030 National Energy and 
Climate Plans (NECPs) in June 202319. As emphasised in the Commission’s Guidance to 
Member States for the update of the 2021-2030 national energy and climate plans20, the 
updated plans should describe Member States’ objectives and policies to facilitate the 
scale-up of manufacturing projects of commercially available energy efficient and low-
carbon technologies, equipment and key components within their territory. Those plans 
should also describe Member States’ objectives and policies to achieve such scale-up 
through diversification efforts in third countries, and to enable their industries to capture, 
transport and store CO2 emissions permanently in geological storage sites. 
(24) 
Under the first pillar of the Green Deal Industrial Plan for the Net-Zero Age, the Union 
should develop and maintain an industrial basis for the provision of net-zero technology 
solutions to secure its energy supply, while also living up to its ambitions on climate 
neutrality. To support that goal and to avoid dependencies for the supply of net-zero 
technologies that would delay the Union’s greenhouse gas emission reductions efforts or 
put the security of supply of energy at risk, this Regulation should set out provisions to 
encourage demand for sustainable and resilient net-zero technologies. 
(25) 
Directives 2014/23/EU, 2014/24/EU and 2014/25/EU allow contracting authorities and 
entities awarding contracts through public procurement procedures to rely, in addition to 
price or cost, on additional criteria for identifying the most economically advantageous 
tender. Such criteria concern the quality of the tender including social, environmental and 
innovative characteristics. When awarding contracts for net-zero technology through 
public procurement, tendering conditions should take into account the tenders’ contribution 
to sustainability and resilience in relation to a series of criteria relating to the tender’s 
environmental sustainability, innovation, resilience and, where applicable, system 
integration. Criteria need to be balanced and SME participation ensured. 
                                                 
19 
Member States shall update their national plans for 2021-2030 by June 2023 (draft plans) and 
June 2024 (final plans). See Article 14 and requirements of Chapter 2 and Annex I of the 
Regulation (EU) 2018/1999. 
20 
Commission Notice on the Guidance to Member States for the update of the 2021-2030 
national energy and climate plans (OJ C 495, 29.12.2022, p. 24). 


 
 
16521/23  
 
VF/ae 
21 
ANNEX 
COMPET.1 
 
EN 
 
(26) 
Social sustainability criteria can already be applied under existing legislation and can 
include working conditions and collective bargaining in line with the European Pillar of 
Social Rights in line with Articles, 30 (3) of Directive 2014/23/EU, 18 (2) of Directive 
2014/24/EU and 36 (2) of Directive 2014/25/EU. Member States should contribute to 
social sustainability by taking the appropriate measures to ensure that in the performance 
of public contracts economic operators comply with applicable obligations in the fields of 
social and labour law established by Union law, national law, collective agreements or by 
the international environmental, social and labour law provisions listed in Annex X of 
Directive 2014/23/EU, Annex X of Directive 2014/24/EU and Annex XIV of Directive 
2014/25/EU21. 
                                                 
21 
Commission Notice "Buying Social - a guide to taking account of social considerations in 
public procurement (2nd edition)", C(2021) 3573 final. 


 
 
16521/23  
 
VF/ae 
22 
ANNEX 
COMPET.1 
 
EN 
 
(27) 
In compliance with Directives 2014/23/EU, 2014/24/EU, 2014/25/EU and applicable 
sectoral legislations, and with the Proposal for a Regulation of the European Parliament 
and of the Council establishing a framework for setting ecodesign requirements for 
sustainable products22 and the Regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council 
concerning batteries and waste batteries23, and unless otherwise indicated therein, when 
evaluating the environmental sustainability of the net-zero solutions procured on the basis 
of this Regulation, contracting authorities and contracting entities may take into account 
various elements with an impact on the climate and the environment. These may include, 
for instance, the durability and reliability of the solution; the ease of repair and 
maintenance and access to such services; the ease of upgrading and refurbishment; the ease 
and quality of recycling; the use of substances; the consumption of energy, water and other 
resources in one or more life cycle stages of the product; the weight and volume of the 
product and its packaging; the incorporation of renewable materials or used components; 
the quantity, characteristics and availability of consumables needed for proper use and 
maintenance; the environmental footprint of the product and its life cycle environmental 
impacts; the carbon footprint of the product; the microplastic release; emissions to air, 
water or soil released in one or more life cycle stages of the product; the amounts of waste 
generated; the conditions for use. The mandatory application of criteria for procurement of 
net zero technologies does not preclude the application of other relevant award criteria 
provided for in applicable sectorial legislations. The weighting range of award criteria for 
procurement of net-zero technologies gives contracting authorities and entities the 
possibility to attribute significant importance to other criteria while ensuring that the aims 
pursued with the sustainability and resilience considerations are sufficiently addressed. 
                                                 
22 
Proposal for a Regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council establishing a 
framework for setting ecodesign requirements for sustainable products and repealing 
Directive 2009/125/EC, COM/2022/142 final, 30.03.2022. 
23 
Regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council concerning batteries and waste 
batteries, amending Directive 2008/98/EC and Regulation (EU) 2019/1020 and repealing 
Directive 2006/66/EC. 


 
 
16521/23  
 
VF/ae 
23 
ANNEX 
COMPET.1 
 
EN 
 
(28) 
For the purposes of taking into account within a public procurement procedure or an 
auction to support the production or consumption of energy from renewable sources the 
need to diversify sources of supply of net-zero technologies away from single sources of 
supply and without prejudice to the Union’s international commitments, the supply should 
at least be deemed insufficiently diversified where a single source supplies for more than 
50 % of the demand for a specific net-zero technology and the specific components 
primarily used for the production of those products within the Union. 
(28a) 
When procuring net-zero technologies, contracting authorities and contracting entities 
might include these technologies as part of a larger procurement procedure. In this case, 
they should consider splitting the procurement procedure into separate lots, setting out the 
minimum requirements and the implementing acts thereof as requirements concerning this 
specific lot. 
(28b) 
To promote the responsible business conduct of bidders, the cybersecurity and data 
security of the technologies used, the projects and the related infrastructures and to 
promote the delivery projects fully and on time, public authorities designing auctions for 
the deployment of energy from renewable energy sources should include pre-qualification 
criteria related to responsible business conduct, cybersecurity and data security and ability 
to deliver the project fully and on time. 
(28c) 
To support the aim to develop and maintain an industrial basis for the provision of strategic 
net-zero renewable energy technologies to secure the Union energy supply and to avoid 
dependencies for the supply of these technologies that would delay the Union’s greenhouse 
gas emission reductions efforts or put the security of energy supply at risk, public 
authorities designing auctions for the deployment of energy from renewable energy 
sources should increase the sustainability and resilience of the supply of those technologies 
within the Union. 


 
 
16521/23  
 
VF/ae 
24 
ANNEX 
COMPET.1 
 
EN 
 
 
Member States should assess the auctions’ contribution to sustainability by examining the 
environmental sustainability of bids, their contribution to innovation and their contribution 
to energy system integration. In order to do so, Member States should have the choice to 
introduce pre-qualification or award criteria in the auction design. While pre-qualification 
criteria must be fulfilled by all the bidders’ projects in order to be able to participate in the 
auction, award criteria aim at evaluating and ranking the different projects participating in 
an auction. 
(28d) 
When evaluating the environmental sustainability of bids, either in the form of pre-
qualification criteria or award criteria, public authorities designing auctions for the 
deployment of energy from renewable energy sources may take into account various 
elements with an impact on the climate and the environment. These may include, for 
instance, the durability and reliability of the solution; the ease of repair and maintenance 
and access to such services; the ease of upgrading and refurbishment; the ease and quality 
of recycling; the use of substances; the consumption of energy, water and other resources 
in one or more life cycle stages of the product; the weight and volume of the product and 
its packaging; the incorporation of renewable materials or used components; the quantity, 
characteristics and availability of consumables needed for proper use and maintenance; the 
environmental footprint of the product and its life cycle environmental impacts; the carbon 
footprint of the product; the microplastic release; emissions to air, water or soil released in 
one or more life cycle stages of the product; the amounts of waste generated; the 
conditions for use. 
(28e) 
To support the design and production of more innovative and advanced renewable energy 
technologies, the sustainability contribution of bids may take into account, either in the 
form of pre-qualification criteria or award criteria, the contribution to innovation by 
providing for pre-qualification or award criteria that promote the use of entirely new 
solutions or the improvement of comparable state-of-the-art solutions. 


 
 
16521/23  
 
VF/ae 
25 
ANNEX 
COMPET.1 
 
EN 
 
(28f) 
To support the integration of energy from renewable sources into the Union’s energy 
system and its benefits to cost-effective decarbonisation, the sustainability contribution of 
bids may take into account the contribution to energy system integration through, for 
instance, flexibility solutions including demand response and energy storage, and the 
production of renewable hydrogen. 
(28g) 
To increase the resilience of supply of strategic net-zero renewable energy technologies 
and avoid excessive dependencies from countries with high concentration of supply within 
the Union, public authorities should evaluate by means of award criteria the resilience 
contribution of the different projects participating in auctions for the deployment of energy 
from renewable energy sources taking into account the need to diversify the supply of 
strategic net-zero renewable energy technologies, without prejudice to the Union’s 
international commitments. When ranking bids, public authorities should take into account 
that the supply should at least be deemed insufficiently diversified where more than 50% 
of the demand for a specific net-zero technology and the specific components primarily 
used for the production of those products within the Union originates from a third country. 
(28h) 
The weighting of criteria on the sustainability and resilience contribution of the tender in 
relation to auctions for the deployment of energy from renewable sources is without 
prejudice to the possibility for the authorities designing those auctions to set a higher 
threshold for the criteria relating to environmental sustainability, innovation and energy 
system integration if this is compatible with any limit for non-price criteria set under State 
aid rules. 
(28i) 
In the view to reach the overall annual manufacturing benchmark of annual deployment 
needs by 2030 within the Union, a specific share of the volume auctioned for which non-
price criteria are applied is provided by this Regulation. The determination of the share of 
the volume auctioned should, as appropriate, strive to reach a gradual overall increase in 
the share of volume to be auctioned, with a view to cover as many auctions as possible and 
meet the overall objectives of this Regulation, subject to regular assessments by the 
Commission on the impact of such measures on the development of Union industry and 
deployment of renewable energy technologies. The exact share of the volume auctioned 
should be determined by an implementing act. The review of the share of auctions should 
be undergone until the overall annual manufacturing benchmark of at least 40% is reached. 


 
 
16521/23  
 
VF/ae 
26 
ANNEX 
COMPET.1 
 
EN 
 
(29) 
For the purposes of setting up schemes benefitting households or consumers which 
incentivise the purchase of net-zero technology final products and of diversifying sources 
of supply of net-zero technologies, and without prejudice to the Union’s international 
commitments, the supply should be deemed insufficiently diversified where a single source 
supplies more than 65% of the total demand for a specific net-zero technology within the 
Union. To ensure a consistent application, the Commission should publish a yearly list 
starting on the date of application of this Regulation, of the distribution of the origin of net 
zero technology final products which fall under this category, broken down by the share of 
Union supply originating in different sources in the last year for which data is available. 
(30) 
Council Decision 2014/115/EU approved in particular the amendment to the World Trade 
Organisation Agreement on Government Procurement (the ‘GPA’)24. The aim of the GPA 
is to establish a multilateral framework of balanced rights and obligations relating to public 
contracts with a view to achieving the liberalisation and expansion of world trade. For 
contracts covered by the European Union’s Appendix I to the GPA, as well as by other 
relevant international agreements by which the Union is bound, including free trade 
agreements and the Article III:8(a) of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade of 1994 
for procurement by governmental agencies of products purchased with a view to 
commercial resale or with a view to use in the production of goods for commercial sale, 
contracting authorities and contracting entities should not apply the requirements of Article 
19(5) to economic operators of sources of supply that are signatories to the agreements. 
                                                 
24 
Council decision 2014/115/EU of 2 December 2013 on the conclusion of the Protocol 
Amending the Agreement on Government Procurement, (OJ L68, 7.3.2014, p. 1). 


 
 
16521/23  
 
VF/ae 
27 
ANNEX 
COMPET.1 
 
EN 
 
(31) 
The application of the provisions on resilience in public procurement procedures should be 
without prejudice to the application of Article 25 of Directive 2014/24/EU of the European 
Parliament and of the Council25, and Articles 43 and 85 of Directive 2014/25/EU of the 
European Parliament and of the Council26, as according with the Commission’s guidance 
of 201927. The same way, public procurement provisions should continue to apply to 
works, supplies and services subject to this Regulation, including article 67 (4) of Directive 
2014/24/EU, Article 82 (4) of Directive 2014/25/EU and Article 41 (2) of Directive 
2014/23/EU and any implementing measures resulting from the Proposal for a Regulation 
establishing a framework for setting ecodesign requirements for sustainable products. 
(33) 
In order to limit administrative burden resulting from the need to take into account 
requirements relating to the sustainability and resilience contribution of the tender, in 
particular for smaller public buyers and for contracts of lower value which do not have an 
important impact on the market, the application of the relevant provisions of this 
Regulation should be deferred for two years for public buyers which are not central 
purchasing bodies and for contracts of a value below EUR 25 million. 
(34) 
For the purposes of the application of the provisions on public procurement, where a 
product is covered by a delegated act adopted under Regulation (EU) 2017/1369 of the 
European Parliament and of the Council28, contracting authorities or contracting entities 
should purchase only the products that comply with the obligation laid down in Article 7 
(2) of that Regulation. 
                                                 
25 
Directive 2014/24/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council of 26 February 2014 on 
public procurement and repealing Directive 2004/18/EC (OJ L 94, 28.3.2014, p. 65). 
26 
Directive 2014/25/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council of 26 February 2014 on 
procurement by entities operating in the water, energy, transport and postal services sectors 
and repealing Directive 2004/17/EC (OJ L 94, 28.3.2014, p. 243). 
27 
Communication from the Commission: Guidance on the participation of third country bidders 
and goods in the EU procurement market, Brussels, 24.7.2019, C(2019) 5494 final. 
28 
Regulation (EU) 2017/1369 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 4 July 2017 
setting a framework for energy labelling and repealing Directive 2010/30/EU (OJ L 198, 
28.7.2017, p. 1). 


 
 
16521/23  
 
VF/ae 
28 
ANNEX 
COMPET.1 
 
EN 
 
(35) 
Households and final consumers are an essential part of the Union’s demand for net-zero 
technologies final products and public support schemes to incentivize the purchase of such 
product by households, in particular for vulnerable low- and lower middle-class income 
households and consumers, are important tools to accelerate the green transition. Under the 
solar rooftop initiative announced in the EU solar strategy29, Member States should for 
instance set-up national programmes to support the massive deployment of rooftop solar 
energy. In the REPowerEU plan, the Commission called Member States to make full use of 
supporting measures which encourage switching to heat pumps. Such support schemes set 
up nationally by Member States or locally by local or regional authorities should also 
contribute to improving the sustainability and resilience of the EU net-zero technologies. 
Public authorities should for instance provide higher financial compensation to 
beneficiaries for the purchase of net-zero technology final products that will make a higher 
contribution to resilience in the Union. Public authorities should ensure that their schemes 
are open, transparent and non-discriminatory, so that they contribute to increase demand 
for net-zero technology products in the Union. Public authorities should also limit the 
additional financial compensation for such products so as not to slow down the deployment 
of the net-zero technologies in the Union. To increase the efficiency of such schemes 
Member States should ensure that information is easily accessible both for consumers and 
for net-zero technology manufacturers on a free website. The use by public authorities of 
the sustainability and resilience contribution in schemes targeted at consumers or 
households should be without prejudice to State aid rules and to WTO rules on Subsidies. 
(36) 
When designing schemes benefitting households or consumers which incentivise the 
purchase of net-zero technology final products as defined in this Regulation, Member 
States, regional or local authorities, bodies governed by public law or associations formed 
by one or more such authorities or one or more such bodies governed by public law, should 
ensure the respect of the Union’s international commitments, including by ensuring that 
schemes do not reach a magnitude that causes serious prejudice to the interest of WTO 
members. 
                                                 
29 
Communication from the Commission to the European Parliament, the Council, the European 
Economic and Social Committee and the Committee of the Regions : EU Solar Energy 
Strategy, COM(2022) 221 final, 18.05.2022. 


 
 
16521/23  
 
VF/ae 
29 
ANNEX 
COMPET.1 
 
EN 
 
(37) 
The Commission may also assist Member States in the design of schemes targeted at 
households and consumers to build synergies and exchange best practices. The Net-Zero 
Europe Platform should also play an important role in accelerating the implementation of 
the sustainability and resilience contribution by Member States and public authorities in 
their public procurement and auctioning practices. It should issue guidance and identify 
best practices on how to define the contribution and use it, providing concrete and specific 
examples. 
(38) 
To enable the industry to adjust its production on time, contracting authorities and 
contracting entities should inform the market in advance of their estimated procurement 
needs for net-zero technology products. 
(38a) 
In addition to measures oriented towards public and household demand, the Union could 
consider action to ease the deployment of net zero technologies in the EU industrial value 
chains with particular attention to SMEs, notably through facilitating the connection 
between supply and demand from industry. 
(39) 
As indicated in the Communication on the Green Deal Industrial Plan for the Net-Zero 
Age, published on 1 February 2023, the Union’s industry’s market shares are under strong 
pressure, due to subsidies in third countries which undermine a level playing field. This 
translates in a need for a rapid and ambitious reaction from the Union in modernising its 
legal framework. 


 
 
16521/23  
 
VF/ae 
30 
ANNEX 
COMPET.1 
 
EN 
 
(40) 
Access to finance is key for ensuring the Union’s open strategic autonomy and for 
establishing a solid manufacturing base for net-zero technologies and their supply chains 
across the Union. The majority of investments necessary to reach the Green Deal 
objectives will come from private capital30 attracted by both the growth potential of the 
net-zero ecosystem and a stable and ambitious policy framework. Well-functioning, deep 
and integrated capital markets will therefore be essential to raise and channel the funds 
needed for the green transition and net-zero manufacturing projects. Swift progress 
towards the Capital Markets Union is thus necessary for the EU to deliver on its net-zero 
objectives. The sustainable finance agenda (and blended finance) also plays a crucial role 
in scaling up investments into the net-zero technologies along the value chains, while 
guaranteeing the competitiveness of the sector. 
                                                 
30 
Commission Staff Working Document Identifying Europe's recovery needs Accompanying 
the document Communication from the Commission to the European Parliament, the 
European Council, the Council, the European Economic and Social Committee and the 
Committee of the Regions - Europe's moment: Repair and Prepare for the Next Generation, 
SWD(2020) 98 final, Identifying Europe's recovery needs, 27.05.2020. 


 
 
16521/23  
 
VF/ae 
31 
ANNEX 
COMPET.1 
 
EN 
 
(41) 
Private investment by companies and financial investors is essential. Where private 
investment alone is not sufficient, the effective roll-out of net-zero manufacturing projects 
may require public support, for example in the form of guarantees, loans or equity and 
quasi-equity investments, while avoiding distortion within the internal market. When this 
public support comes in the form of State aid, such aid must have an incentive effect and 
be necessary, targeted, temporary, appropriate and proportionate, while preserving 
competition and cohesion in the internal market. The existing State aid guidelines that have 
recently undergone an in-depth revision in line with the twin transition objectives provide 
ample possibilities to support investments for projects in the scope of this Regulation 
subject to certain conditions. Member States can have an important role in easing access to 
finance for net-zero technologies manufacturing projects by addressing market failures 
through targeted and temporary State aid support. The Temporary Crisis and Transition 
Framework (TCTF) adopted on 9 March 2023 aims at ensuring a level playing field within 
the internal market, targeted to those sectors where a third-country delocalisation risk has 
been identified, and proportionate in terms of aid amounts. It would enable Member States 
to put in place measures to support new investments in production facilities in defined, 
strategic net-zero sectors, including via tax benefits. 
 
The permitted aid amount can be modulated with higher aid intensities and aid amount 
ceilings if the investment is located in assisted areas, in order to contribute to the goal of 
convergence between Member States and regions. Appropriate conditions are required to 
verify the concrete risks of diversion of the investment outside the European Economic 
Area (EEA) and that there is no risk of relocation within the EEA. To mobilise national 
resources for that purpose, Member States may use a share of the ETS revenues that 
Member States have to allocate for climate-related purposes. 


 
 
16521/23  
 
VF/ae 
32 
ANNEX 
COMPET.1 
 
EN 
 
(41a) 
Public support should be used to address specific identified market failures or sub-optimal 
investment situations in a proportionate manner, and actions should not duplicate or crowd 
out private financing or distort competition in the internal market. Actions should have a 
clear added value for the Union. Public investment can in particular focus on the necessary 
infrastructure investments, on fostering innovation and the upscaling of breakthrough 
technologies. 
(42) 
Several Union funding programmes, such as the Recovery and Resilience Facility, 
InvestEU, cohesion policy programmes or the Innovation Fund are also available to fund 
investments in net-zero technology manufacturing projects. 
(43) 
The amended Recovery and Resilience Facility Regulation31 made available an additional 
EUR 20 billion of non-repayable support to Member States in order to promote energy 
efficiency and replace fossil fuels, amongst others through EU net-zero industry projects. 
As pointed out in the Commission Guidance on the REPowerEU chapters32, Member 
States are encouraged to include in the REPowerEU chapter of their recovery and 
resilience plans, measures supporting investments in net-zero technologies manufacturing 
and industrial innovation, in accordance with Regulation (EU) 2021/241 of the European 
Parliament and of the Council33. 
(44) 
InvestEU is the EU flagship programme to boost investment, especially the green and 
digital transition, by providing financing and technical assistance, for instance through 
blending mechanisms. Such an approach contributes to crowd in additional public and 
private capital. In addition, Member States are encouraged to contribute to the InvestEU 
Member State compartment to support financial products available to net-zero technology 
manufacturing, without prejudice to applicable State aid rules. 
                                                 
31 
Regulation (EU) 2023/435 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 27 February 
2023 amending Regulation (EU) 2021/241 as regards REPowerEU chapters in recovery and 
resilience plans and amending Regulations (EU) No 1303/2013, (EU) 2021/1060 and (EU) 
2021/1755, and Directive 2003/87/EC, (OJ L 63, 28.2.2023, p. 1). 
32 
Commission Notice Guidance on Recovery and Resilience Plans in the context of 
REPowerEU 2023/C 80/01, (OJ C 80, 3.3.2023, p. 1). 
33 
Regulation (EU) 2021/241 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 12 February 
2021 establishing the Recovery and Resilience Facility, (OJ L 57, 18.2.2021, p. 17). 


 
 
16521/23  
 
VF/ae 
33 
ANNEX 
COMPET.1 
 
EN 
 
(45) 
Member States can provide support from cohesion policy programmes in line with 
applicable rules under Regulation (EU) 2021/1060 of the European Parliament and of the 
Council34 to encourage the take up of net-zero strategic projects in less developed and 
transition regions through investment packages of infrastructure, productive investment in 
innovation, manufacturing capacity in SMEs, services, training and upskilling measures, 
including support to capacity building of the public authorities and promoters. The 
applicable co-financing rates set in programmes may be up to 85% for less developed 
regions and up to 60% or 70% for transition regions depending on the fund concerned and 
the status of the region but Member States may exceed these ceilings at the level of the 
project concerned, where feasible under State aid rules. The Technical Support Instrument 
can help Member States and regions in preparing net-zero growth strategies, improve the 
business environment, reducing red tape and accelerating permitting. Member States 
should be encouraged to promote the sustainability of net-zero strategic projects by 
embedding these investments in European value chains, building notably on interregional 
and cross border cooperation networks. 
(46) 
The Innovation Fund also provides a very promising and cost-efficient avenue to support 
the scaling up of manufacturing and deployment of renewable hydrogen and other strategic 
net zero technologies in Europe, including, innovative projects with a positive climate 
impact in the maritime and aviation sector, thus reinforcing Europe’s sovereignty in key 
technologies for climate action and energy security. 
                                                 
34 
Regulation (EU) 2021/1060 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 24 June 2021 
laying down common provisions on the European Regional Development Fund, the European 
Social Fund Plus, the Cohesion Fund, the Just Transition Fund and the European Maritime, 
Fisheries and Aquaculture Fund and financial rules for those and for the Asylum, Migration 
and Integration Fund, the Internal Security Fund and the Instrument for Financial Support for 
Border Management and Visa Policy (OJ L 231, 30.6.2021, p. 159). 


 
 
16521/23  
 
VF/ae 
34 
ANNEX 
COMPET.1 
 
EN 
 
(48) 
To overcome the limitations of the current fragmented public and private investments 
efforts, facilitate integration and return on investment, the Commission, and Member 
States should better coordinate and create synergies between the existing funding 
programmes at Union and national level as well as ensure better coordination and 
collaboration with industry and key private sector stakeholders. The Net-Zero Europe 
Platform has a key role to play to build a comprehensive view of available and relevant 
funding opportunities and to discuss the individual financing needs of net-zero strategic 
projects. 
(59) 
Space data and services derived from EU Space Programme, and in particular Copernicus, 
shall be used to the extent possible to provide information on the geology, biology, 
ecology, socio-economic development, and resource availability for the environmental 
assessments and authorisations; such data and services and in particular the Copernicus 
anthropogenic CO2 emission monitoring and verification capacity are most relevant to 
assess the impact of industry projects and the impact of anthropogenic CO2 sinks on the 
global greenhouse gas concentrations and fluxes. 
(61) 
Hydrogen Valleys with industrial end-use applications play an important role in 
decarbonising the energy-intensive industries. REPowerEU set the objective of doubling 
the number of Hydrogen Valleys in the Union. In order to achieve this objective, Member 
States should accelerate permitting and consider regulatory sandboxes and prioritise access 
to funding. To strengthen the net-zero resilience, Member States should ensure the 
interconnection of Hydrogen Valleys across the Union’s borders. Industrial installations 
which produce their own energy, and which can provide a positive contribution to the 
production of electricity, should be encouraged to contribute to the smart electricity grid as 
energy producers by simplifying regulatory requirements. 


 
 
16521/23  
 
VF/ae 
35 
ANNEX 
COMPET.1 
 
EN 
 
(62) 
Net-zero regulatory sandboxes can be an important tool to promote innovation in the field 
of net-zero technologies and regulatory learning. Innovation needs to be enabled through 
experimentation spaces as scientific outcomes need to be tested in a controlled real-word 
environment. Regulatory sandboxes should be introduced to test innovative net-zero 
technologies or other innovative technologies with potential to enable the transition to a 
climate neutral, clean economy and reduce strategic dependencies, in a controlled 
environment for a limited amount of time, thus enhancing regulatory learning and potential 
scaling up and wider deployment. It is appropriate to strike a balance between legal 
certainty for participants in the Net-Zero regulatory sandboxes and the achievement of the 
objectives of Union law. Member States should be able to allow for derogations of net zero 
regulatory sandboxes in national legislation while in any case ensuring compliance with 
Union law and with the essential requirements on Net-Zero technology laid in national law. 
The Commission will publish a Guidance for Sandboxes document in 2023 as announced 
in the New European Innovation Agenda to support Member States in preparing the net 
zero technology sandboxes. Those innovative technologies could eventually be essential to 
achieve the Union’s climate neutrality objective, ensure the security of supply and 
resilience of the Union’s energy system. 


 
 
16521/23  
 
VF/ae 
36 
ANNEX 
COMPET.1 
 
EN 
 
(64) 
The scaling up of European net-zero technology industries’ value and supply chains 
requires significant additional skilled workers which implies important investment needs in 
re-skilling and upskilling, including in the field of vocational education and training. This 
should contribute to the creation of quality jobs in line with the targets for employment and 
training of the European Pillar of Social Rights. The energy transition will require a 
significant increase in the number of skilled workers in a range of sectors, including 
renewable energy and energy storage and raw materials, and has a great potential for 
quality job creation. The skill needs for the fuel cell hydrogen sub-sector in manufacturing 
alone are estimated at 180.000 trained workers, technicians and engineers by the year 
2030, according to the Commission’s European Strategic Energy Technology Plan35. In the 
photo-voltaic solar energy sector, up to 66.000 jobs would be needed in manufacturing 
alone. The European network of employment services (EURES) is providing information, 
advice and recruitment or placement for the benefit of workers and employers, including 
across internal market borders. 
                                                 
35 
European Commission, Directorate-General for Research and Innovation, Joint Research 
Centre, The strategic energy technology (SET) plan, Publications Office, 2019, 
https://data.europa.eu/doi/10.2777/04888. 


 
 
16521/23  
 
VF/ae 
37 
ANNEX 
COMPET.1 
 
EN 
 
(65) 
Since strengthening the manufacturing capacity of key net-zero technologies in the Union 
will not be possible without a sizeable skilled workforce, it is necessary to introduce 
measures to boost the activation of more people to the labour market, notably women, 
young people not in employment, education or training (NEETs), older persons and 
persons with disabilities. In addition, in line with the objectives of the Council 
Recommendation on ensuring a fair transition towards climate-neutrality, specific support 
for job-to-job transition for workers in redundant and declining sectors are important. This 
means investing in skills and in quality job creation required for net-zero technologies in 
the Union. Building on and fully taking into account existing initiatives such as the EU 
Pact for Skills, EU level activities on skills intelligence and forecasting, such as by the 
European Centre for the Development of Vocational Training (Cedefop) and the European 
Labour Authority, and the Blueprints for sectoral cooperation on skills, the objective is to 
mobilise all actors and to train on all skill levels to the extent needed: Member States 
authorities, including at regional and local levels, education and training providers, social 
and economic partners and industry, in particular SMEs, to identify skills needs, develop 
education and training programmes and deploy these at large scale in a fast and operational 
manner. Net-zero strategic projects have a key role to play in this regard. Member States 
and the Commission may ensure financial support including by leveraging the possibilities 
of the Union budget through instruments such as the European Social Fund Plus, Just 
Transition Fund, European Regional Development Funds, the Recovery and Resilience 
Facility, the Modernisation Fund, REPowerEU and the Single Market Programme. 


 
 
16521/23  
 
VF/ae 
38 
ANNEX 
COMPET.1 
 
EN 
 
(66) 
European Net-Zero Industry Academies should be launched to develop education and 
training programmes, content and materials, as well as the credentials showing that these 
have been used, to upskill and reskill people of all working ages required for key net-zero 
technology value chains and offer these programmes, content and materials to appropriate 
education and training providers in the Member States for their voluntary use. Net-Zero 
Academies are organisations or consortia or projects of relevant stakeholders being 
awarded seed-funding by the European Commission. The Academies should play a 
facilitating role, fully respecting the responsibility of the Member States for the content of 
teaching and the organisation of education systems and for the content and organisation of 
vocational training. The Academies should offer education and training programmes, 
content and materials, which education and training providers, economic and social 
partners and other actors involved in up- and reskilling in the Member States, such as 
Public Employment Services may choose to use, where they consider it useful. Economic 
and social partners should be involved in the development of training programmes to 
ensure relevance and increase the uptake. The Academies should encourage that, next to 
other required skills, transversal skills facilitating occupational mobility are taught. The 
Academies will aim to support the quality of the education and training offered by 
education and training providers in the Member States using learning programmes, content 
and materials developed by the Academies, including by training their trainers. 


 
 
16521/23  
 
VF/ae 
39 
ANNEX 
COMPET.1 
 
EN 
 
(66a) 
In order to support skills transparency and portability and the mobility of workers, the 
European Net-Zero Industry Academies will develop and promote the deployment by 
education and training providers of credentials, including micro-credentials, covering 
learning achievements. The credentials developed by the European Net-Zero Industry 
Academies may be issued by the education and training providers in the Member States, or 
awarding bodies in the Member States, where an education and training programme 
developed by the Academies has been completed successfully. The credentials may be 
issued in the format of European credentials for learning and could be integrated in 
EUROPASS and, where relevant and feasible, included in National Qualifications 
Frameworks. Continuous reskilling and upskilling offered via the academies and the 
relevant education and training providers in their territories may be encouraged by Member 
States, for example, through national programmes and Union funding. 
(67) 
While in the absence of specific provisions introducing minimum training requirements for 
the access to a regulated profession or the pursuit thereof laid down in the Union law, it is 
a Member State’s competence to decide whether and how to regulate a profession, national 
rules organizing access to regulated professions must not constitute an unjustified or 
disproportionate obstacle to the exercise of those fundamental rights. The competence to 
regulate access to a profession must be exercised within the limits of the principles of non-
discrimination and proportionality, in accordance with Directive (EU) 2018/958 of the 
European Parliament and of the Council of 28 June 2018 on a proportionality test before 
adoption of new regulation of professions. 
(68) 
Where Member States determine that the learning programmes developed by the European 
net-zero industry academies lead to credentials that correspond to the knowledge, skills 
and competences required for access to a regulated profession or to activities that are part 
of a regulated profession, Member States should, in order to facilitate the mobility in 
strategic net-zero industry professions, treat these credentials as evidence of formal 
qualifications to which they attest, in line with Directive 2005/36/EC of the European 
Parliament and of the Council on the recognition of professional qualifications. 


 
 
16521/23  
 
VF/ae 
40 
ANNEX 
COMPET.1 
 
EN 
 
(69) 
At Union level, a Net-Zero Europe Platform, should be established, composed of the 
Member States and chaired by the Commission. The Net-Zero Europe Platform may advise 
and assist the Commission and Member States on specific questions and provide a 
reference body, in which the Commission and Member States coordinate their action and 
facilitate the exchange of information on issues relating to this Regulation. The Net-Zero 
Europe Platform should further perform the tasks outlined in this Regulation, notably in 
relation to permitting, including points of single contact, net-zero strategic projects, 
coordination of financing, access to markets, skills, net-zero regulatory sandboxes as well 
as consulting the Commission in assessing the feasibility and proportionality of proposing 
measures if the Commission concludes that the general objectives of the Regulation are not 
likely to be achieved. Where necessary, the Platform may establish standing or temporary 
subgroups and invite third parties, such as experts or representatives from net-zero 
industries and social and economic partners. 
(69a) 
Where appropriate and useful, the Net-Zero Europe Platform should seek close 
collaboration with other relevant Commission initiatives, platforms and groups, in order to 
seek synergies, share expertise, exchange information and foster stakeholder involvement, 
whilst avoiding duplication and overlaps. The Platform will engage with the existing EU 
industrial alliances, and thereby contribute to the work of the alliances by involving 
Member States. Key alliances for collaboration with the Platform are the European Battery 
Alliance, the European Solar Photovoltaic Industry Alliance, the European Clean 
Hydrogen Alliance, the Alliance for Zero-Emission Aviation, the Industrial Alliance on 
Processors and Semiconductor Technologies and the Renewable and Low-Carbon Fuels 
Value Chain Industrial Alliance. Sectors not currently represented in industrial alliances 
equally benefit from the structured framework that the Net-Zero Europe Platform provides. 
As regards net-zero strategic partnerships, close collaboration with the Critical Raw 
Materials Board is foreseen where relevant. 


 
 
16521/23  
 
VF/ae 
41 
ANNEX 
COMPET.1 
 
EN 
 
(70) 
As part of the Green Deal Industrial Plan the Commission announced its intention to 
conclude Net-Zero Industrial Partnerships covering net-zero technologies, to adopt net-
zero technologies globally and to support the role of EU industrial capabilities in paving 
the way for the global clean energy transition. The Commission and Member States may 
coordinate within the Platform the Partnerships, discussing existing relevant partnerships 
and processes, such as green partnerships, energy dialogues and other forms of existing 
bilateral contractual arrangements, as well as potential synergies with relevant Member 
States’ bilateral agreements with third countries. 
(71) 
The Union should aim to diversify and stimulate international trade and investments in net-
zero technologies and to promote globally high social and environmental standards. This 
should be done in close cooperation and partnership with like-minded countries. Similarly, 
stronger research and innovation efforts to develop and deploy net-zero technologies 
should be pursued in close cooperation with partner countries in an open but assertive 
approach and based on reciprocity and mutual interests. 
(72) 
Where the power to adopt acts in accordance with Article 290 of the Treaty is delegated to 
the Commission under this Regulation, it is of particular importance that the Commission 
carries out appropriate consultations during its preparatory work, including at expert level, 
and that those consultations be conducted in accordance with the principles laid down in 
the Inter-institutional Agreement on Better Law-Making of 13 April 2016. In particular, to 
ensure equal participation in the preparation of delegated acts, the European Parliament 
and the Council receive all documents at the same time as Member States’ experts, and 
their experts systematically have access to meetings of Commission expert groups dealing 
with the preparation of delegated acts. 
(73) 
To the extent that any of the measures envisaged by the present Regulation constitute State 
aid, the provisions concerning such measures are without prejudice to the application of 
Articles 107 and 108 of the Treaty. 


 
 
16521/23  
 
VF/ae 
42 
ANNEX 
COMPET.1 
 
EN 
 
(74) 
Since the objective of this Regulation cannot be sufficiently achieved by the Member 
States and can rather, by reason of the scale or effects of the action, be better achieved at 
Union level, the Union may adopt measures in accordance with the principle of 
subsidiarity as set out in Article 5 of the Treaty. In accordance with the principle of 
proportionality as set out in that Article, this Regulation does not go beyond what is 
necessary in order to achieve that objective.


 
 
16521/23  
 
VF/ae 
43 
ANNEX 
COMPET.1 
 
EN 
 
HAVE ADOPTED THIS REGULATION: 
Chapter I 
Subject matter, scope and definitions 
Article 1 
Subject matter 
1. 
The general objective of this Regulation is to improve the functioning of the internal 
market by establishing a framework to ensure the Union’s access to a secure and 
sustainable supply of net-zero technologies, while contributing to achieving the Union’s 
2030 target of reducing net greenhouse gas emissions by at least 55% relative to 1990 
levels and the Union’s 2050 climate neutrality target. 
2. 
To contribute to achieving the general objective referred to in paragraph 1, this Regulation 
contains measures aimed at 
a) lowering the risk of supply disruptions related to net-zero technologies likely to distort 
competition and fragment the internal market, in particular by identifying and 
supporting the scale-up of the manufacturing capacity of net-zero technologies and 
their value chains; 
b) 
encouraging demand for sustainable and resilient net-zero technologies through 
public procurement, auctioning and other forms of public interventions; 
c) 
enhancing skills through the support of net-zero academies, thereby safeguarding and 
creating quality jobs; 
d) 
supporting innovation through the creation of net-zero regulatory sandboxes; 
e) 
improving the Union's ability to monitor and mitigate the supply risk related to net-
zero technologies. 
2a. 
This Regulation also aims at establishing a Union market for CO2 storage services. 


 
 
16521/23  
 
VF/ae 
44 
ANNEX 
COMPET.1 
 
EN 
 
Article 2 
Scope 
This Regulation applies to net-zero technologies, except for Articles 26 and 27 of this Regulation, 
which apply only to innovative net-zero technologies and other innovative technologies with 
potential to enable the transition to a climate neutral, clean economy and reduce strategic 
dependencies. Critical raw materials falling under the scope of Regulation (EU) …/… [add footnote 
with publication references of the Critical Raw Materials Regulation] shall be excluded from the 
scope of this Regulation. 
In cases of integrated production facilities that cover production of materials falling both under the 
scope of the [Critical Raw Materials Act] and this Regulation, it shall be the facilities’ final product 
that determines which Regulation applies. 
Article 3 
Definitions 
1. 
For the purpose of this Regulation, the following definitions shall apply: 
(a) 
’net-zero technologies’ means all technologies identified under Article 3a, which are 
final products, specific components or specific machinery primarily used for the 
production of those products, and which have reached a technology readiness level of 
at least 8; 
(aa) ‘strategic net-zero technology’ means all technologies identified under paragraph 1 
of Article 3b, which are final products, specific components or specific machinery 
primarily used for the production of those products, and which have reached a 
technology readiness level of at least 8; 


 
 
16521/23  
 
VF/ae 
45 
ANNEX 
COMPET.1 
 
EN 
 
b) 
‘primarily used’ means final products and specific components, which are essential 
for the production of net-zero technologies, as set out in Annex X or final products, 
specific components and specific machinery which are essential for the production of 
net-zero technologies based on evidence provided to a national competent authority 
by the project promoter, such as market studies or off-take agreements; 
(ac) ‘renewable energy’ means ‘renewable energy’ as defined in Directive (EU) 
2018/2001 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 11 December 2018 on 
the promotion of the use of energy from renewable sources; 
(aca) ‘renewable fuels of non-biological origin’ means renewable fuels of non-biological 
origin as defined by [Art. XX RED II Revision]; 
(ad) ‘sustainable alternative fuels’ means fuels destined for the aviation sector referred to 
in Article 3(7), 3(13) and 3(17) of the [Refuel Aviation Regulation] or fuels destined 
for the maritime sector as identified in applying the criteria defined in Articles 10(1) 
and 10(2) of the [FuelEU Maritime Regulation]; 
(ae) ‘transformative industrial technologies for decarbonisation’ means the scaling up of 
manufacturing capacity for transformative industrial technologies that are used to 
significantly and permanently reduce emission rates of CO2-eq of energy intensive 
activities in the steel, aluminium, non-ferrous metals, basic chemicals, cement, lime, 
glass, ceramics, fertilisers and paper sectors to the extent which is technically 
feasible; 
(af) ‘biotech climate and energy solutions’ means technologies anchored in the use of 
living organism such as enzymes, microorganisms and bacterial culture able to 
reduce CO2 emissions by replacing energy-intensive fossil or chemical-based inputs 
in industrial manufacturing processes relevant for inter alia carbon capture and 
production of biofuels; 
(b) 
‘component’ means a part of a net-zero technology that is manufactured and traded 
by a company, including processed materials; 


 
 
16521/23  
 
VF/ae 
46 
ANNEX 
COMPET.1 
 
EN 
 
(ba) ‘processed material’ means a material that is at an advanced stage of processing, 
excluding critical raw materials falling under CRMA, and designed to fulfil a 
specific function in a net-zero technology; 
(c) 
‘innovative net-zero technologies’ means technologies which satisfy the definition of 
‘net-zero technologies’, except that they have not reached a technology readiness 
level of at least 8, and that comprise genuine innovation which are not currently 
available on the market and are advanced enough to be tested in a controlled 
environment; 
(ca) 'other innovative technologies’ means energy or climate related technologies with 
proven potential to contribute to decarbonisation of industrial or energy systems and 
reduce strategic dependencies, which comprise genuine innovation not currently 
available on the European market and which are advanced enough to be tested in a 
controlled environment, but have not reached a technology level of at least 8; 
(d) 
‘net-zero technology manufacturing project’ means a planned commercial facility or 
an extension or repurposing of an existing facility to manufacture net-zero 
technologies; 
(e) 
‘net-zero strategic project’ means a net-zero technology manufacturing project, CO2 
storage project or CO2 transport infrastructure project located in the Union that a 
Member State has recognised as a net-zero strategic project in accordance with 
Articles 10 and 11; 


 
 
16521/23  
 
VF/ae 
47 
ANNEX 
COMPET.1 
 
EN 
 
(f) 
‘permit granting process’ means a process covering all relevant permits to construct, 
extend, change and operate net-zero technology manufacturing projects and strategic 
projects encompassing all applications and procedures from the acknowledgement 
that the application is complete to the notification of the comprehensive decision. For 
CO2 geological storage, the permit granting process refers to the storage permit 
granting process, which concerns processing of all necessary permits for surface 
installations requested to operate a storage site (building permit, pipes 
authorisation…) and the environmental authorisation for the injection and storage of 
CO2 completed in accordance with Directive 2009/31/EC of the European 
Parliament and of the Council of 23 April 2009 on the geological storage of carbon 
dioxide and amending Council Directive 85/337/EEC, European Parliament and 
Council Directives 2000/60/EC, 2001/80/EC, 2004/35/EC, 2006/12/EC, 2008/1/EC 
and Regulation (EC) No 1013/2006; 
(g) 
‘comprehensive decision’ means the decision or set of decisions taken by Member 
State authorities that determines whether or not a project promoter is authorised to 
implement a net-zero technology manufacturing project, without prejudice to any 
decision taken in the context of an appeal procedure; 
(h) 
‘project promoter’ means any undertaking or consortium of undertakings developing 
a net-zero technology manufacturing project or a net-zero strategic project; 
(i) 
‘net-zero regulatory sandbox’ means a scheme that enables undertakings to test 
innovative net-zero technologies and other innovative technologies in a controlled 
real-world environment, under a specific plan, developed and monitored by a 
competent authority; 
(j) 
‘technology readiness level’ means a method of estimating the maturity of 
technologies, according to the classification used by the International Energy 
Agency; 
(k) 
‘authorities concerned’ means authorities that, under national law, are involved in the 
issuing of permits as part of the permit-granting process as described in letter (f); 


 
 
16521/23  
 
VF/ae 
48 
ANNEX 
COMPET.1 
 
EN 
 
(l) 
‘public procurement procedure’ means any of the following: 
(i) 
any type of award procedure covered by Directive 2014/24/EU for the 
conclusion of a public contract or Directive 2014/25/EU for the conclusion of a 
supply, works and service contract; 
(ii) 
a procedure for the award of works or a service concession covered by 
Directive 2014/23/EU; 
(m) ‘contracting authority’ in the context of public procurement procedures, means 
contracting authority as defined in Article 6 of Directive 2014/23/EU, Article 2(1), 
point (1) of Directive 2014/24/EU and Article 3 of Directive 2014/25/EU; 
(n) 
‘contracting entity’ in the context of public procurement procedures, means 
contracting entity as defined in, Article 7 of Directive 2014/23/EU and Article 4 of 
Directive 2014/25/EU; 
(o) 
‘contract’, in the context of public procurement procedures, means a public contract 
as defined in Article 2(1), point (5) of Directive 2014/24/EU, ‘contracts’ as defined 
in ‘supply, works and service contracts’ as defined in Article 2, point (1), of 
Directive 2014/25/EU, and ‘concessions’ as defined in Article 5, point (1), of 
Directive 2014/23/EU; 
(p) 
‘auction’ means a mechanism for competitive tendering procedures to support the 
production or consumption of energy from renewable sources, not falling under 
Directives 2014/23/EU, 2014/24/EU, 2014/25/EU and 2009/81/EC; 
(q) 
‘CO2 injection capacity’ means the annual amount of CO2 that can be injected in an 
operational geological storage site, permitted under Directive 2009/31/EC, with the 
purpose to reduce emissions or increase carbon removals, in particular from large 
scale industrial installations and which is measured in tonnes per annum; 


 
 
16521/23  
 
VF/ae 
49 
ANNEX 
COMPET.1 
 
EN 
 
(r) 
‘energy system integration’ means solutions for the planning and operating of the 
energy system as a whole, across multiple energy carriers, infrastructures, and 
consumption sectors, by creating stronger links between them with the objective of 
delivering renewable-based, flexible, reliable and resource-efficient energy services, 
at the least possible cost for society and the environment; 
(s) 
‘manufacturing capacity’ means the total amount of output capacity of the net-zero 
technologies produced in a manufacturing project. If the manufacturing project does 
not produce final products but specific components or specific machinery primarily 
used for the production of such products, then manufacturing capacity refers to 
output capacity of the final product that would use such components or specific 
machinery to be produced. 
Chapter Ia 
Net-zero technologies and strategic net-zero technologies 
Article 3a 
List of net-zero technologies 
1. 
The net-zero technologies within the scope of this Regulation are: 
a) 
renewable energy technologies; 
b) 
electricity and heat storage; 
c) 
heat pumps; 
d) 
electricity grid technologies 
e) 
renewable fuels of non-biological origin technologies; 
f) 
sustainable alternative fuels technologies; 
g) 
hydrogen technologies, including electrolysers and fuel cells; 
i) 
nuclear technologies; 


 
 
16521/23  
 
VF/ae 
50 
ANNEX 
COMPET.1 
 
EN 
 
j) 
CO2 transport and carbon capture, utilisation, and storage technologies; 
k) 
energy-system related energy efficiency technologies; 
l) 
biotech climate and energy solutions, including biobased feedstock solutions; 
p) 
transformative industrial technologies for decarbonisation not covered under the 
previous categories. 
Article 3b 
List of strategic net-zero technologies 
1. 
The list of strategic net-zero technologies within the scope of this Act are: 
a) 
solar photovoltaic, solar thermal electric and solar thermal technologies; 
b) 
onshore wind and offshore renewable technologies; 
c) 
battery and storage technologies; 
d) 
heat pumps and geothermal energy technologies; 
e) 
hydrogen technologies including, electrolysers and fuel cells; 
f) 
sustainable biogas and biomethane technologies; 
g) 
carbon capture and storage (CCS) technologies; 
h) 
electricity grid technologies; 
i) 
nuclear fission energy technologies, including nuclear fuel cycle technologies; 
j) 
sustainable alternative fuels technologies. 
2. 
The list in paragraph 1 is without prejudice to a Member State's right to determine its choice 
between different energy sources and the general structure of its energy supply. 


 
 
16521/23  
 
VF/ae 
51 
ANNEX 
COMPET.1 
 
EN 
 
3. 
The list in paragraph 1 is without prejudice to the allocation of Union funding, in particular on 
eligibility or award criteria, as adopted in accordance with the appropriate procedures, or on 
Union support through the European Investment Bank. 
Chapter II 
Enabling conditions for net-zero technology manufacturing 
SECTION I 
STREAMLINING ADMINISTRATIVE AND PERMIT-GRANTING PROCESSES 
Article 4 
Point of single contact 
1. 
By …[ 9 months after the date of entry into force of this Regulation], Member States shall 
designate one or more contact points at relevant levels of Member State administration. 
The designated contact point shall be responsible for facilitating and coordinating the 
permit-granting process for net-zero technology manufacturing projects, including for net-
zero strategic projects, and providing information on streamlining the administrative 
process in line with Article 5, including information on when an application is considered 
to be complete according to Article 6(2a) and 6(6). 
1a. 
In case of multiple designated contact points, Member States shall provide tools to help 
project promoters identify the appropriate designated contact point on the online web page 
set up in accordance with Article 5. 
2. 
The designated contact point shall be the sole point of contact for the project promoter in 
the permit-granting process for a net-zero technology manufacturing project, including a 
net-zero strategic project. The designated contact point shall notify the project promoter on 
the outcome of the comprehensive decision. 


 
 
16521/23  
 
VF/ae 
52 
ANNEX 
COMPET.1 
 
EN 
 
3. 
The responsibilities of the designated contact point or the tasks related to it may be 
delegated to another authority, for a net-zero technology manufacturing project, including 
a net-zero strategic project, provided that: 
(a) 
the designated contact point notifies the project promoter of that delegation; 
(b) 
a single contact point is responsible for each of the projects; 
(c) 
a single contact point coordinates the submission of all relevant documents and 
information; 
(d) 
a single contact point provides information on relevant documentation needed for the 
application required in the permit-granting process. 
4. 
Project promoters shall be allowed to submit any documents relevant to the permit-
granting process in electronic form. 
5. 
The competent authorities shall ensure that any relevant studies, permits or authorisations 
issued or conducted for a given project are taken into account and that not duplicate 
studies, permits or authorisations are required, unless otherwise required under national or 
Union law. 
6. 
Member States shall ensure that applicants have easy access to information on procedures 
for the settlement of disputes concerning the permit-granting process including, where 
applicable, alternative dispute resolution mechanisms, if such procedures are provided by 
national law. 
7. 
Member States shall ensure that the designated contact point has a sufficient number of 
qualified staff and sufficient financial, technical and technological resources necessary, for 
the effective performance of its tasks under this Regulation. 
8. 
The Platform referred to in Article 28 and 29 shall periodically discuss the implementation 
of this Section and Articles 12 and 13 and share best-practices for organising designated 
contact points. 


 
 
16521/23  
 
VF/ae 
53 
ANNEX 
COMPET.1 
 
EN 
 
9. 
The national competent authorities shall specify and make available to the designated 
contact point the requirements and extent of information requested of a project promoter 
before the permit-granting process commences. 
Article 5 
Online accessibility of information 
Member States shall provide access to the following information on processes relevant to net-zero 
technology manufacturing projects, including net zero strategic projects, online and in a centralised 
and easily accessible manner: 
(-a) the designated contact points referred to in Article 4 paragraph 1; 
(a) 
the permit-granting process, including information on dispute settlement; 
(b) 
financing and investment services; 
(c) 
funding possibilities at Union or Member State level; 
(d) 
business support services, including but not limited to corporate tax declaration, local 
tax laws, labour law. 
Article 6 
Duration of the permit-granting process 
1. 
The permit-granting process for net-zero technology manufacturing projects shall not 
exceed any of the following time limits: 
(a) 
12 months for the construction or expansion of net-zero technology manufacturing 
projects with a yearly manufacturing capacity of less than 1 GW; 
(b) 
18 months for the construction or expansion of net-zero technology manufacturing 
projects, with a yearly manufacturing capacity of 1 GW or more. 


 
 
16521/23  
 
VF/ae 
54 
ANNEX 
COMPET.1 
 
EN 
 
2. 
For net-zero technology manufacturing projects for which a yearly manufacturing capacity 
is not measured in GW, the permit-granting process shall not exceed a time limit of 18 
months. 
2a. 
Where an environmental impact assessment is required pursuant to Directive 2011/92/EU, 
the steps of the assessment referred to in Article 1 (2)(g) (i) of that Directive shall not be 
included in the duration for permit granting process referred to in paragraphs 1 and 2. 
4. 
In exceptional cases, where the nature, complexity, location or size of the proposed net-
zero technology manufacturing project or net-zero strategic project so requires, a Member 
State may once extend the time limits referred to in Articles 6(1), 6(2), 13(1) and 13(2) by 
a maximum of 3 months before their expiry and on a case-by-case basis. 
Where a Member State considers that the proposed net-zero technology manufacturing 
project or net-zero strategic project raises exceptional risks for the health and safety of 
workers or of the general population, and where additional time is necessary to establish 
that measures to address identifiable risks are put in place, it may extend those time limits 
by a further 6 months, before their expiry and on a case-by-case basis. 
5. 
In either such event, the designated contact point shall inform the project promoter of the 
reasons for the extension and of the date when the comprehensive decision is expected in 
writing. 
5a 
The designated contact point referred to in Article 4(1) shall notify the project promotor 
when the environmental impact assessment report referred in Article 5(1) of Directive 
2011/92/EU is due, taking into account the organisation of the permit granting process in 
the relevant Member State and the need to allow sufficient time to assess the report. The 
period as from the date the environmental impact report is due until the submission of that 
report shall not be counted towards the duration of the permit granting process referred to 
in paragraphs 1 and 2. 


 
 
16521/23  
 
VF/ae 
55 
ANNEX 
COMPET.1 
 
EN 
 
 
Where the consultation according to article 1(2)(g)(ii) of Directive 2011/92/EU results in 
the need to supplement the environmental impact assessment report with additional 
information, the designated contact point referred to in Article 4(1) may give the project 
promotor the opportunity to submit additional information. In such case, the designated 
contact point shall notify the project promotor when the additional information is due, 
which shall be in no less than 30 days after the notification. The period as from the date the 
additional information is due until the submission of that information shall not be counted 
towards the duration of the permit granting process referred to in paragraphs 1 and 2. 
6. 
No later than 45 days following the receipt of a permit granting application, the designated 
contact point referred to in Article 4(1) shall acknowledge that the application is complete 
or, if the project promoter has not sent all the information required to process the 
application, request the project promoter to submit a complete application without undue 
delay. The date of the acknowledgement of the completeness of the application from the 
designated contact point referred to in Article 4(1) shall serve as the start of the permit 
granting process for that particular application. 
7. 
No later than two months following the date of the acknowledgement, the designated 
contact point shall draw up, in close cooperation with other authorities concerned, a 
detailed schedule for the permit granting process. 
8. 
The time limits set in Articles 6 and 13 shall be without prejudice to obligations arising 
from Union and international law, and without prejudice to administrative appeal 
procedures and judicial remedies before a court or tribunal. 
9. 
The time limits set in Articles 6 and 13 for any of the permit granting procedures shall be 
without prejudice to any shorter time limits set by Member States. 


 
 
16521/23  
 
VF/ae 
56 
ANNEX 
COMPET.1 
 
EN 
 
Article 7 
Environmental assessments and authorisations 
1. 
Where an environmental impact assessment is required pursuant to Directive 2011/92/EU, 
the project promoter concerned may request, before submitting the application, an opinion to 
the designated contact point on the scope and level of detail of the information to be 
included in the environmental impact assessment report pursuant to Article 5(1) of that 
Directive. The designated contact point shall ensure that the opinion referred to in the first 
subparagraph is issued as soon as possible and within a period of time not exceeding 45 days 
from the date on which the project promoter submitted its request. 
2. 
Where the obligation to assess the effects on the environment arises simultaneously from 
Directive 2011/92/EU, Directive 92/43/EEC, Directive 2009/147/EC of the European 
Parliament and the Council, Directive 2000/60/EC, Directive 2001/42/EC of the European 
Parliament and the Council , Directive 2008/98/EC of the European Parliament and of the 
Council, Directive 2010/75/EU, Directive 2012/18/EU of the European Parliament and the 
Council [or Nature Restoration Regulation COM (2022) 304 final], the Member State shall 
ensure that a coordinated or a joint procedure fulfilling the requirements of that Union 
legislation is applied. 
Under the coordinated procedure referred to in the first subparagraph, a competent 
authority shall coordinate the various individual assessments of the environmental impact 
of a particular project required by the applicable Union legislation. 
Under the joint procedure referred to in the first subparagraph, a competent authority 
shall provide for a single assessment of the environmental impact of a particular project 
required by the applicable Union legislation. 
3. 
The Member State shall ensure that a reasoned conclusion as referred to in Article 1(2), 
point (g)(iv) of Directive 2011/92/EU on the environmental impact assessment is 
issued within three months of receiving all necessary information gathered pursuant to 
Articles 5, 6 and 7 of that Directive and completing the consultations referred to in Articles 
6 and 7 of that Directive. 


 
 
16521/23  
 
VF/ae 
57 
ANNEX 
COMPET.1 
 
EN 
 
4. 
The timeframes for consulting the public concerned as referred to in Article 1(2)(e) of 
Directive 2011/92/EU and authorities referred to in Article 6(1) of that Directive on the 
environmental report referred to in Article 5(1) of that Directive shall not be longer than 90 
days. 
Article 8 
Planning 
1. 
Member States shall encourage that national, regional and local authorities responsible for 
preparing plans, including zoning, spatial plans and land use plans, include in such plans, 
where appropriate, provisions for the development of net-zero technology manufacturing 
projects, including net-zero strategic projects and all the necessary infrastructure. 
2. 
Where plans include provisions for the development of net-zero technology manufacturing 
projects, including net-zero strategic projects, and are subject to an assessment pursuant 
to Directive 2001/42/EC and pursuant to Article 6 of Directive 92/43/EEC, those 
assessments shall be streamlined. Where relevant, that streamlined assessment shall also 
address the impact on all potentially affected water bodies and verify whether the plan may 
prevent a water body from complying with the obligations set out in Article 4 of Directive 
2000/60/EC, to achieve good status or good potential and not to deteriorate status or 
potential. Where relevant Member States are required to assess the impacts of existing and 
future activities on the marine environment, including land-sea interactions, as referred to 
in Article 4 of Directive 2014/89/EU, these impacts shall also be covered by the 
streamlined assessment. 
Article 8a 
Establishment of Net Zero Acceleration Areas 
1. 
Member States may adopt plans designating specific areas to accelerate net-zero 
technology manufacturing projects, including net-zero strategic projects or clusters thereof, 
to test innovative net-zero technologies, facilitate permit granting processes and, where 
relevant, develop economic opportunities and share responsibilities. 


 
 
16521/23  
 
VF/ae 
58 
ANNEX 
COMPET.1 
 
EN 
 
2. 
Those plans shall: 
(a) 
define a clear geographical scope for the Net Zero Acceleration Areas; 
(b) 
exclude Natura 2000 sites and areas designated under national protection schemes for 
nature and biodiversity conversation and identified bird and marine mammal 
migratory routes; 
(c) 
be subject to an environmental assessment pursuant to Directive 2001/42/EC of the 
European Parliament and of the Council, and, where applicable, to an assessment 
pursuant to Article 6(3) of Directive 92/43/EEC. This provision is without prejudice 
to compliance of individual projects with applicable Union environmental 
legislation; 
(d) 
ensure synergies with the designation of renewables acceleration areas of RED3. 
3. 
Member States may facilitate the necessary infrastructure in the Net Zero Acceleration 
Areas to develop net-zero projects. This can be, but is not limited to, physical, digital or 
electricity infrastructure. 
Article 8b 
Permitting under Net Zero Acceleration Areas 
1. 
The provisions provided in sections 1 and 2 shall apply to individual projects in Net Zero 
Acceleration Areas. 
2. 
In view of avoiding duplication of assessments, the designated contact point shall take into 
account the results of the assessments undertaken under Article 8a point 2(c), when issuing 
of the opinion under Article 7(1). 
3. 
The point of single contact may create templates indicating the specific permits needed for 
the projects in the Net Zero Acceleration Areas and its submission to the competent 
authorities. Templates may be shared in the Net-Zero Europe Platform. 


 
 
16521/23  
 
VF/ae 
59 
ANNEX 
COMPET.1 
 
EN 
 
Article 9 
Applicability of UNECE Conventions 
1. 
The provisions set out in this Regulation are without prejudice to the obligations under 
Articles 6 and 7 of the United Nations Economic Commission for Europe (UNECE) 
Convention on Access to Information, Public Participation in Decision-making and Access 
to Justice in Environmental Matters, signed at Aarhus on 25 June 1998, and under the 
UNECE Convention on environmental impact assessment in a transboundary context, 
signed at Espoo on 25 February 1991, and its Protocol on Strategic Environmental 
Assessment, signed in Kyiv on 21 May 2003. 
2. 
All decisions adopted pursuant to this Section and Articles 12 and 13 shall be made 
publicly available. 
SECTION II 
NET-ZERO STRATEGIC PROJECTS 
Article 9a 
Benchmark 
The Commission and Member States shall support Strategic Projects in accordance with this 
Section in order to ensure that by 2030, manufacturing capacity in the Union of the strategic net-
zero technologies listed in Article 3b, approaches or reaches a benchmark of at least 40% of the 
Union’s annual deployment needs for the corresponding technologies necessary to achieve the 
Union’s 2030 climate and energy targets. 
Article 10  
Selection criteria 
1. 
Member States shall recognise as net-zero strategic projects those net-zero technology 
manufacturing projects corresponding to a technology listed in Article 3b, and located in 
the Union that contributes to the realisation of the objectives and meet at least one of the 
following criteria. 


 
 
16521/23  
 
VF/ae 
60 
ANNEX 
COMPET.1 
 
EN 
 
(a) 
the net-zero technology manufacturing project contributes to the technological and 
industrial resilience of the Union’s net-zero technologies by increasing the 
manufacturing capacity of a component or a segment of the net-zero technology 
value chain for which the Union heavily depends on imports coming from a single 
third country; 
(b) 
the net-zero technology manufacturing project has a clear positive impact on the 
Union’s net-zero industry supply chain or downstream sectors, with spill over effects 
in other Member States beyond the project promoter and the Member States 
concerned, while contributing to the competitiveness, Union’s climate and energy 
targets and quality job creation of the Union’s net-zero industry supply chain, 
according to at least one of the following criteria: 
(i) 
it adds significant manufacturing capacity in the Union for the net-zero 
technology concerned that contributes to the realisation of the objective set out 
in Article 9a; 
(ii) 
it manufactures technologies with improved environmental sustainability and 
performance; 
and according to at least one of the following criteria: 
(iii) it puts into place measures to attract, upskill or reskill a workforce required for 
net-zero technologies, including through apprenticeships, in close cooperation 
with social partners; 
(iv) it adopts comprehensive low-carbon and circular manufacturing practices, 
including, for example, waste heat recovery, side stream valorisation and water 
efficiency; 
 
2. 
Member States shall recognise as net-zero strategic projects CO2 storage projects that meet 
the following cumulative criteria: 


 
 
16521/23  
 
VF/ae 
61 
ANNEX 
COMPET.1 
 
EN 
 
(a) 
the CO2 storage site is located in the territory of the Union, its exclusive economic 
zones or on its continental shelf within the meaning of the United Nations 
Convention on the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS); 
(b) 
the CO2 storage project contributes to reaching the objective set out in Article 16; 
(c) 
the CO2 storage project has applied for a permit for the safe and permanent 
geological storage of CO2 in accordance with Directive 2009/31/EC. 
2a. 
CO2 capture projects and CO2 transport infrastructure projects that facilitate connections of 
installations capturing CO2 with CO2 storage sites recognised as net-zero strategic projects 
according to paragraph 2, shall also be considered as net-zero strategic projects. 
2b. 
The Commission shall provide general information, data and guidance for the assessment 
of the criteria in paragraphs 1 and 2. 
3. 
Net-zero technology manufacturing projects corresponding to a technology as defined in 
Article 3(1), point (aa), located in ‘less developed and transition regions’ and Just 
Transition Fund Territories and eligible for funding under cohesion policy rules, shall be, 
after the award procedure has been completed, recognised by Member States as net-zero 
strategic projects under Article 11(3) upon written request of the project promoter without 
the project promoter having to submit a formal application under Article 11(2). 
4. 
A net-zero technology manufacturing project located in the Union that contributes to the 
realisation of the general objective set out in Article 1(1) and that either benefits from the 
ETS Innovation Fund, or is part of Important Projects of Common European Interest, 
European Hydrogen Valleys, or of the Hydrogen Bank, when the funds support investment 
in manufacturing capacities corresponding to a technology as defined in Article 3(1), point 
(aa), shall be recognised by Member States as net-zero strategic project under Article 11(3) 
upon request of the project promoter without the project promoter having to submit a 
formal application under Article 11(2). 


 
 
16521/23  
 
VF/ae 
62 
ANNEX 
COMPET.1 
 
EN 
 
5. 
Where a net-zero strategic project contributes to a value chain for a technology that a 
Member State does not accept as part of the general structure of its energy supply, the 
Member State may refuse to grant the project status. 
Article 11 
Application and recognition 
1. 
Applications for recognition as net-zero strategic projects shall be submitted by the project 
promoter to the relevant Member State. 
2. 
The application referred to in paragraph 1 shall contain all of the following: 
(a) 
relevant evidence related to the fulfilment of the criteria laid down in Article 10(1) or 
(2); 
(b) 
a business plan evaluating the financial viability of the project consistent with the 
objective of creating quality jobs; 
(c) 
a first estimation of a timetable for the project, in order to estimate when the project 
would be able to contribute to the Unions manufacturing capacity benchmark in 
Article 9a or Union level objective of CO2 injection capacity in article 16. 
2a. 
The Commission shall provide a pre-set form to submit the applications referred to in 
paragraph 1. 
3. 
Member States shall assess the application referred to in paragraph 1 through a fair and 
transparent process within a month of the receipt of the complete application. If the project 
promoter has not sent all the relevant and complete information required to process an 
application, the Member State shall request, once only, that the project promoter submit 
complementary information without undue delay, in order to reach a complete application. 
The date of the acknowledgement of the completeness of the submission shall serve as the 
start of the assessment process. 


 
 
16521/23  
 
VF/ae 
63 
ANNEX 
COMPET.1 
 
EN 
 
3a. 
If there is no decision within the timeframe in paragraph 3, the project promoter may notify 
the Net-Zero Europe Platform and the Commission shall request without undue delay the 
Member State to provide the project promoter with an updated deadline. The Member State 
shall then specify the timeframe of when the decision on the recognition of the project as 
strategic will be taken. 
4. 
The Commission may provide its opinion on the approved net-zero strategic projects. In 
the case of a rejection of the application by a Member State, the applicant shall have the 
right to submit the application to the Commission, which shall assess the application within 
20 working days. The Commission’s assessment is without prejudice to the Member 
State’s decision. 
5. 
Where the Commission, following its assessment in accordance with paragraph 4, confirms 
the rejection of the application by the Member State, it shall notify the applicant of its 
conclusion in the form of a letter. Where the Commission differs in its assessment from the 
Member State, the Net-Zero Europe Platform as established in Article 28 shall discuss the 
project in question. 
6. 
Where the Commission or a Member State finds that a net-zero strategic project has 
undergone substantial changes or that it no longer fulfils the criteria set out in Article 10(1) 
or 10(3), or where its recognition was based on an application containing incorrect 
information, it shall inform the project promoter concerned. After hearing the project 
promoter, the Member State may repeal the decision granting a project the status of net-
zero strategic project. 
7. 
Projects which are no longer recognised as net-zero strategic project shall lose all rights 
connected to that status under this Regulation. 
8. 
The Commission shall set up and maintain an openly available registry of net-zero 
strategic projects. 


 
 
16521/23  
 
VF/ae 
64 
ANNEX 
COMPET.1 
 
EN 
 
Article 12 
Priority status of net-zero strategic projects 
1. 
Project promoters and all authorities concerned shall ensure that for net-zero strategic 
projects those processes are treated in the most rapid way possible in accordance with 
Union and national law. 
2. 
Without prejudice to obligations provided for in Union law, when a project is granted the 
status of net-zero strategic project, Member States shall grant net-zero strategic projects the 
status of the highest national significance possible, where such a status exists in national 
law, and be treated accordingly in the permit-granting processes including those relating to 
environmental assessments and if national law so provides, to spatial planning. 
3. 
Net-zero strategic projects shall be considered to contribute to the security of supply of 
strategic net-zero technologies in the Union and therefore to be in the public interest. With 
regard to the environmental impacts addressed in Articles 6(4) and 16(1)I of Directive 
92/43/EEC, Article 4(7) of Directive 2000/60/EC and Article 9(1)(a) of Directive 
2009/147/EC [or in Articles 4(8) and 4(8a) of the Nature Restoration Regulation,] net-zero 
strategic projects in the Union shall be considered as being of public interest and may be 
considered as having an overriding public interest provided that all the conditions set out in 
those acts are fulfilled. 
4. 
All dispute resolution procedures, litigation, appeals and judicial remedies related to net-
zero strategic projects in front of any national courts, tribunals, panels, including mediation 
or arbitration, where they exist in national law, shall be treated as urgent, if and to the 
extent to which national law concerning permit granting processes provides for such 
urgency procedures and provided that the normally applicable rights of defence of 
individuals or of local communities would be respected Project promoters of net-zero 
strategic projects shall participate in such urgency procedure, where applicable. 


 
 
16521/23  
 
VF/ae 
65 
ANNEX 
COMPET.1 
 
EN 
 
Article 13 
Duration of the permit-granting process for net-zero strategic projects 
1. 
The permit-granting process for net-zero strategic projects shall not exceed any of the 
following time limits: 
(a) 
9 months for the construction or expansion of net-zero strategic projects with a 
yearly manufacturing capacity of less than 1 GW; 
(b) 
12 months for the construction or expansion of net-zero strategic projects, with a 
yearly manufacturing capacity of 1 GW or more; 
(c) 
18 months for all necessary permits to operate a storage site in accordance with 
Directive 2009/31/EC. 
2. 
For net-zero strategic technologies for which a yearly manufacturing capacity is not 
measured in GW, the permit-granting process shall not exceed a time limit of 12 months. 
2a. 
Where an environmental impact assessment is required pursuant to Directive 2011/92/EU, 
the steps of the assessment referred to in Article 1 (2)(g) (i) of that Directive shall not be 
included in the duration for permit granting process referred to in paragraphs 1 and 2. 
Article 14 
Accelerating implementation of net-zero strategic projects 
1. 
The Commission and the Member States shall, where relevant, undertake activities to 
accelerate and crowd-in private investments in net-zero strategic projects. Such activities 
may, without prejudice to Article 107 and Article 108 of the TFEU, include providing and 
coordinating support to net-zero strategic projects facing difficulties in accessing finance. 
2. 
Member States may provide administrative support to net-zero strategic projects to 
facilitate their timely and effective implementation, including by providing: 


 
 
16521/23  
 
VF/ae 
66 
ANNEX 
COMPET.1 
 
EN 
 
(a) 
assistance to ensure compliance with applicable administrative and reporting 
obligations; 
(b) 
assistance to project promoters to inform the public, to increase the public acceptance 
of the project. 
Article 15 
Coordination of financing 
1. 
The Net-Zero Europe Platform as established in Article 28 shall discuss financial needs 
and bottlenecks of net-zero strategic projects, potential best practices, in particular to 
develop EU cross-border supply chains, notably based on regular exchanges with the 
relevant industrial alliances. 
2. 
The Net-Zero Europe Platform shall, at the request of the net-zero strategic project 
promoter, discuss and advise on how the financing of its project can be completed, taking 
into account the funding already secured and considering at least the following elements: 
(a) 
additional private sources of financing; 
(b) 
support through resources from the European Investment Bank Group or other 
international financial institutions including the European Bank for Reconstruction 
and Development; 
(c) 
existing Member State instruments and programmes, including from national 
promotional banks, institutions and Export Credit Agencies; 
(d) 
relevant Union funding and financing programmes. 


 
 
16521/23  
 
VF/ae 
67 
ANNEX 
COMPET.1 
 
EN 
 
Chapter III 
CO2 injection capacity 
Article 16 
Union level objective of CO2 injection capacity 
1. 
An annual injection capacity of at least 50 million tonnes of CO2 shall be achieved by 
2030, in storage sites located in the territory of the European Union, its exclusive economic 
zones or on its continental shelf within the meaning of the United Nations Convention on 
the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS) and which are not combined with Enhanced Hydrocarbon 
Recovery (EHR). 
2. 
All storage sites shall be designed to operate for a minimum of five years and shall respect 
the principles of fair and open access provided in a transparent and non-discriminatory 
manner, as defined in Directive 2009/ 31/EC. 
Article 17 
Transparency of CO2 storage capacity data 
1. 
By 6 months from the entry into force of this Regulation, Member States shall: 
(a) 
make data on all areas where CO2 storage sites could be permitted on their territory, 
including saline aquifers, publicly available, without prejudice to requirements 
regarding the protection of confidential information; 


 
 
16521/23  
 
VF/ae 
68 
ANNEX 
COMPET.1 
 
EN 
 
(b) 
oblige entities which are or have been holders of an authorisation as defined in 
Article 1, point 3, of Directive 94/22/EC of the European Parliament and of the 
Council36 on their territory to make publicly available all geological data relating to 
production sites that have been decommissioned or whose decommissioning has 
been notified to the competent authority, unless the entity has applied for an 
exploration permit in accordance with Directive 2009/31/EC; 
(c) 
for the purposes of point (a), the data shall include at least the information requested 
in the Commission Notice on the Guidance to Member States for the update of the 
2021-2030 National Energy and Climate Plans. 
2. 
By six months from the entry into force of this Regulation and each year thereafter, each 
Member State shall submit to the Commission a report describing: 
(a) 
CO2 capture projects in progress and an estimation of the corresponding needs and 
plans for transport, injection and storage capacities; 
(b) 
CO2 transport and storage projects in progress on its territory, including the status of 
permitting under Directive 2009/31/EC, expected dates for Final Investment 
Decision (FID) and entry into operation; 
(c) 
the national support measures that have or will be adopted to prompt projects 
referred to in points (a) and (b), as well as measures relating to cross-border 
transportation of CO2. 
3. 
Where no CO2 storage projects are implemented in a Member State, it shall report on its 
plans to facilitate the decarbonisation of industrial sectors or to develop cross-border 
transport of CO2. 
                                                 
36 
Directive 94/22/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 30 May 1994 on the 
conditions for granting and using authorizations for the prospection, exploration and 
production of hydrocarbons (OJ L 164, 30.6.1994, p. 3). 


 
 
16521/23  
 
VF/ae 
69 
ANNEX 
COMPET.1 
 
EN 
 
Article 18 
Contribution of authorised oil and gas producers 
1. 
Each entity holding an authorisation as defined in Article 1, point 3, of Directive 94/22/EC 
shall be subject to an individual contribution to the Union-wide target for available CO2 
injection capacity set in Article 16. Those individual contributions shall be calculated pro-
rata on the basis of each entity’s share in the Union’s crude oil and natural gas production 
from 1 January 2020 to 31 December 2023 and shall consist of CO2 injection capacity in a 
storage site permitted in accordance with Directive 2009/31/EC on the geological storage 
of carbon dioxide and available to the market by 2030. Entities with crude oil and natural 
gas production below a certain threshold as defined in accordance with a delegated act 
pursuant to paragraph 7 shall be excluded from this calculation and shall not be subject to a 
contribution. 
2. 
Within three months of the entry into force of this Regulation, Member States shall, 
identify and report to the European Commission the entities referred to in paragraph 1 and 
their volumes in crude oil and natural gas production from 1 January 2020 to 31 December 
2023. 
3. 
Following the receipt of the reports submitted pursuant to Article 17 (2), the Commission 
after having consulted Member States and interested parties, shall specify the contributions 
to the Union CO2 injection capacity objective by 2030 from entities referred to in 
paragraph 1. 
4. 
Within twelve months of the entry into force of the Regulation, the entities referred to in 
paragraph 1 shall submit to the Commission a plan detailing how they intend to meet their 
contribution to Union CO2 injection capacity objective by 2030. Those plans shall: 
(a) 
confirm the entity's contribution, expressed in terms of targeted volume of new CO2 
storage and injection capacity commissioned by 2030; 
(b) 
specify the means and the milestones for reaching the targeted volume. 


 
 
16521/23  
 
VF/ae 
70 
ANNEX 
COMPET.1 
 
EN 
 
5. 
To meet their targeted volumes of available injection capacity, entities referred to in 
paragraph 1 can do any of the following: 
(a) 
develop CO2 storage projects alone or in co-operation; 
(b) 
enter into agreements with other entities referred to in paragraph 1; 
(c) 
enter into agreements with third party storage project developers or investors to fulfil 
their contribution. 
6. 
Two years after the entry into force of the Regulation and every year thereafter, the entities 
referred to in paragraph 1 shall submit a report to the Commission detailing their progress 
towards meeting their contribution. The Commission shall make these reports public. 
6a. 
By derogation, a Member State may request the Commission to exempt the entities 
referred to in paragraph 1 from individual contribution in relation to the production 
activities they have carried out on the territory of that Member State from 1 January 2020 
to 31 December 2023, provided that: 
(a) 
the overall annual injection capacity of all storage sites operated by any entity having 
received a storage permit within the meaning of Directive 2009/31/EC and having 
reached a final investment decision located on the territory of the Member State 
exceeds the sum of the individual contributions of the entities referred to in 
paragraph 1 in relation to the relevant production activities. The annual injection 
capacities associated with these storage sites shall correspond to those mentioned in 
the storage permits and in the final investment decisions and contribute to the Union-
wide target for available CO2 injection capacity set in Article 16; 
(b) 
the application is submitted before the end of 2027. 
Provided that the two above conditions are met, the Commission shall adopt a decision 
exempting the entities concerned, referred to in paragraph 1, from their individual 
contribution in relation to the production activities they have carried out on the territory of 
the Member State submitting the request. 


 
 
16521/23  
 
VF/ae 
71 
ANNEX 
COMPET.1 
 
EN 
 
Exempted entities may enter into agreements in accordance with paragraph 5, points (b) 
and (c) only in respect of any injection capacity exceeding the individual contribution from 
which they are exempted and the sum of the individual contributions that has been 
exempted. 
One year after the exempting decision and every year thereafter, the Member State shall 
submit a report to the Commission detailing the progress of the exempted entities towards 
meeting their contribution to the Union-wide target for available CO2 injection capacity set 
in Article 16. The Commission shall make these reports public. 
6b. 
By 31 December 2028, the Commission shall assess on the basis of the reports under 
Article 31(1)(b) and 31(7) the relationship between the demand for injection capacity from 
CO2 capture projects in progress or planned to be operational by 2030 and the sum of the 
individual contributions of the entities referred to in paragraph 1 in relation to the 
production activities on the territory of a given Member State. In case of a substantial 
imbalance, the Member State concerned may exceptionally ask the Commission for a 
derogation regarding the date by which the individual contributions are fulfilled. 
7. 
The Commission is empowered to adopt delegated acts in accordance with Article 32 to 
supplement this Regulation concerning: 
(-a) The rules concerning the identification of entities subject to contribution in 
accordance with paragraph 1, including the threshold below which entities are 
exempt from contribution; 
(a) 
The modalities in which agreements between entities referred to in paragraph 1 and 
investments in storage capacity held by third parties are taken into account to meet 
their individual contribution under paragraph 5, points b and c; 


 
 
16521/23  
 
VF/ae 
72 
ANNEX 
COMPET.1 
 
EN 
 
(b) 
The content of the reports referred to in paragraph 6.(c) The conditions under which 
the Commission may exempt entities from part of their individual contribution in 
accordance with paragraph 6a. 
Chapter IV 
Access to markets 
Article 19 
Sustainability and resilience contribution in public procurement procedures 
1. 
For procurement procedures falling within the scope of Directives 2014/23/EU, 
2014/24/EU or 2014/25/EU where contracts have strategic net-zero technology listed in 
Article 3b of this Regulation as part of their subject matter, or in the case of works 
contracts including said technology, contracting authorities and contracting entities shall 
apply minimum mandatory requirements regarding environmental sustainability as defined 
in implementing acts referred to in paragraph 4. 
This shall not preclude contracting authorities and contracting entities from using other 
minimum requirements or award criteria in relation to environmental sustainability. 
3. 
The minimum mandatory requirements referred to in paragraph 1, where applicable shall 
take the form of: 
(a) 
technical specifications or requirements within the meaning of Article 36 of 
Directive 2014/23/EU, of paragraph 1 of Annex VII of Directive 2014/24/EU and of 
Article 60 of Directive 2014/25/EU or 
(b) 
contract performance clauses within the meaning of Article 70 of Directive 
2014/24/EU and of Article 87 of Directive 2014/25/EU and of the general principles 
of Directive 2014/23/EU. 
4. 
The Commission shall adopt an implementing act specifying minimum requirements on 
environmental sustainability. When adopting this implementing act the following elements 
shall at least be considered: 


 
 
16521/23  
 
VF/ae 
73 
ANNEX 
COMPET.1 
 
EN 
 
(a) 
the market situation at Union level of the relevant technologies, 
(b) 
provisions regarding environmental sustainability set out in other Union legislative 
and non-legislative acts applicable to procurements covered by the obligation set out 
in paragraph 1, 
(c) 
the Union’s international commitments, including the GPA and other international 
agreements of which the Union is bound. 
This implementing act shall be adopted within 9 months after the entry into force of this 
Regulation, in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 34(3). 
5. 
The tender’s resilience contribution, shall be taken into account in the case of public 
procurement procedures where contracts have strategic net-zero technology listed in 
Article 3b of this Regulation as part of their subject matter, or in the case of work contracts 
including said technology, and in the case of contracts awarded on the basis of a 
framework agreement where the estimated value of those agreements is equal to or above 
the values set out in Article 8 of Directive 2014/23/EU, Article 4 of Directive 2014/24/EU 
and Article 15 of Directive 2014/25/EU. 
At the time of the call for competition or commencement of such a procedure, where the 
Commission has determined in accordance with Article 22 paragraph 2 that the proportion 
of a specific strategic net-zero technology or the specific components primarily used for 
the production of those products originating in a third country accounts for more than 50% 
of the supply of that specific strategic net-zero technology or of those specific components 
primarily used for the production of those products within the Union, contracting 
authorities and contracting entities shall include the following conditions for the public 
procurement procedures as referred to in paragraph 1: 
(a) 
an obligation not to supply more than 50 % of the value of the specific strategic net 
zero technology referred to in this paragraph from the third country as determined by 
the Commission; 


 
 
16521/23  
 
VF/ae 
74 
ANNEX 
COMPET.1 
 
EN 
 
(b) 
an obligation for the duration of the contract that main components of the strategic 
net-zero technology referred to in this paragraph supplied or provided in the 
execution of the contract represent no more than 50 % of the value of the main 
components of the specific strategic net-zero technology referred to in this 
paragraph, irrespective of whether such components are supplied or provided directly 
by the successful tenderer or by a subcontractor from the third country as determined 
by the Commission; 
(c) 
to provide to the contracting authority or to the contracting entity upon their request 
adequate evidence corresponding to point (a) or (b), at the latest upon completion of 
the execution of the contract; 
(d) 
to pay a proportionate charge, in the event of non-observance of the conditions 
referred in point (a) or (b), of at least 5% of the value of the specific strategic net-
zero technologies of the contract referred to in this paragraph. 
For contracts covered by the European Union’s Annex I to the GPA as well as by other 
relevant international agreements by which the Union is bound, contracting authorities and 
contracting entities shall not apply the requirements of point (a) to (d) to economic 
operators of sources of supply that are signatories to these agreements. 
This shall not preclude contracting authorities and contracting entities from using 
additional non price criteria. 
6. 
Contracting authorities and contracting entities may on an exceptional basis decide not to 
apply paragraphs 1, 2, 3 and 5 where: 
(a) 
the required net zero technology can only be supplied by a specific economic 
operator and no reasonable alternative or substitute exists and the absence of 
competition is not the result of an artificial narrowing down of the parameters of the 
procurement; 


 
 
16521/23  
 
VF/ae 
75 
ANNEX 
COMPET.1 
 
EN 
 
(b) 
no suitable tenders or no suitable requests to participate have been submitted in 
response to a previous public procurement procedure; 
(c) 
their application would oblige that contracting authority or contracting entity to 
acquire equipment having disproportionate costs, or technical characteristics 
different from those of existing equipment, or would result in incompatibility or 
technical difficulties in operation and maintenance. 
Estimated cost differences above 20%, based on objective and transparent data, may be 
presumed by contracting authorities and contracting entities to be disproportionate. 
This provision shall be without prejudice to the possibility of excluding abnormally low 
tenders under Article 69 of Directive 2014/24/EU and Article 84 of Directive 2014/25/EU. 
Article 20 
Auctions to deploy renewable energy sources 
1. 
When designing auctions for the deployment of energy from renewable sources, and where 
technologies listed as a strategic net-zero technologies under this Regulation are allowed to 
participate, Member States shall include: 
(a) 
pre-qualification criteria related to responsible business conduct, cybersecurity and 
data security and ability to deliver the project fully and on time; 
(b) 
pre-qualification criteria different than those referred to in point (a) or award criteria 
to assess the auction’s sustainability and resilience contribution as referred to in 
paragraph 1a. 
This is without prejudice to Article 4 of Directive (EU) 2018/2001 and Articles 107 and 
108 the Treaty, and to the Union’s international obligations. 


 
 
16521/23  
 
VF/ae 
76 
ANNEX 
COMPET.1 
 
EN 
 
1a. 
The auctions’ sustainability and resilience contribution shall be based on the criterion set in 
point (a) and on at least one of the criteria laid down in points (b) to (d) which shall be 
objective, transparent and non-discriminatory: 
(a) 
contribution to resilience, taking into account the proportion of the strategic net-zero 
technologies or the specific components primarily used for the production of those 
products that originate from a third country accounting for more than 50% of the 
supply of that specific strategic net-zero technology within the Union; 
 
For the purpose of point (a), the country of origin shall be determined in accordance 
with Regulation (EU) No 952/2013 of the European Parliament and of the Council; 
(b) 
environmental sustainability going beyond the minimum requirements in applicable 
legislation; 
(c) 
contribution to innovation by providing entirely new solutions or improving 
comparable state-of-the-art solutions; 
(d) 
contribution to the energy system integration. 
This shall not preclude Member States from using additional non-price criteria beyond 
those listed in this paragraph 1a. 
The Commission will adopt an implementing act further specifying the pre-qualification 
and award criteria. 
This implementing act shall be adopted within 9 months after the entry into force of this 
Regulation in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 34(3). 


 
 
16521/23  
 
VF/ae 
77 
ANNEX 
COMPET.1 
 
EN 
 
2. 
When applied as award criteria, Member States shall give to each of the criteria to assess 
the auction’s sustainability and resilience contribution a minimum weight of 5% and a 
combined weight between 15% and 30% of the award criteria. This is without prejudice of 
the possibility to give a higher weighting to the criteria referred to in paragraph 1a, points 
(b), (c) and (d), in accordance with any limit for non-price criteria set under State aid rules. 
3. 
Member States shall not be obliged to apply the considerations relating to the pre-
qualification and award criteria defined in paragraph 1 where their application would result 
in disproportionate costs. Estimated cost differences above 15%, based on objective and 
verifiable data, may be presumed by Member States to be disproportionate. 
4. 
Paragraphs 1 to 3 shall apply to at least 20% of the volume auctioned per year per Member 
State. Upon entry into force of the implementing act as referred to in paragraph 5, 
paragraphs 1 to 3 shall apply to the volume auctioned per year per Member State as 
defined in the implementing act referred to in paragraph 5. 
 
5. 
By 31 December 2027and every two years thereafter, the Commission shall a adopt an 
implementing act to determine the shares of the volume auctioned per year per Member 
State to which paragraphs 1 to 3 shall apply , and to reduce the threshold of the estimated 
cost differences referred to in paragraph 3. The determination of the share of the volume 
auctioned shall be based on a comprehensive assessment on the application of resilience 
and sustainability criteria for renewable energy auctions and their effect on the accelerated 
deployment of renewable energy technologies. 
The implementing act referred to in subparagraph 1 shall ensure adequate appropriate time 
for implementation, ensuring at least 12 months after the entry into force of the 
implementing act, in order to adjust national law and auctions design. 


 
 
16521/23  
 
VF/ae 
78 
ANNEX 
COMPET.1 
 
EN 
 
6. 
For calculating the volumes auctioned per year per Member State the following auctions 
may be excluded: 
(a) 
auctions for a specific technology where all auctions have been undersubscribed in 
the previous 2 years; 
(b) 
auctions for installations with a maximum project size of 10 MW. 
7. 
To facilitate implementation for all Member States, in particular for those with low volume 
of auctions, Member States that have not launched more than 2 auctions per year during 
the last 2 years, may compute the share of auctions to which the non-price criteria apply 
over the period of 2 years. 
Article 21 
Other forms of public intervention 
1. 
Without prejudice to Articles 107 and 108 of the Treaty and Article 4 of Directive 
2018/200137 and in line with the Union’s international commitments, when deciding to set 
up new schemes or to update existing schemes benefitting households, companies or 
consumers which incentivise the purchase of strategic net-zero technology final products, 
Member States, regional or local authorities, bodies governed by public law or associations 
formed by one or more such authorities or one or more such bodies governed by public 
law, shall design them in such a way as to promote the purchase by beneficiaries of 
strategic net-zero technology final products with a high sustainability and resilience 
contribution as referred in Article 21(3a), by providing additional proportionate financial 
compensation. 
                                                 
37 
Directive 2018/2001 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 11 December 2018 
on the promotion of the use of energy from renewable sources 


 
 
16521/23  
 
VF/ae 
79 
ANNEX 
COMPET.1 
 
EN 
 
2. 
The additional financial compensation granted by authorities in accordance with 
paragraph 1, due to the application of the criteria referred to in Article 21(3a) (a), (c) and 
(d) shall not exceed 5% of the cost of the net-zero technology final product for the 
consumer. 
3. 
When designing and implementing a scheme falling under paragraph 1, the authority shall 
base itself on an open, non-discriminatory and transparent process to assess the resilience 
and sustainability contribution of available strategic net-zero technology final products on 
the market. Any strategic net-zero technology final product shall be entitled to apply to 
join the scheme at any time. The authority shall specify a pass mark for strategic net-zero 
technology final products to be eligible to the additional financial compensation under the 
support scheme. 
3a. 
The sustainability and resilience contribution of other forms of public intervention shall be 
based on the following criteria which shall be objective, transparent and non-
discriminatory: 
(a) 
contribution to resilience, taking into account the proportion of the strategic net-zero 
technologies or the specific components primarily used for the production of those 
products that originates from a third country that accounts for more than 50% of the 
supply of that specific strategic net-zero technology within the Union; 
 
and at least one of the following: 
(b) 
environmental sustainability going beyond the minimum requirements in applicable 
legislation; 
(c) 
contribution to innovation by providing entirely new solutions or improving 
comparable state-of-the-art solutions; 
(d) 
contribution to the energy system integration. 


 
 
16521/23  
 
VF/ae 
80 
ANNEX 
COMPET.1 
 
EN 
 
This shall not preclude Member States from using additional non-price criteria beyond 
those listed in this paragraph 3a. 
For the purpose of point (a), the country of origin shall be determined in accordance with 
Regulation (EU) No 952/2013 of the European Parliament and of the Council. 
4. 
Member States shall publish on a single free access website all information relating to 
schemes pursuant to Article 21(1) for each relevant strategic net-zero technology final 
product. 
Article 22 
Coordination of access to markets initiatives 
1. 
The Commission shall provide guidance on the application of the criteria to assess the 
resilience and sustainability contribution of available products covered by the forms of 
public intervention covered under articles 19, 20 and 21. 
2. 
For the assessment of the contribution to resilience, the Commission shall adopt an 
implementing act providing for a list of each of the strategic net-zero technology final 
products and their main components. The implementing act shall be adopted in accordance 
with the examination procedure as referred to Article 34(3). 
 
Based on the implementing act referred to in subparagraph 1, the Commission shall 
provide updated information on the shares of the Union supply originating in different 
third countries in the last year for which data is available for each of the strategic net-zero 
technologies and their main components. The country of origin shall be determined in 
accordance with Regulation (EU) 952/2013 of the European Parliament and of the Council. 


 
 
16521/23  
 
VF/ae 
81 
ANNEX 
COMPET.1 
 
EN 
 
3. 
The Net-Zero Europe Platform shall discuss measures carried out by Member States to 
implement Articles 19 to 21 and exchange best practices, inter alia, as concerns the 
practical use of criteria defining the sustainability and resilience contribution in public 
procurement, or schemes incentivising the purchase of net-zero technology final products. 
Chapter V 
Enhancing skills for quality job creation 
Article 23 
European Net Zero Industry Academies 
1. 
Fully respecting the competence of Member States in the field of education and training, 
the Commission may support, including through the provision of seed-funding, the launch 
of European Net Zero Industry Academies, which have as their objectives to: 
(a) 
develop, for voluntary use by Member States and education and training providers on 
their territories, learning programmes, content and learning and training materials for 
training and education, such as on developing, producing, installing, commissioning, 
operating, maintaining, repairing, ecodesigning, re-using and recycling net-zero 
technologies, including also on raw materials, as well as to support the capacities of 
public authorities, in particular, those competent to issue permits and authorisations 
referred to in Chapter II and contracting authorities referred to in Chapter IV of this 
Regulation; 
(b) 
promote the voluntary use of the learning programmes, content and materials by 
education and training providers in the Member States; 
(b1) offer support to the education and training providers that use the learning 
programmes, content and materials produced by the academies to strengthen the 
quality of the training offered; 


 
 
16521/23  
 
VF/ae 
82 
ANNEX 
COMPET.1 
 
EN 
 
(c) 
develop credentials, including, if appropriate, micro-credentials, for voluntary use by 
Member States and education and training providers on their territories, in order to 
facilitate the transparency of skills acquired and enhance the transferability between 
jobs and the cross-border mobility of the workforce, and to promote matching with 
relevant jobs through tools such as the European Employment Services (EURES) 
network and EURAXESS as well as to identify that a learning programme or 
learning content was developed by a European Net Zero Industry Academy. 
2. 
European Net Zero Industry Academies shall produce gender-balanced content, contribute 
to counter gender stereotypes and pay particular attention to the need to activate more 
women and young people, who are not in education, employment or training, and older 
persons and persons with disabilities for the labour market. 
Article 24 
Regulated professions in Net Zero Industries and recognition of professional qualifications 
1. 
By 31 December 2025 and every two years thereafter, Member States shall strive to 
identify whether the learning programmes developed by the European net-zero industry 
academies are equivalent to the specific qualifications required by the host Member State 
to access regulated activities within the scope of a profession with particular interest for the 
net-zero industry in that Member State. 


 
 
16521/23  
 
VF/ae 
83 
ANNEX 
COMPET.1 
 
EN 
 
2. 
If a Member State concludes that the learning programmes developed by the European 
Net-Zero industry Academies are equivalent to the specific qualifications required by the 
host Member State to access regulated activities within the scope of a profession with 
particular interest for the net-zero industry, it shall make this public and easily accessible 
online. In addition, it shall facilitate the recognition of credentials issued by education and 
training providers on the basis of the learning programmes developed by the academies, 
under Directive 2005/36/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council38, whenever a 
holder of such a credential requests access to a regulated profession within the meaning of 
Article 3(1)(a) of Directive 2005/36/EC, and of particular importance for the net-zero 
industry, by treating the credential as evidence of formal qualifications, according to the 
Article 11 of the Directive 2005/36/EC. 
3. 
Where access to a profession of particular importance for the net-zero industry is regulated 
within the meaning of Article 3(1)(a) of Directive 2005/36/EC, Member States are 
recommended to work towards developing a common set of minimum knowledge, skills 
and competences necessary for the pursuit of this specific profession with the purpose of 
establishing a Common Training Framework as referred to in Article 49a (1) of Directive 
2005/36/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council to enable automatic recognition 
of qualifications. The Net Zero Europe Platform may also submit suggestions as referred to 
in Article 49a (3) of Directive 2005/36/EC. 
Article 25 
Net-Zero Europe Platform and skills 
The Net-Zero Europe Platform referred to in Article 28 shall support and supplement the action of 
the Member States, where feasible and avoiding disproportionate administrative burden for Member 
States as well as respecting their competence, by advising and assisting the Commission and 
Member States, including competent authorities and contracting authorities referred to in Chapter II 
and Chapter IV, through the following tasks: 
                                                 
38 
Directive 2005/36/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 7 September 2005 on 
the recognition of professional qualifications (OJ L 255, 30.9.2005, p. 22). 


 
 
16521/23  
 
VF/ae 
84 
ANNEX 
COMPET.1 
 
EN 
 
(1) 
assist the Commission in assessing, continuously monitoring and forecasting the demand 
and supply of a workforce with the skill sets needed in net-zero technologies, informing as 
appropriate the activities of the European Net-Zero Industry Academies; 
(2) 
monitor the activity of the European Net-Zero Industry Academies and foster synergies 
with other national and Union skills initiatives and projects, strengthen and scale-up good 
practices and provide general oversight; 
(3) 
assist the mobilisation of stakeholders including industry, social partners and education and 
training providers for the promotion of learning programs developed by the European Net-
Zero Industry Academies; 
(4) 
assist the uptake of learning credentials developed by the European Net-Zero Industry 
Academies in the Member States to promote the identification of skills and the matching of 
skills and jobs, inter alia by promoting the validity and acceptance of the credentials 
throughout the labour market of the European Union; 
(5) 
facilitate, where appropriate, the development of occupation profiles, for the voluntary use 
by Member States, consisting of a common set of knowledge, skills and competences for 
key professions in the net-zero technologies, drawing inter alia upon the learning 
programmes developed by the European Net-Zero Industry Academies, and, where 
appropriate, using the terminology provided by the European Skills, Competences, 
Qualifications and Occupations (ESCO) classification to facilitate transparency and 
mobility between jobs and across internal market borders; 
(6) 
promote adequate working conditions in jobs in net-zero technology industries, the 
activation of youth, women and seniors to the labour market for net-zero technology 
industries, and the attraction of skilled workers from third countries, in accordance with 
national competences, law and practice, and thereby achieve a more diverse workforce; 


 
 
16521/23  
 
VF/ae 
85 
ANNEX 
COMPET.1 
 
EN 
 
(7) 
facilitate closer coordination and the exchange of best practices between Member States to 
enhance the availability of skills in the net-zero technologies, including by contributing to 
Union and Member States policies to attract new talents from third countries, in 
accordance with national competences, law and practice. This shall be done in coordination 
with the already existing structures of European cooperation in education and training; 
(8) 
look for synergies with existing training or education programs, among others aiming at 
matching programs with the needs of the European industry. 
Chapter VI 
Innovation 
Article 26 
Net-Zero regulatory sandboxes 
1. 
Member States may at their own initiative establish net-zero regulatory sandboxes, 
allowing for the development, testing and validation of innovative net-zero technologies or 
other innovative technologies, in a controlled real-world environment for a limited time 
before their placement on the market or putting into service. 
Member States shall establish net-zero regulatory sandboxes in accordance with paragraph 
1 at the request of any company, organisation or consortium developing innovative net-
zero technologies which fulfils the eligibility and selection criteria referred to in paragraph 
2(a) and which has been selected by the competent authorities following the selection 
procedure referred to in paragraph 2(b). 


 
 
16521/23  
 
VF/ae 
86 
ANNEX 
COMPET.1 
 
EN 
 
2. 
The modalities and the conditions for the establishment and operation of the net-zero 
regulatory sandboxes under this Regulation shall be adopted through implementing acts in 
accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 34. The modalities and 
conditions shall support flexibility for national competent authorities to prioritise between 
and deciding on approval of applications for Net-zero regulatory sandboxes. The 
modalities and conditions shall foster innovation and regulatory learning and shall 
particularly take into account the special circumstances and capacities of participating 
SMEs, including start-ups. The implementing acts shall include common main principles 
on the following issues: 
(a) 
eligibility and selection for participation in the net-zero regulatory sandboxes; 
(b) 
procedure for the application, participation, monitoring, exiting from and termination 
of the net-zero regulatory sandboxes; 
(c) 
the terms and conditions applicable to the participants. 
3. 
The participation in the net-zero regulatory sandboxes shall not affect the supervisory and 
corrective powers of the authorities supervising the sandbox. The testing, development and 
validation of innovative net-zero technologies or other innovative technologies shall take 
place under the supervision and support of the competent authorities. The competent 
authorities shall exercise their supervisory powers in a flexible manner within the limits of 
the relevant legislation, adapting existing regulatory practices and using their discretionary 
powers when implementing and enforcing legal provisions to a specific net-zero regulatory 
sandbox project, with the objective of removing barriers, alleviating regulatory burden, 
reducing regulatory uncertainty, and supporting innovation in net-zero technologies or 
other innovative technologies. 


 
 
16521/23  
 
VF/ae 
87 
ANNEX 
COMPET.1 
 
EN 
 
4. 
Where relevant to achieve the objective of this article, the competent authorities shall 
consider granting derogations or exemptions in national law to the extent allowed by the 
relevant Union law. The competent authorities shall ensure that the sandbox plan ensures 
respect for requirements of the Union law and key objectives and essential requirements of 
national legislation. Competent authorities shall make sure that any significant risks to 
health, safety or the environment identified during the development and testing of 
innovative net-zero technologies or other innovative technologies is publicly 
communicated and results in immediate suspension of the development and testing process 
until such risk is mitigated. Where competent authorities consider that the proposed project 
raises exceptional risks for the health and safety of workers, of the general population, or 
of the environment, in particular because it relates to testing, development or validation 
involving particularly toxic substances, they shall only approve the sandbox plan once they 
are satisfied that adequate safeguards have been put in place commensurate with the 
exceptional risk identified. 
6. 
Participants in the net-zero regulatory sandbox shall remain liable under applicable Union 
and Member States’ liability legislation for any material harm inflicted on third parties as a 
result of the testing taking place in the regulatory sandbox. 
7. 
The duration of the net-zero regulatory sandbox may be extended through the same 
procedure upon agreement of the national competent authority. 


 
 
16521/23  
 
VF/ae 
88 
ANNEX 
COMPET.1 
 
EN 
 
8. 
The net-zero regulatory sandboxes shall be designed and implemented in such a way that, 
where relevant, they facilitate cross-border cooperation between the national competent 
authorities. Member States that have established net-zero regulatory sandboxes shall 
coordinate their activities and cooperate within the framework of the Net-Zero Europe 
Platform with the objectives of sharing relevant information with other Member States 
within the Platform. The Platform may invite companies who have participated in a net-
zero regulatory sandbox to share their experience of the process. The Commission shall, on 
the basis of information provided by the Platform, report annually on the results of the 
implementation of regulatory sandboxes, including good practices, lessons learnt and 
recommendations on their setup and, where relevant, on the application within the 
regulatory sandbox of this Regulation and other Union legislation in a manner adapted for 
the purposes of the sandbox. 
Article 27 
Measures for small and medium-sized enterprises, including start-ups 
1. 
Member States shall undertake the following actions: 
(a) 
provide small and medium-sized enterprises, including start-ups, with priority access 
to the Net-zero regulatory sandboxes to the extent that they fulfil the eligibility 
conditions set in Article 26; 
(b) 
organise awareness raising activities about participation to the regulatory sandboxes 
by small and medium-sized enterprises, including start-ups; 
(c) 
where appropriate, establish a dedicated channel for communication with small and 
medium-sized enterprises, including start-ups, to provide guidance and respond to 
queries about the implementation of Article 26. 


 
 
16521/23  
 
VF/ae 
89 
ANNEX 
COMPET.1 
 
EN 
 
2. 
Member States shall take into account the specific interests and needs of small and 
medium-sized enterprises, including start-ups, and provide adequate administrative support 
to take part in the regulatory sandboxes. Without prejudice to the application of Articles 
107 and 108 of the Treaty, Member States should inform small and medium-sized 
enterprises, including start-ups, of available financial support to their activities in the 
regulatory sandboxes. 
Chapter VII 
Governance 
Article 28 
Establishment and tasks of the Net-Zero Europe Platform 
1. 
The Net-Zero Europe Platform (‘the Platform’) is established. 
2. 
The Platform shall perform the tasks set out in this Regulation. 
3. 
The Platform may advise and assist the Commission and Member States in relation to their 
actions to reach the objectives outlined in Chapter I of this Regulation, taking into account 
Member States’ national energy and climate plans submitted under Regulation (EU) 
2018/199939. 
                                                 
39 
Regulation (EU) 2018/1999 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 11 December 
2018 on the Governance of the Energy Union and Climate Action, amending Regulations 
(EC) No 663/2009 and (EC) No 715/2009 of the European Parliament and of the Council, 
Directives 94/22/EC, 98/70/EC, 2009/31/EC, 2009/73/EC, 2010/31/EU, 2012/27/EU and 
2013/30/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council, Council Directives 2009/119/EC 
and (EU) 2015/652 and repealing Regulation (EU) No 525/2013 of the European Parliament 
and of the Council (Text with EEA relevance.), (OJ L 328, 21.12.2018, p. 1). 


 
 
16521/23  
 
VF/ae 
90 
ANNEX 
COMPET.1 
 
EN 
 
4. 
Members of the Net-Zero Platform may coordinate within the Platform on the Net-Zero 
Industrial Partnerships to help promote the adoption of net-zero technologies globally and 
to support the role of Union industrial capabilities in paving the way for the global clean 
energy transition, in line with the overall objectives of this Regulation stemming from 
Article 1 of this Regulation. The Platform may periodically discuss, among other topics: 
(a) 
how to improve cooperation along the net-zero value chain between the Union and 
third countries; 
(b) 
how to address non-tariff barriers to trade, such as through mutual recognition of 
conformity assessment or commitments to avoid export restrictions; 
(c) 
which third countries could be prioritised for the conclusion of Net-Zero Industrial 
Partnerships, taking into account the following: 
i) 
the potential contribution to security of supply, taking into account their 
manufacturing capacity of net-zero technologies; 
ii) 
whether there are existing cooperation agreements between a third country and 
the Union; 
 
iii) 
whether a third country's regulatory framework and its implementation ensures 
the monitoring, prevention and minimisation of environmental impacts, the use 
of socially responsible practices including respect of human and labour rights 
and meaningful and equitable engagement with local communities, the use of 
transparent business practices and the prevention of adverse impacts on the 
proper functioning of public administration and the rule of law; 
(d) 
how to incentivise production in Europe, by addressing funding, regulatory 
framework and investment and location guarantees. 
This paragraph shall be without prejudice to the prerogatives of the Council in accordance 
with the Treaties. 


 
 
16521/23  
 
VF/ae 
91 
ANNEX 
COMPET.1 
 
EN 
 
5. 
Member States shall support the Commission in the implementation of the cooperation 
measures set out in the Net-Zero Industrial Partnership. 
Article 29 
Structure and functioning of the Net-Zero Europe Platform 
1. 
The Platform shall be composed of representatives of Member States and of the 
Commission. It shall be chaired by a representative of the Commission. 
2. 
Each Member State shall appoint a high-level representative to the Platform. Where 
relevant as regards the function and expertise, a Member State may have more than one 
representative in relation to different tasks related to the work of the Platform. Each 
member of the Platform shall have an alternate. Only Member States shall have voting 
rights. Each Member State shall have only one vote regardless the number of 
representatives. 
3. 
On a proposal by the Commission, the Platform shall adopt its rules of procedure by a 
simple majority of its members. 
4. 
The Platform shall meet at regular intervals to ensure the effective performance of its tasks 
specified in this Regulation. Where necessary, the Platform shall hold extraordinary 
meetings at the reasoned request of the Commission or a Member State. 
5. 
The Commission shall assist the Platform by means of an executive secretariat that 
provides technical and logistic support. 
6. 
The Platform may establish standing or temporary sub-groups dealing with specific 
questions and tasks related to this Regulation. 
6a. 
The Platform shall meet at least once a year in order to discuss the monitoring foreseen in 
Article 31. 


 
 
16521/23  
 
VF/ae 
92 
ANNEX 
COMPET.1 
 
EN 
 
7. 
The Platform shall invite representatives of the European Parliament to attend, as 
observers, its meetings, including of the standing or temporary sub-groups referred to in 
paragraph 6. 
8. 
Where appropriate, the Platform or the Commission may invite experts and other third 
parties with specific expertise on the subject matter, including from industry and 
stakeholder organisations, to the Platform and sub-group meetings or to provide written 
contributions, but without rights to participate in the decision making. 
9. 
The Platform shall take the necessary measures to ensure the safe handling and processing 
of confidential and commercially sensitive information. 
10. 
The Platform shall use its best endeavours to reach consensus. 
11. 
The Platform shall coordinate and cooperate with existing and relevant industrial alliances. 
Article 30 
Articulation with National Energy and Climate Plans 
Member States shall take into consideration this Regulation when preparing their national energy 
and climate plans and their updates, submitted pursuant to Articles 3, 9, and 14 of Regulation (EU) 
2018/1999, in particular as regards the dimension “research, innovation and competitiveness” of the 
Energy Union, and in the submission of their biennial progress reports in accordance with Article 
17 of that Regulation. 


 
 
16521/23  
 
VF/ae 
93 
ANNEX 
COMPET.1 
 
EN 
 
Chapter VIII 
Monitoring 
Article 31 
Monitoring 
1. 
The Commission shall monitor on an ongoing basis: 
(a) 
the Union’s progress with respect to the Union’s objectives referred to in Article 1, in 
particular the supply risks of net zero technologies that would distort competition or 
fragment the internal market, and the related impact of this Regulation; 
(aa) the Union’s progress with respect to the benchmark referred to in Article 9a; 
(ab) the volume of imports into its territory and exports outside of the Union’s territory of 
strategic net-zero technologies; 
(b) 
the progress with respect to the Union level objective of CO2 injection capacity 
referred to in Article 16 and to the related CO2 transport infrastructure. 
2. 
Member States and the national authorities they designate for this purpose shall collect and 
provide data and other evidence required pursuant to paragraph 1, points (a), (aa), (ab) and 
(b). In particular, they shall collect and report every 4 years to the Commission data on: 
(-a) identified obstacles to trade of net zero technologies or in goods that use net zero 
technologies within the internal market; 
(a) 
developments in strategic net-zero technologies and market trends, as well as market 
prices for the respective net-zero technologies, including information on auctions 
about their frequency, awarding prices, and volume as relevant for Chapter IV; 


 
 
16521/23  
 
VF/ae 
94 
ANNEX 
COMPET.1 
 
EN 
 
(b) 
net-zero technology manufacturing capacity per strategic technology and per key 
value chain component if listed in Annex X, as well as the manufacturing capacity of 
future strategic net-zero projects that have reached final investment decisions; 
(ba) data on employment and skills for manufacturing in each strategic net-zero 
technology sector, including the number of employees, labour and skills shortages, 
where applicable, and figures on labour and skills needs to fulfil the objectives of this 
Regulation; 
(d) 
the following information related to permit-granting processes per strategic net-zero 
technology: 
i. 
the number of permit-granting processes initiated, the number of applications 
refused, and the number of comprehensive decisions taken and specifying whether 
they approved or refused the project; 
ii. 
the duration of the permit-granting processes where a comprehensive decision was 
taken, including duration of extensions of the time limits; 
iii. 
information on the resources allocated to the operation of the designated contact 
point(s); 
(g) 
the number and nature of the sandboxes set up within the past 12 months; 
(h) 
the amount of CO2 stored permanently underground in accordance with Directive 
2009/31/EC. 
3a. 
The data referred to in paragraph 2 shall be reported where they are not already included in 
or in accordance with the elements of the reporting notified to the Commission pursuant to 
Articles 17 and 25 of Regulation 2018/1999. 


 
 
16521/23  
 
VF/ae 
95 
ANNEX 
COMPET.1 
 
EN 
 
3b. 
The reporting obligations referred to in paragraph 2 shall not apply where Member States 
consider that it would be contrary to their essential security interests in accordance with 
Article 346 of the Treaty of the Functioning of the European Union. 
4. 
The first report shall be sent to the Commission by each Member State at the end of May 
of the year following the date of entry into force of this Regulation. The following reports 
shall be sent by the end of May every year. 
4a. 
The Commission is empowered to adopt implementing acts in accordance with Article 
34(3) setting out a template for the reports referred to in paragraph 4. 
6. 
On the basis of the reports submitted pursuant to paragraph 2 of this Article, the 
Commission shall monitor the Union’s progress referred to paragraph 1, point (a) and 
publish related recommendations on an annual basis as part of the Annual Reports on 
Competitiveness of Clean Energy Technologies, pursuant to Article 35 (2), point (m) of 
Regulation (EU) 2018/1999. The recommendations shall also include considerations on 
whether all the net-zero technologies necessary to achieve the objectives in Article 1 are 
covered by the Regulation. 
7. 
On the basis of the draft permit applications submitted pursuant to Article 10 of the 
Directive 2009/31/EC and on the reports submitted pursuant to Articles 17(2) and Article 
18(4) and 18(6) of this Regulation, the Commission shall monitor the progress towards 
reaching the Union-wide target for CO2 injection capacity referred to paragraph 1 point (b) 
of this Article and shall report annually to the European Parliament and the Council. 
8. 
The Commission shall inform the Net-Zero Europe Platform on its findings. 


 
 
16521/23  
 
VF/ae 
96 
ANNEX 
COMPET.1 
 
EN 
 
Chapter IX 
Final provisions 
Article 32 
Delegation of power 
The Commission is empowered to adopt delegated acts in accordance with Article 33 to amend the 
modalities in which agreements between entities referred to in Article 18(1) and investments in 
storage capacity held by third parties are taken into account to meet their individual contribution set 
out in Article 18 (5), as well as the content of the reports referred to in Article 18 (6). 
Article 33 
Exercise of the delegation 
1. 
The power to adopt delegated acts is conferred on the Commission subject to the 
conditions laid down in this Article. 
2. 
The power to adopt delegated acts referred to in Article 32 shall be conferred on the 
Commission for a period of five years from [date of application]. The Commission shall 
present a report in respect of the delegation of power not later than nine months before the 
end of the five-year period. The delegation of power shall be tacitly extended for periods of 
an identical duration, unless the European Parliament or the Council opposes such 
extension not later than three months before the end of each period. 
3. 
The delegation of power referred to in Article 32 may be revoked at any time by the 
European Parliament or by the Council. A decision to revoke shall put an end to the 
delegation of the power specified in that decision. It shall take effect on the day following 
the publication of the decision in the Official Journal of the European Union or at a later 
date specified therein. It shall not affect the validity of any delegated acts already in force. 


 
 
16521/23  
 
VF/ae 
97 
ANNEX 
COMPET.1 
 
EN 
 
4. 
Before adopting a delegated act, the Commission shall consult experts designated by each 
Member State in accordance with the principles laid down in the Interinstitutional 
Agreement of 13 April 2016 on Better Law-Making. 
5. 
As soon as it adopts a delegated act, the Commission shall notify it simultaneously to the 
European Parliament and to the Council. 
6. 
A delegated act adopted pursuant to Article 32 shall enter into force only if no objection 
has been expressed either by the European Parliament or by the Council within a period of 
two months of notification of that act to the European Parliament and the Council or if, 
before the expiry of that period, the European Parliament and the Council have both 
informed the Commission that they will not object. That period shall be extended by two 
months at the initiative of the European Parliament or of the Council. 
Article 34  
Committee procedure 
1. 
The Commission shall be assisted by a committee. That committee shall be a committee 
within the meaning of Regulation (EU) No 182/2011. 
For matters related to Article 19 the Commission shall be assisted by the Advisory 
Committee on Public Procurement established by Council Decision 71/306/EEC. 
For matters related to Article 20 the Commission shall be assisted by the Energy Union 
Committee established by Article 44 of Regulation (EU) 2018/1999. 
2. 
Where reference is made to this paragraph, Article 4 of Regulation (EU) No 182/2011 shall 
apply. 


 
 
16521/23  
 
VF/ae 
98 
ANNEX 
COMPET.1 
 
EN 
 
3. 
Where reference is made to this paragraph, Article 5 of Regulation (EU) No 182/2011 shall 
apply. 
4. 
Where reference is made to this paragraph, Article 8 of Regulation (EU) No 182/2011, in 
conjunction with Article 4 thereof, shall apply. 
Article 35 
Evaluation 
1. 
By…[5 years after the date of application of this Regulation], and every 5 years thereafter, 
the Commission shall evaluate this Regulation and present a report on the main findings to 
the European Parliament, the Council and the European Economic and Social Committee. 
2. 
The evaluation shall assess: 
(a) 
whether the objectives of this Regulation as established in Article 1, , in particular its 
contribution to the functioning of the Single Market, have been achieved and its 
impact on business users, especially SMEs, and end users, and the European Green 
Deal objectives; 
(b) 
whether provisions in the Net Zero Industry Act are fit to deliver beyond 2030 and 
towards the longer term 2050 climate neutrality target referred to in Article 1, taking 
into account, among other aspects, the possibility to include in the Net Zero Industry 
Act other technologies that can play a significant role in achieving climate neutrality 
by 2050, as well as the possible enlargement of the scope of this Regulation to cover 
the construction or conversion of plants and facilities in hard-to-abate sectors to 
climate neutral processes where the construction or conversion of the respective 
plants and facilities reduce emission rates of CO2-eq of industrial processes 
significantly and permanently to an extent which is technically feasible. 


 
 
16521/23  
 
VF/ae 
99 
ANNEX 
COMPET.1 
 
EN 
 
3. 
The evaluation shall take into account the result of the monitoring process as outlined in 
Article 31 as well as the technology needs stemming from the updates of the National 
Energy and Climate Plans notified by Member States in accordance with the [Energy 
Union Governance Regulation] and informed by the State of the Energy Union Report. 
3a. 
Within the same period referred to in paragraph 1 at the latest and after consultation with 
the Net-Zero Europe Platform, the Commission shall assess and, if necessary, present a 
proposal to expand the list of net-zero technologies set in Article 3a and the list of strategic 
net-zero technologies set in Article 3b. 
4. 
The competent authorities of the Member States shall provide to the Commission any 
relevant information they have and that the Commission may require to draw up the report 
referred to in paragraph 1. 
5. 
Where, based on the report referred to in paragraph 1, the Commission concludes that the 
Union is likely not to achieve the objectives set out in Article 1(1), it shall, in consultation 
with the Net-Zero Europe Platform, assess the feasibility and proportionality of proposing 
measures in order to ensure the achievement of those objectives. 
6. 
No later than 31 December 2026, the Commission may propose an amendment to this 
Regulation to introduce a new Union-level objective for CO2 injection capacity by 2040. 
The Commission shall justify its choice to the European Parliament and the Council if it 
decides not to propose to introduce an objective for 2040. 
Article 36 
Treatment of confidential information 
1. 
Information acquired in the course of implementing this Regulation shall be used only for 
the purposes of this Regulation and shall be protected by the relevant Union and national 
legislation. 


 
 
16521/23  
 
VF/ae 
100 
ANNEX 
COMPET.1 
 
EN 
 
2. 
Member States and the Commission shall ensure the protection of trade and business 
secrets and other sensitive, confidential and classified information acquired and generated 
in application of this Regulation, including recommendations and measures to be taken, in 
accordance with Union and the respective national law. 
3. 
Member States and the Commission shall ensure that classified information provided or 
exchanged under this Regulation is not downgraded or declassified without the prior 
written consent of the originator in accordance with relevant national or Union law. 
4. 
If a Member State assesses that the presentation of aggregated information in the context of 
Article 18 may nonetheless compromise its national security interest, it may object to the 
Commission’s presentation through a justified notice. 
5. 
The Commission and the national authorities, their officials, employees and other persons 
working under the supervision of these authorities shall ensure the confidentiality of 
information obtained in carrying out their tasks and activities in accordance with relevant 
national or Union law. This obligation also applies to all representatives of Member States, 
observers, experts and other participants attending meetings of the Platform pursuant to 
Article 29. 
Article 37 
Amendment to Regulation (EU) 2018/1724 
Regulation (EU) 2018/1724 is amended as follows: 
(1) 
in Annex I, in the first column, a new row ‘R. Net-zero technology manufacturing projects’ 
is added. 
(2) 
in Annex I, in the second column, in the row ‘R. Net-zero technology manufacturing 
projects’, the following point are added: 
‘1. information on the permit-granting process’ 


 
 
16521/23  
 
VF/ae 
101 
ANNEX 
COMPET.1 
 
EN 
 
‘2. financing and investment services’ 
‘3. funding possibilities at Union or Member State level’ 
‘4. business support services, including but not limited to corporate tax declaration, local 
tax laws, labour law’. 
(3) 
in Annex II, in the first column, a new row ‘Net-zero technology manufacturing projects’ 
is added. 
(4) 
in Annex II, in the second column, in the row ‘Net-Zero technology manufacturing 
projects’, the following points are added: 
‘Procedures for all relevant permits to, build, expand, repurpose and operate net-zero 
technology manufacturing projects, including for net-zero strategic projects encompassing 
all applications and procedures’. 
(5) 
in Annex II, in the third column, in the row ‘Net-Zero manufacturing projects’, the 
following point is added: 
‘All outputs pertaining to the procedures ranging from the acknowledgment of the validity 
of that the application is complete to the notification of the comprehensive decision on the 
outcome of the procedure by the designated contact point responsible national’. 
(6) 
in Annex III, the following point is added: 
‘(8) Designated contact point acting as single point of contact pursuant to Article 4 of [the 
NZIA] Regulation.’ 


 
 
16521/23  
 
VF/ae 
102 
ANNEX 
COMPET.1 
 
EN 
 
Article 38 
Entry into force and application 
This Regulation shall enter into force on…[the day following that of its publication in the Official 
Journal of the European Union]. 
It shall apply from [date of entry into force]. 
Until [2 years following the date of application of this Regulation], Article 19(1) shall apply only to 
contracts concluded by central purchasing bodies as defined in Article 2 (1), point (16), of Directive 
2014/24/EU and Article 2 (1), point (12), of Directive 2014/25/EU and for contracts of a value 
equal to or higher than EUR 25 million. 
Articles 20 and 21 shall apply from [24 months after the date of application of this Regulation]. 
This Regulation shall be binding in its entirety and directly applicable in all Member States. 
Done at Brussels, 
For the European Parliament 
For the Council 
The President 
The President 
 


 
 
16521/23  
 
VF/ae 
103 
ANNEX 
COMPET.1 
 
EN 
 
ANNEX X 
Non-exhaustive list of final products and specific components considered as primarily used 
for the production of Net-Zero technologies 
 
Strategic net-zero 
technologies 
Components "primarily used" for these technologies 
1. Solar photovoltaic and solar thermal technologies 
Solar photovoltaics 
Solar PV module 
Solar PV Cells 
Silicon Wafers 
Solar PV inverter 
Solar PV glass 
Components related to balance of plant 
 
 
Solar Thermal 
Solar thermal panels 
Concentrated solar plant 
Solar thermal Mirrors 
Solar thermal Lenses 
Tower (for molten salt) 
Heat exchanger 
Heat transfer fluid 
Heat engine (steam turbine) 
Power generator 


 
 
16521/23  
 
VF/ae 
104 
ANNEX 
COMPET.1 
 
EN 
 
 
2. Onshore wind and offshore renewable technologies 
Wind 
Blades 
Nacelle structure 
Permanent magnets 
Gearbox 
Shafts 
Power generator 
Controller 
Bearings 
Tower 
Components related to balance of plant 
 
 
Wave energy 
Surface floaters 
Vertical column 
Reaction plates 
Mounting for Power Take-Off systems 
Mooring/foundation system 
Generator 
Hydraulic system 
Frequency converter 


 
 
16521/23  
 
VF/ae 
105 
ANNEX 
COMPET.1 
 
EN 
 
Transformer 
Control system 
 
 
Tidal energy 
 
 
 
 
 
Pile 
Cross-arm 
Nacelles 
Tidal kites 
PTO mounting 
Mooring/foundation system 
Generator 
Gearbox 
Driveshaft 
Hydraulic system 
Frequency converter 
Transformer 
Control system 
Rotors 
 
3. Battery/Storage technologies 
Battery 
Anodes 
Cathodes 
Electrolytes 
Separators 
Cell 
Modules 
Packs 


 
 
16521/23  
 
VF/ae 
106 
ANNEX 
COMPET.1 
 
EN 
 
Battery management systems 
 
 
Storage technologies 
Heat storage 
Gravitational storage 
Pressure storage 
Kinetic storage 
Valves 
Electronic control equipment 
Pumps 
Heat exchangers 
Tanks 
Receiver tubes 
Molten salts 
 
 


 
 
16521/23  
 
VF/ae 
107 
ANNEX 
COMPET.1 
 
EN 
 
4. Heat pumps and geothermal energy technologies 
Heat pumps 
Heat pump 
Evaporator 
Condensor 
Compressor 
Powder coating 
Heat exchanger 
Valves 
Pumps 
Fans 
(Synthetic) Refrigerants 
 
 
Geothermal 
Circulation pumps 
Heat extraction equipment 
Steam turbines 
Turbo expanders 
 
 


 
 
16521/23  
 
VF/ae 
108 
ANNEX 
COMPET.1 
 
EN 
 
5. Electrolysers and fuel cells 
Electrolysers 
Anodes 
Electrolysers 
Cathodes 
Catalysts 
Membranes 
Electrolytes 
Bipolar plates 
Compressors 
Water purification systems 
Dryers 
GDL (gas diffusion layers) 
MEA (membrane electrode assembly) 
Components related to balance of plant 
Fuel cells 
Membrane Electrode Assembly 
Membrane 
Gas diffusion 
Anodes 
Cathodes 
Electrolytes 
Catalysts 
Bipolar plates 


 
 
16521/23  
 
VF/ae 
109 
ANNEX 
COMPET.1 
 
EN 
 
Cell sealants 
 
 
6. Sustainable 
biogas/biomethane 
technologies 
Sustainable 
biogas/biomethane 
technologies  
Membranes 
Electronic components 
Digesters/Fermentation tanks 
Corrosion-resistant materials and liners 
 
7. CCS technologies 
CCS technologies 
Point-source capture equipment 
Solid adsorbents 
Aqueous basic solutions 
Membranes 
Compression equipment 
Pipelines 
CO2 shipping equipment or vehicles 
Injection equipment 
 
 


 
 
16521/23  
 
VF/ae 
110 
ANNEX 
COMPET.1 
 
EN 
 
8. (Electricity) grid technologies 
(Electricity) Grid 
technologies 
Conductors, cables, towers, poles, insulators 
SCADA/Energy management systems 
Transformers (power and measurement) 
Automation equipment for substations 
Switchgears 
Capacity banks, bus bars 
Battery management systems 
Electronic boards 
Power electronics components and equipment, 
including DC technology 
Control and communications components (GPRS 
modules, programmable logic controllers (PLCs) and 
other specific control systems, sensors) 
 
 
 


BRIEFING 
EU Legislation in Progress 
EPRS | European Parliamentary Research Service 
Author: Guillaume Ragonnaud 
Members' Research Service 
PE 747.903 – March 2024 
EN 
Net-zero industry act 
OVERVIEW 
The deployment of clean energy technologies required to support the achievement of Europe's 
2030 and 2050 climate targets is considerable. Europe already largely imports these technologies, 
and like many third countries is increasing efforts to expand clean energy manufacturing capacity 
to reduce strategic dependencies for key products.  
On 16 March 2023, the Commission put forward a proposal for a 'net-zero industry act' that aims to 
expand the manufacturing capacity of net-zero technologies in the EU and enhance the resilience 
of its energy system.  
The proposed regulation would set up enabling conditions for the manufacturing of 10 net-zero 
technologies (through streamlined administrative processes and access to regulatory sandboxes 
and European net-zero industry academies). Eight 'strategic' net-zero technologies would gain 
additional benefits (even shorter administrative processes, facilitated access to markets, and 
administrative support to access finance). The proposed regulation would aim to ensure that, by 
2030, the manufacturing capacity in the EU for these strategic net-zero technologies reaches an 
overall benchmark of at least 40 % of the EU's annual deployment needs. It would also set an 
EU-level target for annual CO2 injection capacity by 2030 (50 million tonnes).  
On 6 February 2024, the Parliament and the Council reached a provisional agreement on the new 
regulation. This agreement must now be formally approved by both institutions. 
Proposal for a regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council on establishing a 
framework of measures for strengthening Europe's net-zero technology products manufacturing 
ecosystem (Net Zero Industry Act) 
Committee responsible: 
Rapporteur: 
Shadow rapporteurs: 
Committee on Industry, Research and 
Energy (ITRE) 
Christian Ehler (EPP, Germany) 
Tsvetelina Penkova (S&D, Bulgaria) 
Christophe Grudler (Renew, France) 
Damien Carême (Greens/EFA, France) 
Paolo Borchia (ID, Italy) 
Evžen Tošenovský (ECR, Czechia) 
Marc Botenga (The Left, Belgium) 
COM(2023)161 
16.3.2023 
2023/0081(COD) 
Ordinary legislative 
procedure (COD) 
(Parliament and Council 
on equal footing – 
formerly 'co-decision') 
Next steps expected:  
Vote in plenary 


EPRS | European Parliamentary Research Service 
2 
Introduction 
In January 2023, the International Energy Agency (IEA) warned that the current global energy crisis 
represented a pivotal moment for clean energy transitions worldwide. It stated that the world was 
at the beginning of a new 'clean energy technology manufacturing industrial age'. Globally, if 
countries fully implement their energy and climate pledges, the annual market for key mass-
manufactured clean energy technologies could reach US$650 billion by 2030 (over three times its 
current value), and jobs in the sector could rise to 14 million (compared to 6 million today). The 
required deployment of clean energy technologies to meet the needs of the IEA's net-zero emissions 
scenario is dramatic: for instance, global production of electric vehicles is expected to increase 
15-fold to 2050 compared to 2021; the deployment of renewables would quadruple and, for heat 
pumps, increase six times. Production of hydrogen from electrolysis or natural gas-based hydrogen 
with carbon capture and storage would increase from 0.5 million tonnes (Mt) in 2021 to 450 Mt in 
2050. 
The IEA recommended that the industrial strategies supporting clean energy technology 
manufacturing should: be holistic, reconciling climate, energy and economic considerations, and 
foster domestic competitive advantages; be based on comprehensive risk assessments of supply 
chains; reduce permitting times; mobilise investment and financing for key supply chain stages; 
develop workforce skills; and speed up innovation in early-stage technologies.  
Context 
The EU framework for the transformation of the EU's industry for the net-zero age builds on the 
European Green Deal (2019), the EU's transformational growth strategy. In particular, it would 
require the full mobilisation of industry to make the EU economy climate-neutral and circular. The 
European Climate Law of 2021 includes the legally binding objective for the EU to reach climate-
neutrality by 2050. It also sets an EU target of a net domestic reduction in greenhouse-gas emissions 
of at least 55 % by 2030, compared to 1990 levels. The 'Fit for 55 package' of 2021 included a wide 
range of legislative proposals reforming the EU's policies to reach the targets of the climate law. Key 
initiatives impacting EU industry include the updated emissions trading system (ETS) and new 
carbon border adjustment mechanism, both signed into law on 10 May 2023. The REPowerEU plan 
of 2022 aimed to eliminate the EU's dependence on Russian fossil fuels by, for example, deploying 
photovoltaic, wind and heat pump capacities or decarbonising industry. The Council and Parliament 
recently agreed on amendments to EU energy legislation, proposed under this plan, accelerating 
the take-up of renewable energy sources and promoting further increased energy efficiency and 
savings. Member States were also allowed to introduce REPowerEU chapters in their recovery and 
resilience plans. The Commission encouraged Member States to include in these chapters measures 
increasing the manufacturing of net-zero technologies.  
Over the past few years, the need to speed up the green and digital transitions, and to reduce 
strategic dependencies for key products, has led to widespread calls for greater government 
involvement in the economy and to the 'rebirth' of industrial policies. Today, nearly all countries 
engage in forms of industrial policy, and the EU in particular has recently embraced a more active 
industrial policy agenda. The Commission adopted a new industrial strategy for Europe in 2020, 
seeking to make EU industry greener, more digital and more competitive globally and to reinforce 
Europe's industrial and strategic autonomy. It introduced an 'ecosystem approach', based on the 
close monitoring of strategic dependencies in 14 key industrial ecosystems, representing 70 % of 
the EU economy (including energy-intensive industries and renewable energies). The 2021 update 
of the industrial strategy focused on addressing the impacts of the pandemic, the evolving global 
competitive context, and the acceleration of the twin transitions. It also put forward a range of 
additional actions to address strategic dependencies. The Commission identified strategic 
dependencies that could lead to EU vulnerabilities for photovoltaic panels, due to a strong 
concentration of global production in China, with limited options for supply diversification. The 
Commission is supporting industrial alliances (in the areas of clean hydrogen, batteries and 


Net-zero industry act 
3 
photovoltaic energy) to develop Europe's strategic capacities in key areas, and to facilitate the 
identification of investment projects. Important projects of common European interest (IPCEIs) have 
also gained in importance as a way to support strategic industrial projects. IPCEIs are a State aid tool 
designed to overcome serious market failures concerning breakthrough innovation and key 
infrastructure. Initiated by Member States, they bring together key European players. The 
Commission has, for example, approved two IPCEIs concerning the battery value chain (in 2019 and 
2021) and hydrogen. The Commission has also put forward a number of regulatory frameworks 
targeting key industries. The Council and Parliament recently struck deals on new EU rules 
concerning semiconductors ('chips act') and batteries, both key in the net-zero industrial age. 
As recently highlighted by the IEA, around 90 % of mass-manufacturing capacity for several key 
clean energy technologies is located in China and the Asia-Pacific region. China is the leading global 
supplier and a net exporter for many clean energy technologies. It represents at least 60 % of the 
world's manufacturing capacity for most mass-manufactured technologies (e.g. solar photovoltaic, 
wind energy and batteries), and 40 % of electrolyser manufacturing. Europe is a large importer of 
clean energy technologies such as electric vehicles, batteries, fuel cells and solar photovoltaic, 
importing almost all its solar panels. It is, however, a net exporter of wind turbine components. China 
accounts for most of the current announced manufacturing capacity expansion plans to 2030 for 
solar photovoltaic components, onshore wind and electric vehicle battery. Hydrogen electrolysers 
are the main exception, with around a quarter of manufacturing capacity announcements for 2030 
being in China and the EU. 
Current barriers to the increase of net-zero technologies production are linked to the situation of 
global supply chains (volatility in materials prices, increasing transport and financing costs, supply 
shortages), long lead times to set up new manufacturing capacities (e.g. due to lengthy permitting 
procedures), or a lack of skilled workers.  
Comparative elements 
Many third countries are stepping up efforts to expand their clean energy manufacturing capacity, 
to advance net zero transitions, strengthen energy security and compete in the new global energy 
economy. In the United States, the Inflation Reduction Act (IRA), signed into law in August 2022, is 
considered one of the most consequential bills in recent US history, and is the subject of fierce 
debate in the EU. It provides for US$369 billion of investment in energy security and combating 
climate change, including, for instance, US$5.8 billion in grant support to energy-intensive industry 
for the reduction of their greenhouse gas emissions, a US$2 billion grant programme for domestic 
production of clean vehicles, and a 'technology neutral' tax credit for production of clean electricity, 
as well as investment in facilities that generate clean electricity. In the United Kingdom, the 
government published the Powering up Britain plan in March 2023, to 'consolidate Britain's position 
as a global leader in green energy'. The IEA stressed that, in China, the 14th Five-Year Plan includes 
measures for technology development aimed at reaching a peak in CO2 emissions by 2030. Japan 
has set up a roadmap to reach net zero by 2050; the development of emerging technologies will be 
supported through a JP¥2 trillion Green Innovation Fund. India is boosting supply chain 
investments in domestic manufacturing of batteries (over US$2 billion), cars (over US$3 billion), solar 
photovoltaic (nearly US$600 million) and steel (US$800 million) for 2022 to 2027.  
Preparation of the proposal 
Commission President Ursula von der Leyen announced a net-zero industry act at the World 
Economic Forum in Davos on 17 January 2023, which would be part of a green deal industrial plan 
for the net-zero age (presented by the Commission on 1 February). The plan set out a European 
approach to boost the EU's net-zero industry, based on four pillars:  
(i) measures to improve the competitiveness of the EU's net-zero industry: under this pillar, the 
Commission proposed a net-zero industry act, a critical raw materials act and reform of the 
electricity market design; 


EPRS | European Parliamentary Research Service 
4 
(ii) measures to increase and speed up access to national and EU public funding, and private 
funding: the temporary crisis framework adopted in March 2022 to enable Member States to 
support the economy in the context of Russia's war against Ukraine was transformed into a 
temporary crisis and transition framework on 9 March 2023. The new framework gives Member 
States more flexibility under EU competition policy to grant state aid for certain sectors, on a 
temporary basis (until the end of 2025). For instance, it simplifies the granting of state aid for 
renewable energy deployment and decarbonisation of industrial processes, and gives Member 
States the possibility of granting higher aid for production of strategic net-zero technologies to 
match the aid received by competitors located in third countries. On 9 March, the Commission 
also endorsed an amendment to the general block exemption rules, giving Member States more 
flexibility to design and implement support measures in key sectors for the net-zero industry, 
without the Commission's prior approval; 
(iii) measures to develop a suitably skilled workforce for the net-zero industry; 
(iv) global cooperation and international trade measures to improve supply chain resilience. 
The proposal was put forward by the Commission on 16 March 2023. No impact assessment and no 
online public consultation were carried out by the Commission, which invoked reasons of urgency. 
The Commission analysis and supporting evidence were presented in a staff working document 
published on 19 June 2023.  
The proposal was accompanied by a Commission staff working document assessing investment 
needs to strengthen the EU's net-zero technology manufacturing capacity and presenting funding 
availabilities. Estimated total investment needed to reach the indicative technology-specific 
benchmarks included in the proposed regulation (only five key net-zero technologies – wind, solar, 
batteries, heat pumps, and electrolysers) is €92 billion for 2023 to 2030; public funding requirements 
would be between €16 billion and €18 billion. The Commission stressed 'the current EU budget has 
insufficient possibilities for supporting the objectives of the net-zero industry act and for ensuring a 
level-playing field between Member States, relative to the identified public investment needs'. 
The changes the proposal would bring 
The general objective of the proposed regulation would be to establish a framework of measures 
for innovating and expanding the manufacturing capacity of net-zero technologies in the EU, to 
support the 2030 and 2050 climate targets, and to enhance the resilience of the EU's energy system 
by securing the supply of net-zero technologies, also contributing to the creation of quality jobs 
(Article 1). To this end, the proposed regulation provides for measures aiming to ensure that, by 
2030, manufacturing capacity in the EU for eight strategic net-zero technologies (listed in the 
annex) reaches an overall benchmark of at least 40 % of the EU's annual deployment needs to 
achieve the EU's 2030 climate and energy targets. These eight strategic net-zero technologies would 
be: solar photovoltaic and solar thermal technologies; onshore wind and offshore renewable 
technologies; battery/storage technologies; heat pumps and geothermal energy technologies; 
electrolysers and fuel cells; sustainable biogas/biomethane technologies; carbon capture and 
storage technologies; and grid technologies. The Commission explained that the choice of these 
eight strategic net-zero technologies relies on three criteria: their technology readiness level 
(the proposed regulation generally refers to mature net-zero technologies); their contribution to 
decarbonisation and competitiveness; and the existence of a security of supply risk.  
Recital 17 includes a range of indicative benchmarks by 2030 for the EU's manufacturing capacities 
for these technologies: 30 gigawatts (GW) across the full value chain for solar photovoltaic 
technologies; 36 GW for wind technologies; 31 GW for heat pump technologies; 550 gigawatt hours 
(GWh) for batteries (almost 90 % of the EU's annual demand for batteries); and 100 GW of overall 
installed capacity being deployed for electrolysers.  
The concept of 'net-zero technologies' would cover (Article 3): renewable energy technologies 
('renewable energy' as defined in Directive (EU) 2018/2001, i.e. energy from renewable non-fossil 
sources, namely wind, solar (thermal and photovoltaic) and geothermal energy, ambient energy, 


Net-zero industry act 
5 
tide, wave and other ocean energy, hydropower, biomass, landfill gas, sewage treatment plant gas, 
and biogas); electricity and heat storage technologies; heat pumps; grid technologies; renewable 
fuels of non-biological origin technologies; sustainable alternative fuel technologies (sustainable 
alternative fuels are those covered by the proposals for a regulation on ensuring a level playing field 
for sustainable air transport, and for a regulation on the use of renewable and low-carbon fuels in 
maritime transport); electrolysers and fuel cells; advanced technologies to produce energy from 
nuclear processes with minimal waste from the fuel cycle, small modular reactors, and related best-
in-class fuels; carbon capture, utilisation, and storage technologies and energy system-related 
energy efficiency technologies. The concept refers to the final products, specific components and 
specific machinery 'primarily used for the production of those products'. The technologies would 
have to have reached a technology readiness level of at least eight (first-of-a-kind commercial – 
commercial demonstration, full-scale deployment in final form).  
Member States would have to appoint a national competent authority, to facilitate the permit-
granting process for net-zero technology manufacturing projects, including for 'net-zero strategic 
projects' (see below), and to provide advice on reducing administrative burdens (Article 4). This 
would provide a 'one stop shop' for the project promoter in the permit-granting process ( 
Member States would have to ensure the online availability of information on administrative 
processes relevant to net-zero technology manufacturing projects, including net-zero strategic 
projects (information on the permit-granting process; financing and investment services; funding 
possibilities; and business support services) (Article 5).  
The proposed regulation would also set time limits for the permit-granting process (Article 6): 
12 months for the construction of net-zero technology manufacturing projects with a yearly 
manufacturing capacity of less than 1 GW (18 months for projects with a yearly manufacturing 
capacity of more than 1 GW (with some exceptions)). If a yearly manufacturing capacity is not 
measured in GW, the time limit would be 18 months. For the expansion of manufacturing capacity 
in existing manufacturing facilities, time limits would be halved.  
If an environmental impact assessment has to be carried out for a strategic project under 
Directive 2011/92/EU, the national competent authority would have to ensure that the opinion on 
the scope and level of detail of the information to be included in the environmental impact 
assessment would be delivered to the applicant within 30 days. For projects for which assessments 
of the effects on the environment arise simultaneously from Directives 2011/42/EC, 92/43/EEC, 
2000/60/EC, 2008/98/EC, 2009/147/EC, 2010/75/EU, 2011/92/EU or Directive 2012/18/EU, the 
national competent authority would have to ensure application of a coordinated or joint 
procedure fulfilling the requirements of EU legislation. Member States would have to ensure 
national, regional and local planning authorities made plans for the development of net-zero 
technology manufacturing projects, including net-zero strategic projects, prioritising artificial and 
built surfaces, industrial, brownfield, and greenfield sites not usable for agriculture and forestry 
(Article 8). Assessments of such plans under Directives 2001/42/EC and 92/43/EEC could be 
combined (and could also assess the impact on water bodies or the marine environment). 
Member States would have to recognise as 'net-zero strategic projects' (Article 10) manufacturing 
projects concerning one of the eight net-zero technologies listed in the annex, located in the EU, 
contributing to reaching the 2030 and 2050 EU climate targets and to ensuring the EU's access to a 
secure and sustainable supply of net-zero technologies. Strategic projects would also have to meet 
at least one of the following criteria: 
 The project would contribute to the technological and industrial resilience of the EU's 
energy system by increasing the manufacturing capacity of a component or part in the value 
chain for which the EU heavily depends on imports coming from a single third country. 
 The project would have a positive impact on the EU's net-zero industry supply chain or 
downstream sectors, beyond the project promoter and the Member States concerned, 
contributing to the competitiveness of and creation of quality jobs in the EU's net-zero 


EPRS | European Parliamentary Research Service 
6 
industry supply chain, according to at least three of the following four criteria: (i) it would 
add significant manufacturing capacity in the EU for net-zero technologies; (ii) it would 
concern technologies with improved sustainability and performance; (iii) it would put 
in place measures to attract, upskill or reskill the workforce; (iv) it would adopt low-carbon 
and circular manufacturing practices, including waste heat recovery. 
Furthermore, Member States would have to recognise as net-zero strategic projects CO2 storage 
projects that meet a set of cumulative criteria: the storage site would be located in the EU, its 
exclusive economic zones or on its continental shelf; the project would contribute to reaching the 
objective on CO2 injection capacity (see below); and the project would have applied for a permit for 
the safe and permanent geological storage of CO2 in accordance with Directive 2009/31/EC. 
Project promoters would have to submit applications for recognition of net-zero technology 
projects as net-zero strategic projects to the relevant Member State (Article 11), who would have to 
assess the application within one month, followed by Commission assessment within 20 working 
days. The Commission would set up and maintain a register of net-zero strategic projects. 
Net-zero strategic projects would be granted priority status (Article 12): authorities would have to 
ensure that such projects are treated in the most rapid way possible. Member States would have to 
grant net-zero strategic projects the status of the highest national significance possible, and they 
must be treated accordingly in the permit-granting processes. Net-zero strategic projects would 
have to be considered to contribute to the security of supply of strategic net-zero technologies in 
the EU and therefore to be in the public interest. Regarding the environmental impacts addressed 
in Directive 92/43/EEC, Directive 2000/60/EC and Directive 2009/147/EC, net-zero strategic projects 
in the EU would be considered as being of public interest and could be considered as having an 
over-riding public interest if all the conditions set out in these directives are fulfilled. All dispute 
resolution procedures, litigation, appeals and judicial remedies would have to be treated as urgent. 
The permit-granting process for net-zero strategic projects would not exceed nine months for the 
construction of net-zero strategic projects with a yearly manufacturing capacity of less than 1 GW, 
12 months for the construction of net-zero strategic projects with a yearly manufacturing capacity 
of more than 1 GW, and 18 months for all necessary permits to operate a storage site (Article 13). 
For net-zero strategic technologies for which a yearly manufacturing capacity is not measured in 
GW, the permit-granting process would not exceed 12 months. For the expansion of manufacturing 
capacity in existing manufacturing facilities, these time limits would be halved. The absence of a 
reply from the administrative bodies within these time limits would result in the specific 
intermediary steps being considered as approved, with some exceptions; this provision would not 
apply to final decisions on the outcome of the process, which are to be explicit. Furthermore, all 
decisions would have to be made public.  
The Commission and the Member States would have to undertake activities to accelerate and 
crowd-in private investments in net-zero strategic projects. They could include providing and 
coordinating support to net-zero strategic projects facing difficulties in accessing finance. Member 
States could also provide administrative support to net-zero strategic projects to facilitate their 
implementation, including by providing assistance to ensure compliance with applicable 
administrative and reporting obligations and assistance to project promoters to increase the public 
acceptance of the project (Article 14). A new 'net-zero Europe platform' (see below) would discuss 
financial needs and bottlenecks of net-zero strategic projects, as well as best practices, and regularly 
interact with industrial alliances (Article 15). This platform would, at the request of the net-zero 
strategic project promoter, discuss and advise on how the financing of its project can be completed, 
considering the following elements in particular: additional private sources of financing; support 
through resources from the European Investment Bank Group or other international financial 
institutions, including the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development; Member State 
instruments and programmes, including from national promotional banks and institutions; and EU 
funding and financing programmes.  


Net-zero industry act 
7 
The proposed regulation would set up an EU-level target for CO2 injection capacity: the EU would 
have to reach an annual injection capacity of at least 50 million tonnes of CO2 by 2030, not 
combined with enhanced hydrocarbon recovery (Article 16). Member States would have to make 
publicly available data on areas where CO2 storage sites can be permitted on their territory, and 
oblige entities authorised for the prospection, exploration and production of hydrocarbons under 
Directive 94/22/EC on their territory to publish all geological data relating to decommissioned 
production sites (Article 17). Each entity holding an authorisation under Directive 94/22/EC 
(authorised oil and gas producers) would be subject to an individual contribution to the EU-wide 
target for available CO2 injection capacity. Those individual contributions would be calculated pro-
rata on the basis of oil and natural gas production from 1 January 2020 to 31 December 2023 and 
would consist of CO2 injection capacity in a storage site, available to the market by 2030 (Article 18).  
Contracting authorities would have to base the award of contracts for net-zero strategic 
technologies in a public procurement procedure on the most economically advantageous tender, 
which shall include the best price-quality ratio, comprising at least the sustainability and resilience 
contribution of the tender (Article 19).  
Contracting authorities would have to give the tender's sustainability and resilience contribution a 
weight between 15 % and 30 % of the award criteria. The contracting authority would not be 
obliged to apply the considerations relating to the sustainability and resilience contribution of net-
zero technologies where their application would oblige that authority to acquire equipment having 
disproportionate costs, or technical characteristics different from those of existing equipment, 
resulting in incompatibility or technical difficulties in operation and maintenance. 
Member States, or regional or local authorities, would have to assess the sustainability and resilience 
contribution when designing the criteria used for ranking bids in the framework of auctions 
supporting the production or consumption of energy from renewable sources (Article 20). The 
sustainability and resilience contribution would have to be given a weight between 15 % and 30 % 
of the award criteria. The Member States, or regional or local authorities, would not be obliged to 
apply the considerations relating to the sustainability and resilience contribution of net-zero 
technologies where their application would oblige those entities to acquire equipment having 
disproportionate costs, or technical characteristics different from those of existing equipment, 
resulting in incompatibility or technical difficulties in operation and maintenance.  
When setting up schemes benefiting households or consumers and promoting the purchase of 
net-zero strategic technologies' final products, Member States, or regional or local authorities, 
would have to design them to promote the purchase by beneficiaries of net-zero technology final 
products with a high sustainability and resilience contribution, by providing additional 
proportionate financial compensation (Article 21). The additional financial compensation would 
not exceed 5 % of the cost of the final product for the consumer. Member States would have to 
publish on a website all information relating to these schemes.  
The Commission would provide guidance on the criteria to assess the resilience and sustainability 
contribution of available products covered by public intervention. The Commission would also 
regularly publish and update a list of each of the net-zero strategic technologies' final products, 
broken down by the share of EU supply originating in different third countries. The net-zero 
Europe platform would discuss Member States' measures and exchange best practices (Article 22).  
The Commission would have to support the establishment of European net-zero industry 
academies (Article 23). Their objectives would be to develop training and education on net-zero 
technologies, and on raw materials; promote the use of the learning programmes, content and 
materials; deploy credentials to facilitate the transparency of skills acquired, and improve 
transferability between jobs and the cross-border mobility of the workforce. 
Member States could establish net-zero regulatory sandboxes (Article 27), allowing for the 
development, testing and validation of innovative net-zero technologies, in a controlled real-


EPRS | European Parliamentary Research Service 
8 
world environment for a limited time before they are placed on the market or put into service, thus 
enhancing regulatory learning and potential scaling up and wider deployment. Member States 
would establish net-zero regulatory sandboxes at the request of any company developing 
innovative net-zero technologies, which fulfils a number of eligibility and selection criteria and 
which has been selected by the competent authorities following a selection procedure. The 
Commission would define the modalities and the conditions for the establishment and operation of 
the net-zero regulatory sandboxes through implementing acts.  
Member States would have to provide small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs) with priority 
access to the regulatory sandboxes, organise awareness-raising activities about participation in the 
regulatory sandboxes by SMEs, and help them implement the regulatory sandboxes. Member States 
would have to take account of SMEs' specific needs, provide administrative support to participate 
in sandboxes, and inform SMEs of available financial support for these activities. 
The regulation would establish a net-zero Europe platform (Article 29). The platform, chaired by 
the Commission, would be composed of representatives of Member States and of the Commission, 
and would have to invite representatives of the European Parliament to attend its meetings as 
observers. It would carry out a number of tasks (mentioned above) and advise and assist the 
Commission and Member States. The platform could periodically discuss a range of topics, such as 
cooperation along the net-zero value chain between the EU and third countries. It would also 
coordinate and cooperate with industrial alliances; net-zero industrial partnerships would aim to 
facilitate trade among participants, including by favouring investments within the EU and in third 
countries, and enhance resilience and sustainability of the value chains. 
Advisory committees 
The European Economic and Social Committee adopted its opinion on 13 July 2023. It stresses that 
that national public funding for projects, including State aid and subsidies, should not distort the 
single market or jeopardise economic convergence and social cohesion. The opinion of the 
European Committee of the Regions, adopted on 5 July 2023, insists that local and regional 
authorities are an integral part of the future success of net-zero technologies in Europe. 
National parliaments 
The deadline for the submission of reasoned opinions on grounds of subsidiarity was 28 June 2023. 
One reasoned opinion was sent by the Czech Chamber of Deputies, supporting the view that the 
proposal does not comply with the principles of subsidiarity and proportionality.  
Stakeholder views1 
The deadline for feedback on the proposed regulation was 27 June 2023. The Commission received 
215 contributions. BusinessEurope pointed out that the limited scope of the proposed regulation 
could become a handicap for Europe's net-zero transformation. The EU's resilience should be built 
on closer cooperation with our major suppliers; the proposed regulation should keep markets open 
and protectionist elements should be avoided. Orgalim believes that the shift away from fossil fuels 
must be complemented by greater emphasis on reducing energy demand. Beyond improvements 
to clean tech permitting procedures, the cumulative regulatory burden should be addressed. 
WindEurope regrets that the proposed regulation does not set up new EU funding mechanisms. For 
WindEurope, the Innovation Fund is overly focused on technological breakthroughs, while it is 
rather the scaling up of existing supply chains that is needed.  
SolarPower Europe thinks that more funding for solar plants in Europe is needed, in the form of a 
'solar manufacturing fund' or a dedicated EU equity instrument, covering both CAPEX and OPEX. 
The European Heat Pump Association (EHPA) stressed that the proposal lacked ambition for heat 
pump deployment, proposing an indicative target of 47 GW by 2030 for installed capacities instead 
of 31 GW. The EHPA also considers that the 40 % benchmark is too low for the heat pump sector, as 


Net-zero industry act 
9 
60 % of heat pumps sold in Europe are currently manufactured in Europe. CurrENT pointed out that 
the proposal overlooked an entire range of commercially available grid technologies that can 
optimise the use of the existing electricity grid and increase its capacity to integrate renewables. 
The European Biogas Association welcomed the inclusion of biomethane among the proposed 
strategic net-zero technologies, which will facilitate the roll-out of industrial capacity in the sector. 
For Hydrogen Europe, the proposed regulation would be a major step forward for the growth of the 
hydrogen manufacturing sector in Europe. NuclearEurope called for the inclusion of nuclear as a 
strategic technology under the proposed regulation.  
The European Environmental Bureau expressed concerns about the inclusion of carbon capture and 
storage as a strategic net-zero technology, as it believes that this technology would not encourage 
the switch away from combustion-based processes. The EEB also considers that hydrogen should 
be carefully deployed, due to its high impact on water resources. Furthermore, the EEB thinks that 
the proposal, while addressing the speed of the permitting process, does not address the quality of 
this process: financial resources should be dedicated to Member States so that they may digitalise 
processes and increase capacity to handle permitting procedures. For WWF, fast and efficient 
permitting is desirable but should be achieved through adequate planning and environmental 
impact assessments. WWF considers the proposal would undermine key provisions on nature 
protection and public participation. 
Legislative process 
In the Parliament, the proposal was referred to the Committee on Industry, Research and Energy 
(ITRE). The Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Food Safety (ENVI) was associated 
under Rule 57 of Parliament's rules of procedure, with respective exclusive and shared competence. 
The Committee on Employment and Social Affairs (EMPL) was associated with exclusive 
competence (e.g. on European net-zero industry academies). The Committees on Economic and 
Monetary Affairs (ECON), Internal Market and Consumer Protection (IMCO) and Regional 
Development (REGI) were associated with shared competence. During its November II 2023 plenary 
session, the Parliament adopted the ITRE report unchanged, with 376 votes in favour, 139 against, 
and 116 abstentions. The Council adopted its position on 7 December 2023. The Parliament and 
Council reached a provisional agreement on 6 February 2024. This agreement has still to be formally 
approved by both institutions. The agreed text was endorsed on 16 February 2024 by Coreper and 
was approved by ITRE on 22 February 2024 by 49 votes in favour and 10 against. 
Under the agreement, the regulation applies to the following 19 'net-zero technologies' (final 
products, components or machinery primarily used for the production of those products): 
1 
solar technologies, including: solar photovoltaic, solar thermal electric and solar thermal 
technologies; 
2 
onshore wind and offshore renewable technologies; 
3 
battery and energy storage technologies; 
4 
heat pumps and geothermal energy technologies; 
5 
hydrogen technologies, including electrolysers and fuel cells; 
6 
sustainable biogas and biomethane technologies; 
7 
carbon capture and storage technologies; 
8 
electricity grid technologies, including electric charging technologies for transportation 
and technologies to digitalise the grid; 
9 
nuclear fission energy technologies, including nuclear fuel cycle technologies; 
10 
sustainable alternative fuels technologies; 
11 
hydropower technologies; 
12 
renewable energy technologies, not covered under the previous categories; 
13 
energy system-related energy efficiency technologies, including heat grid technologies; 
14 
renewable fuels of non-biological origin technologies; 
15 
biotech climate and energy solutions;  


EPRS | European Parliamentary Research Service 
10 
16 
transformative industrial technologies for decarbonisation not covered under the previous 
categories; 
17 
CO2 transport and utilisation technologies; 
18 
wind propulsion and electric propulsion technologies for transport;  
19 
nuclear technologies not covered under previous categories. 
The Commission and Member States should support manufacturing projects to reduce the EU's 
strategic dependencies on these net-zero technologies by reaching a manufacturing capacity of: 
 a benchmark of at least 40 % of the EU's annual deployment needs for the corresponding 
technologies necessary to achieve the EU's 2030 climate and energy targets; 
 reaching 15 % of world production by 2040, except where the increased EU 
manufacturing capacity would be higher than needed to achieve EU 2040 climate and 
energy targets.  
To streamline administrative and permit-granting processes, a designated contact point will be 
the sole point of contact for the project promoter in the permit-granting process for a net-zero 
technology manufacturing project. The contact point should coordinate and facilitate the 
submission of all documents and information, and notify the project promoter on the outcome of 
the process.  
Member States should provide administrative support to net-zero technology manufacturing 
projects located on their territory, to facilitate their implementation, paying particular attention to 
SMEs (e.g. assistance to comply with administrative and reporting obligations, assistance to increase 
the public acceptance of the project).  
The time limits concerning the permit-granting process for net-zero technology 
manufacturing projects are set (except under exceptional circumstances) at: 
 12 months for the construction or expansion of net-zero technology manufacturing 
projects with a yearly manufacturing capacity of less than 1 GW;  
 18 months for the construction or expansion of net-zero technology manufacturing 
projects, with a yearly manufacturing capacity of 1 GW or more.  
If an environmental impact assessment is required pursuant to Directive 2011/92/EU, the 
preparation of this report by the developer should not be included in the duration of the permit 
granting process. If the obligation to assess the effects on the environment arises simultaneously 
from Council Directive 92/43/EEC, or directives 2000/60/EC, 2001/42/EC, 2008/98/EC, 2009/147/EC 
2010/75/EU, 2011/92/EU or 2012/18/EU, the Member State should ensure that a coordinated or 
joint procedure fulfilling all the requirements of that EU legislation is applied. 
The regulation also defines net-zero strategic projects as those located in the EU contributing to 
the regulation's objectives, and meeting at least one of the following criteria: 
 it contributes to the technological and industrial resilience of the EU by adding 
manufacturing capacity in the EU for a net-zero technology, for which the EU depends for 
over 50 % on imports from third countries; or add manufacturing capacity by making a 
substantive contribution to the 2030 climate or energy objectives of the EU; or adds or 
updates existing manufacturing capacity in the EU for a net-zero technology of which the 
EU's manufacturing capacity represents a significant share of world production and 
that plays a crucial role in the resilience of the EU; 
 it has a clear positive impact on the EU's net-zero industry supply chain or downstream 
sectors by providing EU net-zero industries with access to the best available net-zero 
technology or to products produced in a first-of-a-kind manufacturing facility, and 
complies with one of the following criteria: it sets measures to enhance the skills of the 
workforce required for net-zero technologies; or it contributes to SME competitiveness as 
part of the supply chain of net zero technologies. 


Net-zero industry act 
11 
 it contributes to reaching the EU's climate or energy objectives by manufacturing net-zero 
technologies using practices that are more environmentally friendly and more circular. 
If a net-zero strategic project contributes to a value chain for a technology that a Member State 
does not accept as part of the general structure of its energy supply, the Member State may refuse 
to grant the project status. 
Member States should ensure that net-zero strategic projects are treated in the most rapid way 
possible. 
With 
regard 
to 
the 
environmental 
impacts 
or 
obligations 
addressed 
in 
Directives 92/43/EEC, 2000/60/EC and 2009/147/EC and the proposed nature restoration regulation, 
net-zero strategic projects in the EU should be considered as being of public interest and may be 
considered as having an overriding public interest and serving the interests of public health and 
safety, provided that all the conditions set out in the above acts are fulfilled. 
The permit-granting process for net-zero strategic projects are shorter than for other projects:  
 9 months maximum for the construction or expansion of net-zero strategic projects with a 
yearly manufacturing capacity of less than 1 GW;  
 12 months for the construction or expansion of net-zero strategic projects, with a yearly 
manufacturing capacity of 1 GW or more;  
 18 months for all necessary permits to operate a storage site in accordance with 
Directive 2009/31/EC.  
Where an environmental impact assessment is required pursuant to Directive 2011/92/EU, the 
preparation of an environmental impact assessment report by the developer should not be included 
in the duration of the permit granting process.  
Furthermore, Member States may decide to designate 'net-zero acceleration valleys' (NZAV), 
which are specific areas to accelerate net-zero industrial activities. The objectives of the valleys 
should be to create clusters of net-zero industrial activity and further streamline 
administrative procedures. Member States designating NZAVs should take measures to increase 
their attractiveness, such as support schemes facilitating the development of the necessary 
infrastructure in the valley, fostering private investments or enhancing the skills of the local 
workforce. Net-zero technology manufacturing projects in NZAVs should be considered to 
contribute to the security of supply of net-zero technologies in the Union and therefore to be in the 
public interest.  
An annual CO2 injection capacity of at least 50 million tonnes should be achieved by 2030, at 
specific storage sites. Each Member State should submit an annual report to the Commission 
providing, e.g. a mapping of CO2 capture projects in progress on its territory or in cooperation with 
other Member States, and an estimation of the corresponding needs for injection and storage 
capacities, and CO2 transport. The agreement introduces new provisions on CO2 transport 
infrastructure: the EU and Member States should make all reasonable efforts to develop the 
necessary CO2 transport infrastructure, including cross-border infrastructure, to facilitate 
achievement of the annual injection capacity target. The Commission should carry out an 
assessment of the functioning of the market for captured CO2 by three years from the date of entry 
into force of the new regulation.  
In public procurement procedures concerning some of the net-zero projects, contracting 
authorities should apply minimum mandatory requirements on environmental sustainability. 
The Commission should adopt an implementing act specifying the minimum requirements on 
environmental sustainability. In addition, contracting authorities should apply at least one other 
condition for the contract, relating to social or employment-related considerations, or to 
cybersecurity, or to the timely delivery of the component of the contract.  
The net-zero projects can provide a national (environmental) resilience contribution. If the 
Commission determines that the proportion of a net-zero technology or its main specific 
components imported from a third country represents more than 50 % of the EU's supply, 


EPRS | European Parliamentary Research Service 
12 
contracting authorities should include several conditions in their procurement documents: the 
value of the specific net-zero technology or the main specific components of the specific net-zero 
technology originating from the third country concerned should not exceed 50 %. Furthermore, if 
the Commission determines that the proportion of the EU’s supply of these products or components 
imported from a third country has increased by at least 10 percentage points on average for 
two consecutive years and reaches at least 40 % of the supply within the EU, the same 
mechanism should apply. Under certain circumstances, public authorities could decide not to 
apply minimum environmental requirements (e.g. if it would oblige that authority to acquire 
disproportionately costly equipment or would result in technical incompatibility in operation and 
maintenance). It could decide not to apply the resilience criteria if no suitable tenders or no 
suitable requests to participate are submitted in response to a previous procedure. For auctions of 
renewable energy technologies, Member States should also include criteria to assess the auction's 
sustainability and resilience, and responsible business conduct, cyber or data security, for example. 
This should apply to at least 30 % of the volume auctioned per year per Member State or to at 
least 6 GW per year per Member State. 
EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT SUPPORTING ANALYSIS 
Boehm L. with Scalamandrè C., EU-US climate and energy relations in light of the Inflation Reduction Act, 
EPRS, European Parliament, January 2023. 
Ragonnaud G., Securing Europe's supply of critical raw materials: The material nature of the EU's strategic 
goals, EPRS, European Parliament, March 2023. 
OTHER SOURCES 
European Parliament, Framework of measures for strengthening Europe's net-zero technology products 
manufacturing ecosystem (Net Zero Industry Act), Legislative Observatory (OEIL). 
ENDNOTE
 
1 
This section aims to provide a flavour of the debate and is not intended to be an exhaustive account of all different 
views on the proposal. Additional information can be found in related publications listed under 'European 
Parliament supporting analysis'.