9-715-456
R E V :  O C T O B E R  2 8 ,  2 0 1 5  
Professor David B. Yoffie and Research Associate Eric Baldwin prepared this case. This case derives from earlier cases, including: “Apple Inc., 
2008,” HBS No. 708-480, by Professor David B. Yoffie and Research Associate Michael Slind, “Apple Computer, 2006,” HBS No. 706-496 by 
Professor David B. Yoffie and Research Associate Michael Slind, “Apple Inc. in 2010,” HBS No. 710-467 by Professor David B. Yoffie and Research 
Associate Renee Kim, and "Apple Inc. in 2012," HBS No. 712-490, by Professor David B. Yoffie and Research Associate Penelope Rossano. This case 
was developed from published sources. Funding for the development of this case was provided by Harvard Business School and not by the 
company. Professor Yoffie serves as a director of HTC and Intel. HBS cases are developed solely as the basis for class discussion. Cases are not 
intended to serve as endorsements, sources of primary data, or illustrations of effective or ineffective management. 
D A V I D  B .  Y O F F I E  
E R I C  B A L D W I N  
Apple Inc. in 2015 
On March 9, 2015, Apple’s CEO, Tim Cook, announced the Apple Watch, his first major strategic 
initiative following the tragic death of Steve Jobs, his mentor and predecessor. Jobs, of course was a 
legend: he had changed Apple from a company on the verge of bankruptcy to one of the largest and 
most profitable companies in the world. Four years later, Cook was trying to demonstrate that he could 
not only sustain Apple’s achievements in computers, MP3 players, phones, and tablets, but he could 
also take Apple to the next level.  
By almost any measure, Apple’s performance in the prior decade had been stellar. As 2015 opened, 
Cook had reason to celebrate his own accomplishments. In the final quarter of 2014, Apple posted 
record profits of $18 billion, the largest quarterly profits in corporate history (see Exhibit 1). Spurred 
by the release of the iPhone 6, the iPhone shattered sales records, selling 74.5 million units in the 2014 
holiday quarter. Sales were particularly robust in China, the world’s largest smartphone market.   
The company’s momentum and stock performance was undeniable (see Exhibit 2). But there were 
also challenges in 2015. Smartphone competition was intense, especially in China, where new low-cost 
competitors such as Xiaomi were taking the market by storm. iPod sales had been falling for seven 
straight years. Even though Macintosh sales had grown faster than the industry in recent years, Apple’s 
share of worldwide PCs remained in single digits. Worse, the iPad had suffered a significant decline in 
sales, down 22% from Q4 in 2013. With sales of the iPod and iPad slipping, and those of the Mac 
remaining relatively small, Apple was increasingly dependent on the iPhone, which accounted for 69% 
of its revenue.1  
The announcement of the Apple Watch led many to ponder whether Cook would successfully 
transition Apple to “his” company, or whether Apple would still live off of Steve Jobs’s legacy? Would 
the Apple Watch be another home run, similar to the iPhone, or would it become another niche product, 
like Apple TV? Cook had big shoes to fill, and he had to wonder: Had he made the right strategic moves 
to deliver on Apple’s daunting ambitions?  
For the exclusive use of Y. Gu, 2023.
This document is authorized for use only by Yanshan Gu in Business 101    2023 Fall taught by GUO Yidi, Tsinghua University from Sep 2023 to Mar 2024.


715-456 
Apple Inc. in 2015 
2 
Apple’s History 
Steve Jobs and Steve Wozniak, a pair of 20-something college dropouts, founded Apple Computer 
on April Fool’s Day, 1976.2 Working out of the Jobs family garage in Los Altos, California, they built a 
computer circuit board that they named the Apple I. Within several months, they had made 200 units 
and had taken on a new partner—A.C. “Mike” Markkula Jr., who was instrumental in attracting 
venture capital as the experienced businessman on the team. Jobs’s mission was to bring an easy-to-
use computer to market, which led to the release of the Apple II in April 1978. It sparked a computing 
revolution that drove the PC industry to $1 billion in annual sales in less than three years.3 Apple 
quickly became the industry leader, selling more than 100,000 Apple IIs by the end of 1980. In 
December 1980, Apple launched a successful IPO.  
Apple’s competitive position changed fundamentally in 1981 when IBM entered the PC market. The 
IBM PC, which used Microsoft’s DOS operating system (OS) and a microprocessor (also called a CPU) 
from Intel, was a relatively “open” system that other producers could clone. Apple, on the other hand, 
practiced horizontal and vertical integration. It relied on its own proprietary designs and refused to 
license its software to third parties. IBM PCs not only gained more market share, but also emerged as 
the new standard for the industry. Apple responded by introducing the Macintosh in 1984. The Mac 
marked a breakthrough in ease of use, industrial design, and technical elegance. However, the Mac’s 
slow processor speed and lack of compatible software limited sales. Apple’s net income fell 62% 
between 1981 and 1984, sending the company into a crisis. Jobs, who was often referred to as the “soul” 
of the company, was forced out in 1985.4 The boardroom coup left John Sculley, the executive whom 
Jobs had recruited from Pepsi-Cola, alone at the helm.   
The Sculley Years, 1985–1993 
Sculley pushed the Mac into new markets, most notably in desktop publishing and education. 
Apple’s desktop market was driven by its superior software, such as Aldus (later Adobe) PageMaker, 
and peripherals, such as laser printers. In education, Apple grabbed more than half the market. Apple’s 
worldwide market share recovered and stabilized at around 8% (see Exhibit 3). By 1990, Apple had $1 
billion in cash and was the most profitable PC company in the world.   
Apple offered its customers a complete desktop solution, including hardware, software, and 
peripherals that allowed them to simply “plug-and-play.” Apple also stood out for typically designing 
its products from scratch, using unique chips, disk drives, and monitors. IBM compatibles narrowed 
the gap in ease of use in 1990 when Microsoft released Windows 3.0. Still, as one analyst noted, “[T]he 
majority of IBM and compatible users ‘put up’ with their machines, but Apple’s customers ‘love’ their 
Macs.”5  
Macintosh’s loyal customers allowed Apple to sell its products at a premium price. Top-of-the-line 
Macs went for as much as $10,000, and gross profit hovered around an enviable 50%. However, as IBM-
compatible prices dropped, Macs appeared overpriced by comparison. As the volume leader, IBM 
compatibles were also attracting the vast majority of new applications. Moreover, Apple’s cost 
structure was high: Apple devoted 9% of sales to research and development (R&D), compared with 5% 
at Compaq, and only 1% at many other IBM-clone manufacturers. After taking on the chief technology 
officer title in 1990, Sculley tried to move Apple into the mainstream by becoming a low-cost producer 
of computers with mass-market appeal. For instance, the Mac Classic, a $999 computer, was designed 
to compete head-to-head with low-priced IBM clones.  
Sculley also chose to forge an alliance with Apple’s foremost rival, IBM. They worked on two joint 
ventures, one to create a new PC OS and one aimed at multimedia applications. Apple undertook 
For the exclusive use of Y. Gu, 2023.
This document is authorized for use only by Yanshan Gu in Business 101    2023 Fall taught by GUO Yidi, Tsinghua University from Sep 2023 to Mar 2024.


Apple Inc. in 2015 
715-456 
3 
another cooperative project involving Novell and Intel to rework the Mac OS to run on Intel chips that 
boasted faster processing speed. These projects, coupled with an ambition to bring out new “hit” 
products every 6 to 12 months, led to a full-scale assault on the PC industry. Yet Apple’s gross margin 
dropped to 34%, 14 points below the company’s 10-year average. In June 1993, Sculley was replaced 
by Michael Spindler, the company’s president.  
The Spindler and Amelio Years, 1993–1997 
Spindler killed the plan to put the Mac OS on Intel chips and announced that Apple would license 
a handful of companies to make Mac clones. He tried to slash costs, which included cutting 16% of 
Apple’s workforce, and pushed for international growth. Despite these efforts, Apple lost momentum: 
a 1995 Computerworld survey found that none of the Windows users would consider buying a Mac, 
while more than half the Apple users expected to buy an Intel-based PC6 (see Exhibit 4 for shipments 
of PC microprocessors). Spindler, like his predecessor, had high hopes for a revolutionary OS that 
would turn around the company’s fate. But at the end of 1995, Apple and IBM parted ways on their 
joint ventures. After spending more than $500 million, neither side wanted to switch to a new 
technology.7 Following a $69 million loss in Apple’s first fiscal quarter of 1996, the company appointed 
another new CEO, Gilbert Amelio, an Apple board member.8 Amelio proclaimed that Apple would 
return to its premium-price differentiation strategy, but Macintosh sales continued to fall. In December 
1996, Amelio announced the acquisition of NeXT Software (founded by Jobs after he left Apple) and 
plans to develop a new OS based on NeXT. Jobs also returned to Apple as a part-time adviser. Despite 
more restructuring efforts, Apple lost $1.6 billion under Amelio (see Exhibit 3). At one point, insiders 
believed that Apple was within 90 days of bankruptcy. To save the company, Jobs became the 
company’s interim CEO in September 1997.  
Steve Jobs and the Apple Turnaround 
Jobs moved quickly to reshape Apple. In August 1997, Apple announced that Microsoft would 
invest $150 million in Apple and make a five-year commitment to develop core products, such as 
Microsoft Office, for the Mac. Jobs abruptly halted the Macintosh licensing program. Almost 99% of 
customers who had bought clones were existing Mac users, cannibalizing Apple’s profits.9 Apple’s 15 
product lines were slashed to just four categories—desktop and portable Macintoshes, for consumers 
and professionals. Tim Cook, hired by Jobs in 1998 after a career in operations at Compaq and IBM, 
was credited with streamlining Apple’s supply chain. In addition, Apple launched a website to set up 
direct sales for the first time. Internally, Jobs focused on reinvigorating innovation. Apple pared down 
its inventory significantly and increased its spending on R&D (see Exhibit 5 for PC manufacturers’ key 
operating measures). 
Jobs sought to bring a new culture to Apple. While previous CEOs sought to broaden Apple’s 
products, Jobs believed deeply in focus. Apple had one of the narrowest product lines of any company 
of comparable size. Jobs also believed in extreme practices of secrecy, including a “closed door policy” 
in which key cards accessed only certain areas, and dummy positions for new hires until they could be 
trusted. Everyone knew that violation of Apple’s culture of confidentiality was grounds for 
termination.10 Employees reported that working with Jobs was rewarding, but often difficult. Jobs 
noted that “I don’t think I run roughshod over people, but if something sucks, I tell people to their 
face.”11 Jobs was especially fanatic about industrial design, simplicity, and product elegance.  
This approach led to Jobs’s first real coup—the iMac—introduced in August 1998. The $1,299 all-in-
one computer featured colorful translucent cases with a distinctive eggshell design. The iMac also 
supported “plug-and-play” peripherals, such as printers, that were designed for Windows-based 
For the exclusive use of Y. Gu, 2023.
This document is authorized for use only by Yanshan Gu in Business 101    2023 Fall taught by GUO Yidi, Tsinghua University from Sep 2023 to Mar 2024.


715-456 
Apple Inc. in 2015 
4 
machines for the first time. Thanks to the iMac, Apple’s sales outpaced the industry’s average for the 
first time in years. Following Jobs’s return, Apple posted a $309 million profit in its 1998 fiscal year, 
reversing the previous year’s $1 billion loss.  
Another priority for Jobs was to break away from Apple’s tired, tarnished image. Jobs wanted 
Apple to be a cultural force. Not coincidentally, perhaps, Jobs retained his position as CEO of Pixar, an 
animation studio that he had bought in 1986. (Jobs sold Pixar to Walt Disney for $7.4 billion in 2006.) 
Through multimillion-dollar marketing campaigns such as the successful “Think Different” ads and 
catchy slogans (“The ultimate all-in-one design,” “It just works”), Apple promoted itself as a hip 
alternative to other computer brands. Later on, Apple highlighted its computers as the world’s 
“greenest lineup of notebooks” that were energy efficient and used recyclable materials.12 The goal was 
to differentiate the Macintosh amid intense competition in the PC industry.  
The Personal Computer Industry 
While Apple pioneered the first usable “personal” computing devices, it was IBM that brought PCs 
into the mainstream in the 1980s. But by the early 1990s, a new standard known as “Wintel” (the 
Windows OS combined with an Intel processor) dominated the industry. Thousands of 
manufacturers—ranging from Dell Computer to no-name clone makers—built PCs around standard 
building blocks from Microsoft and Intel. Growth was driven by lower prices and expanding 
capabilities. The overall industry continued to boom through the early 2000s, propelled by Internet 
demand and emerging markets such as China. By 2013, emerging markets accounted for nearly 58% of 
PC shipments.13 Growth in PC shipments started to slow after 2005 and tipped over into a 4% decline 
in 2012, followed by a drop of 10% in 2013, and 2.1% in 2014. Total PC shipments slipped to 308.7 
million in 2014.14 
Slowing revenue growth followed the slowdown in volume. Despite PCs that were faster, with 
more memory and storage, average selling prices (ASPs) declined by a compound annual rate of 8%–
10% per year from the early 1990s through 2005.15 The rate of decline in ASPs lessened between 2006 
and 2014 to a compound annual rate of 2%.16 By 2014, the average profit margin for the major PC 
manufacturers was under 3%.17 The standardization of components led PC makers to cut spending on 
R&D to between 1% and 3% of revenue (see Exhibit 5).18 As contract manufacturing in Taiwan and 
China became popular, Asian firms took over responsibility for more innovations, such as industrial 
designs. The largest segment of the PC industry was laptop computers, which represented 56% of 
shipments in 2014.19 The growth in demand for laptops was linked to lower prices: the ASP for a 
portable PC had fallen to roughly $700.20  
Buyers and Distribution 
PC buyers fell into five categories: home, small and medium-sized business (SMB), corporate, 
education, and government. Home consumers represented the biggest segment, accounting for nearly 
half of worldwide PC shipments.21 While all buyers cared deeply about price, home consumers also 
valued design, mobility, and wireless connectivity; business consumers balanced price with service 
and support; and education buyers depended on software availability. In distribution, a significant 
shift occurred in the early 1990s when more knowledgeable PC customers moved away from full-
service dealers that primarily sold established brands to business managers. Instead, larger enterprises 
bought directly from the manufacturer, while home and SMB customers started to buy PCs through 
superstores (Walmart, Costco), electronics retailers (Best Buy), and web-based retailers. At the same 
time, the so-called “white-box” channel—which featured generic machines assembled by local 
For the exclusive use of Y. Gu, 2023.
This document is authorized for use only by Yanshan Gu in Business 101    2023 Fall taught by GUO Yidi, Tsinghua University from Sep 2023 to Mar 2024.


Apple Inc. in 2015 
715-456 
5 
entrepreneurs—represented a large channel for PC sales, especially in emerging markets. White-box 
PCs reportedly represented about 30% of the overall market in 2009, and by 2012, white-box PCs 
accounted for half of all desktop PCs sold in China.22 
PC Manufacturers 
The three top PC vendors—Lenovo, Hewlett-Packard, and Dell, accounted for 51.1% of worldwide 
shipments in 2014 (see Exhibit 3 for PC manufacturers’ market shares). Industry leadership had shifted 
numerous times in the prior three decades, with Lenovo supplanting Hewlett-Packard (HP) as the 
market leader in early 2014. China-based Lenovo vaulted into the front ranks of PC vendors in 2005 
when it acquired IBM’s money-losing PC business for $1.75 billion. The upward trend continued 
through 2014 when Lenovo’s worldwide share grew to 19.2%.23 Lenovo’s greatest strength was its 
dominant position in China, the fastest-growing PC market in the world, where it commanded a 35% 
share.24 Following a rough period after the acquisition of Compaq Computer in 2002, HP outsourced 
most of its production to Asia and dramatically lowered its costs. But HP’s attempt to maintain PC 
leadership came at a high price: after 2005, HP market share eroded, margins declined, and the board 
fired three CEOs.25 HP proposed spinning off PCs in 2011, recanted, then decided again to break up 
the company. HP held the number-two position in worldwide shipment market share at 17.1%.26  
Dell held the third-largest market share, with 13.5% of worldwide PC shipments for 2014.27 Its 
distinct combination of direct sales and build-to-order manufacturing was popular in the corporate 
market for a decade. Yet when a boom in retail consumer PCs outpaced corporate sales, Dell was late 
to catch on. Founder Michael Dell returned as CEO in January 2007 and emphasized consumer-friendly 
products, reentered retail distribution, and pushed for international expansion. Still, Dell struggled 
with cost controls and poor margins. Faced with a declining share price and investor discontent, 
Michael Dell took the company private in a $25 billion deal completed in late 2013.28   
Suppliers, Complements, and Substitutes 
Suppliers to the PC industry fell into two categories: those that made products (such as memory 
chips, disk drives, and keyboards) with many sources; and those that made products—notably 
microprocessors and operating systems—that had just a few sources. Products in the first category 
were widely available at highly competitive prices. Products in the second category were supplied 
chiefly by two firms: Intel and Microsoft (see Exhibit 6 for selected financial information). 
Microprocessors
Microprocessors, or CPUs, were the hardware “brains” of a PC. Intel had held 
the majority of the PC CPU market since the 1980s. Despite competition from companies like Advanced 
Micro Devices (11.5% market share in Q4 2014), Intel remained the market leader with leading-edge 
technology, manufacturing scale, and a powerful brand, commanding over 88% of the market at the 
end of 2014.29 Performance of CPUs continued to double roughly every 18 to 24 months, but prices had 
dropped (adjusted for changes in computing power) by an average of 30% per year between 1970 and 
2007. However, CPU prices had stabilized in recent years.30 In 2015, a few manufacturers were shipping 
PCs with ARM, a low-power, lower-performance, and lower-priced CPU that was used in smartphones 
and tablets, but ARM’s market share in PCs remained tiny.  
Operating system
An OS was the software that managed a PC’s resources and supported its 
applications. Microsoft had dominated this market since the IBM PC in the 1980s. Nearly 90% of all 
PCs in the world ran on some version of Microsoft’s Windows operating system at the end of 2014.31  
Microsoft’s big hit in the new millennium was Windows XP. Introduced in October 2001, 17 million 
copies of XP were sold in its first eight weeks of sales. Developed at a cost of $1 billion, XP initially 
For the exclusive use of Y. Gu, 2023.
This document is authorized for use only by Yanshan Gu in Business 101    2023 Fall taught by GUO Yidi, Tsinghua University from Sep 2023 to Mar 2024.


715-456 
Apple Inc. in 2015 
6 
garnered for Microsoft between $45 and $60 in revenue per copy.32 However, the next three 
generations, Vista (2007), Windows 7 (2009), and Windows 8 (2012), met with mixed reviews, and each 
new generation of OS faced higher development, marketing, and support costs. In mid-2015, Microsoft 
planned to ship its latest update, Windows 10. 
Application software, content, and complementary products
The value of a computer 
corresponded directly to the complementary software, content, and hardware that were available on 
that platform. Key application software included word processing, presentation graphics, desktop 
publishing, and Internet browsing. After the early 1990s, the number of applications available on PCs 
exploded, while ASPs for PC software collapsed. Microsoft was the largest vendor of software for 
Wintel PCs and, aside from Apple itself, for Macs as well.33 Firms such as Google even offered 
productivity software (Google Apps) for free. PCs also benefited from a wide selection of content and 
a vast array of complementary hardware, ranging from printers to multimedia devices. The number of 
new, exciting PC applications had slowed considerably in recent years, as software developers 
increasingly focused on new devices, such as phones and tablets. 
Alternative technologies
Since the early 2000s, consumer electronics (CE) products, ranging 
from cell phones to TV set-top boxes to game consoles, started to encroach on functionality that was 
once the sole purview of the PC. For example, advanced game devices like Sony PlayStation 3 allowed 
consumers to watch DVDs, surf the web, and play games directly online, in addition to playing 
traditional video games. Another alternative to Windows and Mac PCs emerged with the introduction 
of Chromebooks by Google in 2011. Chromebooks were ultraportable laptops designed for web-
browsing, e-mail, and other online or cloud-based activities. In essence, a Chromebook was a low-cost 
laptop with limited internal storage and a stripped-down operating system from Google, called 
ChromeOS. All applications ran inside the Chrome web browser. Over the next few years, Samsung, 
Dell, HP, Lenovo, and Acer introduced Chromebooks, which retailed for $199 to $349. Some analysts 
predicted Chromebook sales would surpass 9 million units in 2015.34  
Of course, the most widely used alternatives were smartphones and tablets. With 1.3 billion 
smartphones and 230 million tablets sold in 2014, PC sales were suffering. While several industry 
insiders worried about the impact of digital devices on the PC industry, Jobs viewed all of these devices 
as part of an integrated strategy to deliver breakthrough user experiences.   
The Macintosh and Apple’s “Digital Hub” Strategy 
In 2001, marking Apple’s 25th anniversary, Jobs presented his vision for the Macintosh in what he 
called the “digital hub.” He believed that the Macintosh had a real advantage for consumers who were 
becoming entrenched in a digital lifestyle, using digital cameras, portable music players, and digital 
camcorders, not to mention mobile phones. The Mac could be the preferred “hub” to control, integrate, 
and add value to these devices. Jobs viewed Apple’s control of both hardware and software, one of the 
few remaining in the PC industry, as a unique strength. 
Apple subsequently revamped its product line to offer machines that could deliver a cutting-edge, 
tightly integrated user experience. Thanks to creative marketing and several innovative computer 
products, such as the ultra-thin Mac Air, Apple became the third-largest PC vendor in the U.S., with a 
13% unit share in Q4 2014.35 The company’s greatest strength lay in the premium-priced PC category; 
91% of PCs priced above $1,000 in the U.S. market were sold by Apple.36 Globally, Apple’s market 
share had risen steadily since 2004, reaching 6.4% at the end of 2014, placing it fifth among global PC 
manufacturers.37  
For the exclusive use of Y. Gu, 2023.
This document is authorized for use only by Yanshan Gu in Business 101    2023 Fall taught by GUO Yidi, Tsinghua University from Sep 2023 to Mar 2024.


Apple Inc. in 2015 
715-456 
7 
Changing the Macintosh
To accomplish his vision, Jobs made four important changes in the 
Macintosh. First, and perhaps most important, Apple introduced a new OS in 2001, the first fully 
overhauled platform released since 1984. The Mac OS X was based on UNIX, an industrial-strength OS 
favored by computer professionals. Analysts estimated that OS X cost Apple roughly $1 billion to 
develop. Second, since the early 1990s, Apple had built Macs with an IBM CPU, called PowerPC. In 
2006, Jobs made a large investment to shift Apple to Intel chips. By the next year, the entire Macintosh 
line ran on Intel. With “Intel Inside,” Apple could produce thinner, lighter laptops as well as more 
powerful computers. The Mac could also natively run Microsoft Windows along with Windows 
applications. This capability potentially offset a long-standing disadvantage of choosing a Mac—the 
relative lack of Macintosh software.  
The third element of the new Mac strategy was developing a proprietary set of applications, even 
though building programs such as the iLife suite required Apple to assume significant development 
costs.38 The final piece of Jobs’s puzzle was a new distribution strategy. The first Apple retail store 
opened in McLean, Virginia, in 2001. Apple not only wanted consumers to look at the eye-catching 
Macintosh designs, but also wanted people to directly use and experience Apple’s software. In 2014, 
the retail division—with nearly 450 stores in 14 countries—accounted for 12% of Apple’s total 
revenue.39 Observers viewed Apple’s retail strategy as a huge success: one analyst said that the 
company had become “the Nordstrom of technology.”40 Most analysts believed that the popularity of 
media products, such as the iPod, iPhone, and iPad, were critical to bringing consumers into the stores 
and exposing them to the Mac. 
Moving Beyond the Macintosh 
Apple’s shift toward a digital hub strategy was initiated by the debut of the iPod in 2001, followed 
by the iPhone in 2007, then the iPad in 2010. While the prospects for the Macintosh business had 
improved, it was the iPod that set Apple on its explosive growth path. Jobs’s focus for the iPod was 
simplicity: he said that “to make the iPod really easy to use—and this took a lot of arguing on my part—
we needed to limit what the device itself would do. Instead we put functionality in iTunes on the 
computer. . . . So by owning the iTunes software and the iPod device, that allowed us to make the 
computer and the device work together, and it allowed us to put the complexity in the right place.”41  
The historical economics of the iPod were stellar by CE industry standards. The iPod Nano, for 
example, had gross margins of around 40% in 2007.42 The biggest cost component for the Nano was 
flash memory, which could account for more than half of the bill of materials. Recognizing the 
importance of flash memory, Apple invested in several memory producers in order to secure output at 
the best prices, which made Apple was one of the largest purchasers of flash memory in the world. 
Apple’s approach to developing and marketing the iPod became, over the initial and strenuous 
opposition of Jobs, more open than its strategy for the Macintosh. The iPod could initially sync only 
with a Mac, and Jobs wanted to keep it that way, reportedly declaring at one point that Windows users 
would get iPods “over my dead body.”43 The rest of Apple’s executive team pushed Jobs to change his 
mind, and he ultimately relented. Opening the iPod provided access to the vast market of Windows 
users, and sales only really took off after Apple developed a version of the iPod and the iTunes software 
that worked on Windows PCs in 2003.  
iTunes
Two features that differentiated Apple’s iPods were its iTunes desktop software and its 
iTunes Music Store, which opened in April 2003. The two, in combination, completed Apple’s vision 
of an entertainment hub.44 The iTunes store was the first legal site that allowed music downloads on a 
pay-per-song basis. Visitors could pay $0.99 per song for a title offered by all five major record labels 
For the exclusive use of Y. Gu, 2023.
This document is authorized for use only by Yanshan Gu in Business 101    2023 Fall taught by GUO Yidi, Tsinghua University from Sep 2023 to Mar 2024.


715-456 
Apple Inc. in 2015 
8 
and by thousands of independent music labels. The downloaded songs could be played on the user’s 
computer, burned onto a CD, or transferred to an iPod. Within three days of launching the service, PC 
owners had downloaded 1 million copies of free iTunes software and had paid for 1 million songs.45 
Customers loved the vast music selections and ease of use, transforming the iTunes store into the 
number-one music store in the world.46  
The launch of the iTunes store had a galvanic impact on iPod sales. In the quarter before the release 
of iTunes store, Apple sold only 78,000 iPods. After the iTunes store launch, iPod sales shot up to 
304,000 units in one quarter and exploded thereafter.47 The direct impact of iTunes on Apple’s 
profitability was far less impressive. On average, roughly 70% of the money Apple collected per 
download went to the music label that owned it, and about 20% went toward the cost of credit card 
processing. That left Apple with only about 10% of revenue per download, from which Apple had to 
pay for its website, along with other direct and indirect costs.48 In essence, Jobs had created a razor-
and-blade business, only in reverse: the variable element (songs) served as a loss leader for a profit-
driving durable good.49 
Competition
Online music stores such as Amazon.com, Napster, and Walmart.com offered 
individual song downloads at competitive or discounted prices to iTunes. Most competitors offered 
songs to play on various devices, including the iPod. As time went on, the iPod and iTunes faced 
challenges from a variety of online music streaming services, such as Pandora, Spotify, Rdio, and 
Rhapsody. Some, such as Pandora, operated by creating personalized radio stations, choosing songs 
based on listener preferences. Others, like Spotify, gave users unlimited access to their online catalog, 
allowing users to create their own playlists, share them, and stream music like a virtual MP3 player. In 
some markets, music labels made more money from Spotify than iTunes.50  
Under fierce competition from streaming services, digital music downloads began to decline in 
2013, both in the U.S. and globally, for the first time since the iTunes store launched in 2003. The iTunes 
store experienced a decline of as much as 13% in the first half of 2014.51 In response, Apple launched 
iTunes Radio, an ad-supported streaming service, in September 2013. In May 2014, Apple acquired 
Beats Electronics in a $3 billion acquisition that was the largest in the company’s history. Beats, founded 
in 2008 by record-industry executive Jimmy Iovine and hip-hop artist Dr. Dre, generated most of its 
revenue—$1.1 billion in 2013—from a line of wireless speakers and high-end headphones. Beats had 
also launched a streaming music service in January 2014, which by the middle of the year had acquired 
250,000 subscribers.  
After peaking in 2008, iPod sales started to decline; iPod net revenues for 2014 were less than a 
quarter what they had been in 2008. The disruption of the digital music by the rise of streaming services 
had hastened its decline, but even more important had been the integration of digital music players 
into cell phones. Jobs had anticipated that the cell phone had the potential to topple the iPod as early 
as 2005, and ensured that Apple would lead the way with the iPhone, introduced in June 2007. Jobs 
later noted, “If you don’t cannibalize yourself, someone else will.” 
The iPhone 
At the January 2007 Macworld, Jobs introduced the iPhone, saying, “Every once in a while a 
revolutionary product comes along that changes everything. Today, we’re introducing three 
revolutionary products of this class. The first one is a widescreen iPod with touch controls. The second 
is a revolutionary mobile phone. And the third is a breakthrough Internet communications 
device. . . . These are not three separate devices, this is one device, and we are calling it iPhone.”52 
Hailed as Time magazine’s “Invention of the Year,” the iPhone represented Apple’s bid to “reinvent 
For the exclusive use of Y. Gu, 2023.
This document is authorized for use only by Yanshan Gu in Business 101    2023 Fall taught by GUO Yidi, Tsinghua University from Sep 2023 to Mar 2024.


Apple Inc. in 2015 
715-456 
9 
the phone.”53 Two and a half years of development efforts had been devoted to the phone, guarded 
under intense secrecy, even among the company’s own employees. The estimated development cost 
was around $150 million.  
Entry into mobile phones might have been a risky move for Apple. At the time, the industry was 
dominated by Nokia, Motorola, and Samsung, with roughly 60% market share. In addition, products 
were characterized by short product life cycles (averaging six to nine months) and sophisticated 
technology, including radio technology, where Apple had little experience. Smartphones, which 
brought multiple functions together in the palm of one’s hand, were just coming into prominence. In 
distribution, Apple faced powerful cellular carriers such as T-Mobile and Vodafone, which controlled 
the networks and often the phones used on those networks. In the U.S., the top two carriers—Verizon 
Wireless and AT&T—collectively controlled more than 60% of the market, and their networks were 
“locked”: an AT&T phone would only work on AT&T’s network.  
The iPhone, however, changed the rules in the industry. A revolutionary 3.5-inch touch-screen 
interface placed commands at the touch of users’ fingertips without a physical keyboard. The iPhone’s 
entire system ran on a specially adapted version of Apple’s OS X platform called iOS. Above all, users 
found it intuitive to use. Apple initially gave the iPhone to only one network operator in most markets. 
AT&T, the exclusive U.S. operator for the iPhone when it launched, did not provide a subsidy, contrary 
to the usual practice in the industry. Instead, AT&T agreed to an unprecedented revenue-sharing 
agreement with Apple, which gave Apple control over distribution and pricing. 
The first-generation iPhone sold about 6 million units over five quarters. Over the next six years, 
Apple released new phones that were thinner, faster, more intelligent, and offered new form factors. 
The second iPhone, for example, was released in 2008 and ran on a faster 3G network. More 
importantly, Apple revamped its pricing model. Carriers provided a subsidy on the phone in exchange 
for dropping the revenue-sharing agreement, and some subsidies were $400 per phone or higher. Over 
the next few years, Apple released an upgraded iPhone every 12 to 15 months and greatly expanded 
distribution. With the release of the 4s in October 2011, Apple introduced Siri, a voice-activated 
technology that Apple bought in 2010. With Siri, the user could dictate texts, schedule appointments, 
ask questions, and send e-mails using voice commands.54 The iPhone 5, announced in September 2012, 
offered a larger screen size for the first time; and a year later, the company launched the iPhone 5c, 
Apple’s first attempt to move down-market. The most successful iPhones in history were the 6 and 6 
plus, released in September 2014. These models had a 4.7-inch and a 5.5-inch screen, respectively, 
matching the best-selling Android phones.     
Apple’s relationship with carriers changed, too. In most markets in the world, Apple moved from 
a single carrier to multiple carriers selling iPhones. When Apple added new carriers, it had a reputation 
as a very tough negotiator: Sprint, for example, signed a four-year, $15 billion deal with Apple that 
committed the carrier to sell at least 24 million iPhones.55 Apple also began to sell “unlocked” versions 
of the phone; users paid full price and could bring them to any carrier. With each new generation of 
product, Apple also dropped the price of prior generations. The combination of big subsidies, low 
prices on older models, and expanded distribution caused revenues and unit volumes to explode (see 
Exhibit 1). Analysts also projected that Apple generated more than 60% of the cell-phone industry’s 
total profits in 2013, with only 8.3% unit market share. In the fourth quarter of 2014, Apple took a 
staggering 93% of the handset industry’s profits.56 
Analysts estimated that Apple realized an ASP of $687 from its iPhones in the last quarter of 2014, 
while overall average selling prices for smartphones was around $300.57 Falling component costs and 
design improvements helped to reduce the iPhone’s cost structure. One study showed that the bill of 
For the exclusive use of Y. Gu, 2023.
This document is authorized for use only by Yanshan Gu in Business 101    2023 Fall taught by GUO Yidi, Tsinghua University from Sep 2023 to Mar 2024.


715-456 
Apple Inc. in 2015 
10 
materials for the 16GB iPhone 6, which retailed for $649, was about $200.58 The first iPhone with half 
the storage capacity cost around $220 to build.59 Apple’s drive to keep its costs down was often 
controversial. Apple had become one of the largest customers of Foxconn in China. After several 
suicides of Foxconn workers, Apple commissioned a study by the Fair Labor Association,60 which 
discovered “serious and pressing” violations of the FLA’s code of conduct. Cook promised quick action 
to bring subcontractors into compliance. 
App Store
One key driver behind the iPhone sensation was the launch of the Apple App Store, 
which Jobs only reluctantly supported. Jobs initially wanted Apple to develop all the apps for the 
phone, a stance consistent with his preference for closed platforms and total control. Other Apple 
executives pushed Jobs to open up the platform, and developers soon began to “jailbreak” the iPhone 
platform so it could to run additional apps anyway. Jobs eventually relented, and the App Store 
launched in July 2008. Software applications for PDAs and smartphones had been around for years. 
But Apple’s App Store was the first outlet that made it easy to distribute, access, and download 
applications directly onto the mobile phone. Many apps were free; even paid apps usually started at 
$0.99. The App Store was introduced as part of iTunes, which already had a huge following. Software 
developers also welcomed the App Store because Apple made it easier to reach consumers. Apple 
reserved the right to approve all applications and kept a 30% cut of the developer’s app sales.  
The popularity of the App Store was stunning. In the first 18 months, 4 billion applications had been 
downloaded worldwide; by mid-2014, the number of downloads had risen to 75 billion.61 By the end 
of 2014, over 1.4 million applications were available in categories ranging from games to business 
productivity programs (see Exhibit 7 for an overview of smartphone operating systems and app 
stores).62 Walt Mossberg of the Wall Street Journal claimed that “the App Store is what makes your 
device worth the price.”63 Mobile apps had turned into a nice side business for Apple as well. In FY 
2014, Apple generated $10.2 billion in revenues from the sale of music, books, videos, and 
applications.64 Over time, Apple also paid out more than $25 billion to developers for the 75 billion 
apps downloaded to iPhones, iPods, and iPads.65 
Competitors
Competition was fierce in the smartphone industry, where worldwide shipments 
surpassed 1.3 billion in 2014.66 The iPhone’s greatest competition came from Android, an open and 
free platform developed by Google. As more manufacturers entered the market, innovation on the 
Android platform exploded. Not surprisingly, developers saw a potentially large market that might 
rival Apple. More variety, lower prices, and a comparable set of applications powered Android-based 
phones to become the most popular smartphones in 2014, with about 81% market share compared to 
about 15% for Apple. In 2014, more than 1 billion Android phones shipped worldwide (see Exhibit 7 
for smartphone sales).67 The share for Apple’s iOS fell gradually with the growth of Android, from its 
peak of nearly 19% in 2011. However, the biggest losers from Android’s growth were Nokia’s Symbian 
and RIM’s BlackBerry. Symbian had the largest share as late as 2010, but Nokia abandoned the platform 
in 2012 in favor of Microsoft Windows. By 2014, BlackBerry’s share, which was once as high as 20%, 
had fallen to under 1%.  
Among handset manufacturers, Samsung was Apple’s most direct competitor. Samsung was a huge 
company that made chips, PCs, TVs, and appliances as well as phones (see Exhibit 6 for financials of 
Apple competitors). Samsung was a relatively late entrant into the smartphone segment, but it became 
the volume leader in 2011 with the introduction of its Android-based Galaxy handset. Although 
Samsung remained the market leader in 2014 with 24.5% share,68 its profits were being squeezed by 
Apple at the high end of the market, and aggressive Chinese manufacturers at the low end. In Q4 2014, 
Apple and Samsung were practically tied for leadership, with each firm selling about 75 million units.  
For the exclusive use of Y. Gu, 2023.
This document is authorized for use only by Yanshan Gu in Business 101    2023 Fall taught by GUO Yidi, Tsinghua University from Sep 2023 to Mar 2024.


Apple Inc. in 2015 
715-456 
11 
Lenovo had emerged as the third-largest player in the smartphone industry, bolstered by its $2.9 
billion acquisition of Motorola in 2014: the combined company held 7.4% of the handset market 
globally. Similar to the PC market, Lenovo had a particularly strong position in its home market, 
surpassing Samsung in 2014 as the top smartphone seller in China.69 Perhaps the most feared 
competitor in the market was a new player from China called Xiaomi, which brought its first 
smartphone to market in 2011. With a business model built on selling inexpensive phones with high-
end specifications, Xiaomi’s sales doubled in 2013 and tripled in 2014, to 61.1 million units. Entering 
2015, it had cracked the top-five in smartphone sales worldwide with 4.4% of the market, and had 
announced ambitious plans to expand beyond China.70 
Microsoft struggled in smartphones. In what some analysts called a desperate move to imitate 
Apple, Microsoft bought Nokia’s devices business for $7.2 billion in early 2014. Microsoft began selling 
Nokia’s Lumia line of smartphones, running its Windows Phone operating system, under its own 
brand later that year. Although it continued to license its software to other vendors, such as Samsung 
and HTC, Microsoft’s share of the global smartphone market slipped under 3% for 2014. 
Google’s competitor to Apple’s App Store, called Play Store, launched in late 2008 and trailed the 
App Store for the next several years. In 2014, the number of Android apps surpassed the number 
available from Apple for the first time, and downloads from the Play Store were 60% higher than from 
the App Store. Despite fewer downloads, though, Apple’s App Store generated significantly more 
revenue, indicating its strength in the premium market (see Exhibit 7).71 While Google had fewer 
restrictions than Apple,72 developers found it more challenging to write applications for Android. Most 
Android phones varied slightly, which required software developers to write numerous versions of 
their applications.  
Suppliers
The supplier base was structurally different in smartphones compared to PCs. The 
supplier that captured most of the value in smartphones was Qualcomm, which largely controlled 
CDMA (3G) and LTE (4G)—the two most important protocols for wireless service. Except in China, 
Qualcomm earned between 3.5% and 5% royalties on almost every CDMA and LTE phone sold in the 
world. The CPU business was also structurally different: the vast majority of CPUs in smartphones 
were based on a design by ARM Holding, a U.K. company. ARM licensed its core design for about 1% 
on each CPU, which sold for roughly $15–$20. Google also developed its application store to enable 
applications to run on different  versions of ARM as well as Intel’s x86 CPUs, so there was no 
architectural lock as there was on Windows PCs. Three companies dominated the ARM CPU business 
in smartphones in 2014:  Qualcomm had about 54%, Apple had roughly 15%, and MediaTek from 
Taiwan had just under 14%.73  Dating back to the early days of Apple, Jobs always preferred to control 
the critical technologies that would drive Apple’s differentiation. To grab greater control of mobile 
devices, Jobs bought two ARM microprocessor design companies for about $400 million between 2008 
and 2010.74 Apple’s CPUs were manufactured by Samsung and optimized to deliver Apple’s 
demanding specifications on battery life and performance.   
The patent wars
Intense competition in the smartphone industries led to numerous lawsuits on 
design and intellectual property.75 Jobs was the most aggressive CEO in pursuing legal redress. “From 
the earliest days at Apple, I realized that we thrived when we created intellectual property. . . . If 
protection of intellectual property begins to disappear, creative companies will disappear or never get 
started. But there’s a simpler reason: It’s wrong to steal. It hurts other people. And it hurts your own 
character.”76 In 2010, Apple initiated litigations against several Android manufacturers. Jobs explained, 
“I will spend every penny of Apple’s $40 billion in the bank, to right this wrong. I’m going to destroy 
Android, because it’s a stolen product. I’m willing to go to thermonuclear war on this. They are scared 
to death, because they know they are guilty.”77 By 2014, Apple had won two large judgments against 
For the exclusive use of Y. Gu, 2023.
This document is authorized for use only by Yanshan Gu in Business 101    2023 Fall taught by GUO Yidi, Tsinghua University from Sep 2023 to Mar 2024.


715-456 
Apple Inc. in 2015 
12 
Samsung in U.S. courts. In early 2015, Swedish telecom pioneer Ericsson filed several lawsuits in the 
U.S., asking the courts to block sales of iPhones and iPads. The suits came after the two companies 
failed to come to terms on the renewal of Apple’s licensing agreement for several of Ericsson’s patents 
related to essential technology for connecting to high-speed wireless communications networks.78  
Moving Beyond the iPhone: The iPad  
The iPhone’s spectacular success may have satisfied many CEOs, but not Steve Jobs. In 2010, he saw 
another opportunity to make a bold move to redefine computing with the launch of the iPad. “Some 
people say, ‘Give the customers what they want,’” said Jobs, “but that’s not my approach. Our job is to 
figure out what they’re going to want before they do.”79 That was what he did with the iPad. Apple’s 
release of the iPad on March 2, 2010, defined a new device category that Jobs described as “even more 
intuitive and easier to use than a PC, and where the software and the hardware and the applications 
need to be intertwined in an even more seamless way than they are on a PC.”80 Prior to the iPad, tablet 
sales accounted for a trivial share of the PC market. When the iPad launched, market demand was 
uncertain, at best. But doubters were quickly silenced, as sales of the new device took off. More than 
450,000 iPads were sold during its first week on the market. Jobs commented, “It feels great to have the 
iPad launched into the world—it’s going to be a game changer.”81  By the end of 2014, Apple had built 
another $30 billion business, cumulatively selling nearly 240 million iPads.82 
The iPad was originally priced from $499 to $829 and was sold in the U.S. by Apple retail stores, 
wireless carriers, and other retail stores. Operators did not subsidize iPads, as they did smartphones. 
Consumers could choose to connect to the Internet by paying for access to a carrier’s data network or 
relying exclusively on Wi-Fi networks. Most tablet owners opted for a Wi-Fi–only connection.83  
Perhaps the biggest debate about the iPad was its usage model. Market research indicated that tablet 
owners viewed it primarily as a device to consume content rather than produce it.84 The most popular 
activities included checking e-mail, playing games, watching full-length videos, and shopping online. 
The iPad could run, with some limitations, almost all iPhone apps. To offset those limitations, software 
developers released over 675,000 native iPad apps by late 2014.85 Over time, iPad consumers became 
more creative in finding uses for the iPad for everything from writing music to restaurant menus, sales 
tools, and even car-owner manuals. In late 2012, Apple released the iPad Mini, a less expensive version 
with a 7.9-inch screen. Although Jobs had previously dismissed such tablets as “tweeners,” the iPad 
Mini quickly became Apple’s best-selling tablet. 
An early controversy over the iPad erupted when Apple sought to offer its own bookstore. 
Historically, Jobs had insisted on low prices for content on the iPod and iPhone ($0.99 for songs, and 
free or low-priced apps). But in trying to woo book and magazine publishers to the iPad, Jobs faced 
Amazon, which distributed 90% of the digital books on the market through its Kindle e-reader. To 
stimulate demand, Amazon priced many of its books at $9.99, often below Amazon’s costs.  Publishers 
were unhappy with the pricing: they feared low prices would devalue the content as well as cause 
rapid cannibalization of physical books. Apple made an offer to publishers that they set their own 
prices, usually ranging from $12 to $15 for an e-book. Apple then took a 30% commission. After initially 
resisting, Amazon was forced by publishers to follow suit. By April 2012, Amazon’s market share in e-
books had fallen to 60%.86 The Department of Justice, however, investigated Apple’s strategy in early 
2012, accusing the company and five publishers of price fixing. The court ruled that Apple had in fact 
colluded with publishers to raise prices, and in late 2014, Apple agreed to pay $400 million in damages 
to consumers who had paid artificially high prices for e-books (as well as $50 million to lawyers).87 
For the exclusive use of Y. Gu, 2023.
This document is authorized for use only by Yanshan Gu in Business 101    2023 Fall taught by GUO Yidi, Tsinghua University from Sep 2023 to Mar 2024.


Apple Inc. in 2015 
715-456 
13 
Since the settlement gave digital retailers flexibility again in setting prices, Amazon almost 
immediately lowered prices back to $9.99 on some books.   
Apple’s business model for the iPad was also slightly different from earlier products. Apple earned 
an estimated 25% gross margin on its entry-model iPad by using its own CPU, giving the channel a 
lower margin and leveraging its scale in purchasing. Apple had lower costs than most competitors, 
which could only make 15% gross margin at the same retail price.88 Yet despite Apple’s formidable 
lead, at least 20 major manufacturers launched tablets over the next few years, driving down Apple’s 
once-commanding market share (see Exhibit 8 for worldwide tablet shipments). 
Competition
Apple had at least three potential serious competitors for tablets: (1) 
manufacturers using Google’s version of Android; (2) Amazon, which used a modified version of 
Android; and (3) Microsoft Windows–based tablets. Android-based tablets were rushed to the market 
in late 2010, and by the end of 2014, Android had captured 70% share.89 Samsung was the leader in this 
camp, with 17.5% of the worldwide tablet market.90  Similar to smartphones, Android’s app store was 
gradually catching up to Apple in the availability of tablet apps.  
Amazon, by contrast, had a different model: it developed a distinctive user interface and sold its 
seven-inch tablet, the Kindle Fire, for $199. Amazon’s product costs were estimated to be slightly more 
than $200.91 While Apple sought to make money on hardware, Amazon hoped to make money on 
software, applications, and content. Despite an impressive start, Amazon struggled to sell large 
volumes: in 2014, Amazon sold only 3.3 million tablets, for a market share of just 1.4%.92  
 Microsoft brought its tablet—the Surface—to market in October 2012, powered by Windows 8, 
Microsoft’s newest OS. More like a PC than an iPad, Microsoft captured only 2.1% unit share of the 
tablet market in 2013, and the company was forced to take a $900 million write-off in the second quarter 
of 2013.93 Microsoft refocused its efforts on the enterprise market in 2014, which improved sales and 
margins. But Surface’s market share remained under 5%.   
Saturation?
After tremendous growth in its first three years, tablet sales began to lose 
momentum in 2014. The fourth quarter of 2014 saw a worldwide year-over-year decline in tablet 
shipments of 3.2%. This was the first quarterly decline since the iPad launched. Apple was hit 
particularly hard: for FY 2014, unit sales declined by 5% and net revenues were down 4%.94 By the end 
of 2014, the iPad had seen four consecutive quarters of sales declines.95 In this slowing market, Apple 
remained the market leader, with 27.6% share, followed by Samsung, ASUS, Lenovo, and Amazon.96  
Partly to spur sales of the iPad, in July 2014, Cook announced a partnership with IBM to develop 
enterprise apps designed for the iPad and iPhone and to enlist IBM’s sales force and business 
connections to sell Apple mobile devices to enterprise customers. As Cook pointed out, iPhones and 
iPads were present in 90% of the Fortune 500, but the rate of penetration was low, providing Apple 
with what he described as a huge opportunity to advance mobility in the enterprise.  
iCloud
One of Jobs’s last acts as CEO was to prepare Apple for the launch of iCloud in October 
2011. Jobs’s vision was that Apple was “the first to have the insight about your computer becoming a 
digital hub . . . [which] worked brilliantly. But over the next few years, the hub is going to move from 
your computer into the cloud. So it’s the same digital hub strategy, but the hub’s in a different place.”97 
iCloud allowed users to synchronize seamlessly across multiple Apple devices by storing data, 
pictures, music, and so on, in one location on the Internet. Five GB of cloud storage on iCloud was free 
for Mac, iPhone, iPad, and iPod Touch users. Consumers could also pay for additional storage.98 To 
support iCloud, Apple invested in a huge data center in North Carolina at an estimated cost of $500 
million.99 Notably, iCloud worked only with Apple products. Following Apple’s lead, OS competitors 
For the exclusive use of Y. Gu, 2023.
This document is authorized for use only by Yanshan Gu in Business 101    2023 Fall taught by GUO Yidi, Tsinghua University from Sep 2023 to Mar 2024.


715-456 
Apple Inc. in 2015 
14 
such as Google and Microsoft offered their own cloud storage services, while product competitors such 
as Samsung struck deals with Dropbox, a cross-platform cloud storage solution first launched in 2008. 
Moving Beyond the iPhone and iPad: Apple Watch and Apple Pay 
During the three years after Steve Jobs’s death, Apple witnessed spectacular revenue growth, driven 
by booming iPhone and iPad sales. After Jobs had revolutionized music, phones, and computing 
between 2001 and 2011, Apple fans were waiting for (and expecting) the next revolution under Cook. 
Hoping to meet those expectations, Cook announced his first new major product initiative in 
September 2014: the Apple Watch, Apple’s entry into wearable technology. Although the product 
would not ship until late April 2015, Apple showed off many of its features in March 2015. The Apple 
Watch would function, of course, as a timepiece, but also incorporate fitness-tracking features. When 
connected to a user’s iPhone, it would bring smartphone applications to the user’s wrist: users could 
receive notifications about upcoming calendar events, e-mail, and text messages without looking at 
their phones, and could, for example, access maps and directions or control the iPhone’s music player 
without needing to pick up their phones.  
Apple was not the first in the category, but it was expected to become the largest. The question was, 
how large? The Apple Watch had to be charged every day, it only worked with new iPhones, and it 
was expensive: prices started at $349 for the basic model and ranged as high as $17,000 for an 18-karat 
gold model. Moreover, there was already significant competition. The pioneer in the category was a 
start-up called Pebble, which shipped the first real smartwatches in 2012 for both iOS and Android. 
Pebbles sold for as little as $150. The largest player entering 2015 was Samsung, which like Apple, 
offered watches that only worked with its own phones. Overall unit sales for the industry had been 
disappointing (see Exhibit 9). After Google announced “AndroidWear” in March 2014, extending the 
Android platform to watches, LG, Motorola, and Samsung subsequently introduced watches based on 
the platform. The field was expected to be very crowded. Even fancy Swiss watch companies, such as 
Tag Heuer, announced that they would join the fray.  
The same day Cook announced the Apple Watch, he also introduced Apple Pay, Apple’s new 
mobile payment system. When it was announced, most of the nation’s largest banks and credit card 
companies had signed on to support it. By early 2015, dozens of retailers, including Walgreens, 
McDonald’s, Macy’s, and Whole Foods, had pledged to accept Apple Pay in their stores. To set it up, 
users added a credit or debit card to Apple Pay on their iPhone. Once a card had been added, Apple 
Pay allowed users to pay simply by holding their iPhone or Apple Watch near a wireless payment 
terminal while keeping their finger on the home button. Payment information was transmitted from 
the device to the payment terminal using near field communication technology. To enable secure 
transactions, the system used TouchID, the iPhone’s fingerprint recognition technology, to ensure that 
the phone’s owner was the one making the purchase. In addition, credit card information was not 
transferred to the retailer during the transaction; rather, a device account number unique to the phone 
was transmitted along with a dynamic security code unique to each transaction. Apple hoped that the 
combination of security and convenience would encourage rapid uptake of the technology. Cook 
claimed in December that Apple Pay accounted for two-thirds of mobile payments at participating 
retailers. By early 2015, nearly 2 million customers at two of the nation’s largest banks—Bank of 
America and Chase—had added credit or debit cards to their Apple Pay account.100   
For the exclusive use of Y. Gu, 2023.
This document is authorized for use only by Yanshan Gu in Business 101    2023 Fall taught by GUO Yidi, Tsinghua University from Sep 2023 to Mar 2024.


Apple Inc. in 2015 
715-456 
15 
The Occasional Disappointments 
While almost everything that Apple had touched in the first decade of the 21st century turned to 
gold, the record was not unblemished. Apple had two notable products that failed to live up to 
expectations. One was the Mac Mini. As Apple’s entry-level desktop, the $599 price tag did not come 
with a keyboard or a mouse. Consumers could buy a Windows desktop with more functions and faster 
performance at a lower price. The other disappointment was Apple TV. Introduced in 2007, the set-top 
box was Apple’s attempt to bring digital video content directly into consumers’ living rooms. Users 
could stream movies and TV shows over the Internet to a TV set and/or connect other Apple devices 
to the TV over a Wi-Fi connection. However, Apple TV sales were paltry compared to Apple’s other 
products. Before he died, Jobs claimed to have cracked the code for a next-generation television, which 
Apple watchers were still waiting to see in early 2015. 
Apple Inc. in the Next Decade? 
Inevitably, many had wondered about what would happen to Apple with Jobs gone, but Apple had 
performed above everyone’s expectations in Cook’s first three years as CEO. The stock price nearly 
doubled between the end of FY2011 and FY2014, while revenues were up nearly 70% over the same 
period. In early 2015, Apple’s market capitalization surpassed $700 billion, making it the most valuable 
company in the history of the world. Despite this success, some observers worried that Apple had 
become overly dependent on the iPhone and pondered how long Apple could sustain its growth 
without the introduction of truly innovative new products. Cook claimed that the Apple Watch, Apple 
Pay, Apple TV, and corporate customers were big growth areas for the company; he confidently 
exclaimed that Apple’s product “pipeline” was the strongest he had ever seen. There were even rumors 
in the press that Apple would start to develop cars to compete with Tesla, and Apple would soon offer 
TV services over the Internet to compete with cable operators.   
While Cook appeared supremely confident at the Apple Watch event, he had to be thinking:  Could 
Apple Watch and Apple Pay really be the next iPhone and iTunes? And what steps did he need to take 
to drive that success?  
 
 
For the exclusive use of Y. Gu, 2023.
This document is authorized for use only by Yanshan Gu in Business 101    2023 Fall taught by GUO Yidi, Tsinghua University from Sep 2023 to Mar 2024.


715-456     -16- 
 
Exhibit 1a
Apple Inc., Selected Financial Information, FY 1991–2014 (in millions of dollars, except for number of employees and stock-related data) 
  
1991 
1996 
1998 
2000 
2002 
2004 
2006 
2008 
2010 
2012 
 2014  
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Net sales 
6,309 
9,833 
5,941 
7,983 
5,742 
8,279 
19,315 
37,491 
65,225 
156,508 
182,795 
Cost of sales 
3,314 
8,865 
4,462 
5,817 
4,139 
6,022 
13,717 
24,292 
39,541 
87,846 
112,258 
Research and development 
583 
604 
303 
380 
446 
491 
712 
1,109 
1,782 
3,381 
6,041 
Selling, general, and administrative 
1,740 
1,568 
908 
1,256 
1,109 
1,430 
2,433 
3,761 
7,299 
10,040 
11,993 
Operating income (loss) 
671 
-1,204 
268 
530 
48 
336 
2,453 
8,327 
18,385 
55,241 
52,503 
Net income (loss) 
310 
-816 
309 
786 
65 
266 
1,989 
6,119 
14,013 
41,733 
39,510 
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Total cash, cash equivalents, and 
marketable securities 
893 
1,745 
2,300 
4,813 
4,376 
5,464 
10,110 
24,490 
51,011 
121,251 
155,239 
Accounts receivable, net 
907 
1,496 
955 
953 
707 
1,050 
2,845 
4,704 
9,924 
18,692 
27,219 
Inventories 
672 
662 
78 
33 
45 
101 
270 
509 
1,051 
791 
2,111 
Net property, plant, and equipment 
448 
598 
348 
419 
621 
707 
1,281 
2,455 
4,768 
15,452 
20,624 
Total assets 
3,494 
5,364 
4,289 
6,803 
6,298 
8,050 
17,205 
36,171 
75,183 
176,064 
231,839 
Total liabilities 
1,727 
3,306 
2,647 
2,696 
2,203 
2,974 
7,221 
13,874 
27,392 
57,854 
120,292 
Total shareholders’ equity 
1,767 
2,058 
1,642 
4,107 
4,095 
5,076 
9,984 
22,297 
47,791 
118,210 
111,547 
Cash dividends paid 
57 
14 
-- 
-- 
-- 
-- 
-- 
-- 
-- 
2,488 
11,126 
Number of employees 
14,432 
10,896 
9,663 
8,568 
10,211 
11,695 
17,787 
32,000 
46,600 
72,800 
92,600 
International sales/sales 
45% 
52% 
45% 
46% 
43% 
41% 
41% 
44% 
56% 
61% 
62% 
Gross margin 
47% 
10% 
25% 
27% 
28% 
27% 
29% 
35% 
39% 
44% 
39% 
R&D/sales 
9% 
6% 
5% 
5% 
8% 
6% 
4% 
3% 
3% 
2% 
3% 
SG&A/sales 
28% 
16% 
15% 
16% 
19% 
17% 
13% 
10% 
9% 
6% 
7% 
Return on sales 
5% 
NA 
5% 
10% 
1% 
3% 
10% 
16% 
22% 
27% 
22% 
Return on assets 
9% 
NA 
7% 
12% 
1% 
3% 
12% 
17% 
19% 
24% 
17% 
Return on equity 
19% 
NA 
22% 
22% 
2% 
6% 
23% 
33% 
35% 
43% 
34% 
Stock price low a  
$1.44 
$0.57 
$0.48 
$0.97 
$0.95 
$1.51 
$7.17 
$11.31 
$27.18 
$58.43 
$70.51 
Stock price high 
$2.62 
$1.27 
$1.56 
$5.37 
$1.87 
$4.97 
$13.31 
$28.61 
$46.67 
$100.72 
$119.75 
P/E ratio at period-end 
21.9 
NA 
19.5 
6.8 
78.2 
58.5. 
25.6 
8.2 
14.7 
15.1 
15.6 
Market value at period-end 
6,649.9 
2,598.5 
5,539.7 
4,996.2 
5,146.4 25,892.5 72,900.8 75,870.6 295,455.3 499,821.0 
647,506.9 
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Source: 
Compiled from Capital IQ data and ThomsonOne, as well as company documents.   
a Share price data reflect calendar-year results and also reflect retroactive application of 7:1 stock split that took effect in June 2014.  
  
For the exclusive use of Y. Gu, 2023.
This document is authorized for use only by Yanshan Gu in Business 101    2023 Fall taught by GUO Yidi, Tsinghua University from Sep 2023 to Mar 2024.


Apple Inc. in 2015 
715-456 
17 
Exhibit 1b
Apple’s Net Sales by Product Category, 2002–2012 (in millions of dollars) 
  
2002 
2004 
2006 
2008 
2010 
2012 
2013 
2014 
Macintosh 
4,534 
4,923 
7,375 
14,354 
17,479 
23,221 
21,483 
24,079 
iPad 
NA 
NA 
NA 
NA 
4,958 
30,945 
31,980 
30,283 
iPod 
143 
1,306 
7,676 
9,153 
8,274 
5,615 
4,411 
2,286 
Other music productsa 
4 
278 
1,885 
3,340 
4,948 
8,534 
NA 
NA 
iPhone, related products and servicesb 
NA 
NA 
NA 
6,742 
25,179 
78,692 
91,279 
101,991 
Peripherals and other hardwarec 
527 
951 
1,100 
1,694 
1,814 
2,778 
NA 
NA 
Accessoriese 
NA 
NA 
NA 
NA 
NA 
NA 
5,706 
6,093 
Software 
307 
502 
NA 
NA 
NA 
NA 
NA 
NA 
Service and other net sales 
227 
319 
NA 
NA 
NA 
NA 
NA 
NA 
Software, service, and other salesd 
NA 
NA 
1,279 
2,208 
2,573 
3,459 
NA 
NA 
iTunes, software, and servicesf 
NA 
NA 
NA 
NA 
NA 
NA 
16,051 
18,063 
Total net sales 
5,742 
8,279 
19,315 
37,491 
65,225 
156,508 
170,910 
182,795 
     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Source: 
Compiled from Apple’s financial statements and casewriter calculations.  
Note: 
NA = Not Available or Not Applicable. 
a Represents iTunes Store sales, iPod services, and Apple-branded and third-party iPod accessories.  
b Represents handset sales, carrier agreements, and Apple-branded and third-party iPhone accessories.  
c Includes sales of displays, wireless connectivity and networking solutions, and other hardware accessories.  
d Includes sales of Apple-branded operating system, application software, third-party software, AppleCare services, and Internet 
services. 
e Includes sales of Apple-branded and third-party accessories for iPhone, iPad, Mac, and iPod. 
f Includes revenue from the iTunes Store, the App Store, the Mac App Store, the iBooks Store, AppleCare, licensing, and other 
services. 
 
 
 
For the exclusive use of Y. Gu, 2023.
This document is authorized for use only by Yanshan Gu in Business 101    2023 Fall taught by GUO Yidi, Tsinghua University from Sep 2023 to Mar 2024.


715-456 
Apple Inc. in 2015 
18 
Exhibit 1c
Apple’s Unit Sales by Product Category, 2004–2012 (in thousands of units) 
 
2004 
2006 
2008 
2009 
2010 
2012 
2013 
2014 
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Desktopsa 
1,625 
2,434 
3,712 
3,182 
4,627 
4,656 
NA 
NA 
Portablesb 
1,665 
2,869 
6,003 
7,214 
9,035 
13,502 
NA 
NA 
Total Macintosh unit sales 
3,290 
5,303 
9,715 
10,396 
13,662 
18,158 
16,341 
18,906 
Net sales per unit sold 
$1,496 
$1,391 
$1,478 
$1,333 
$1,279 
$1,279 
$1,315 
$1,274 
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
iPads 
NA 
NA 
NA 
NA 
7,458 
58,310 
71,033 
67,977 
Net sales per unit sold 
NA 
NA 
NA 
NA 
$665 
$531 
$450 
$445 
iPods 
4,416 
39,409 
54,828 
54,132 
50,312 
35,165 
26,379 
14,377 
Net sales per unit sold 
$296 
$195 
$167 
$149 
$164 
$160 
$167 
$159 
iPhone units sold 
NA 
NA 
11,627 
20,731 
39,989 
125,046 
150,257 
169,219 
Net sales per unit soldc 
NA 
NA 
$580 
$629 
$630 
$629 
$607 
$603 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Source: 
Compiled from Apple’s financial statements and casewriter calculations.  
Note: 
Data for 2004–2011 based on fiscal-year results ending September.  Data for 2012 reflect the latest 12 months ending 
March 31, 2012.  
a Includes iMac, Mac Mini, Mac Pro, and Xserve product lines. 
b Includes MacBook, MacBook Air, and MacBook Pro product lines. 
c Sales/unit includes accessories and related service revenue.  
 
Exhibit 2
Apple’s Share Price vs. S&P 500 Index (December 31, 1982 = 100) 
 
Source: 
Created by casewriter using data from ThomsonOne, accessed March 2015. 
For the exclusive use of Y. Gu, 2023.
This document is authorized for use only by Yanshan Gu in Business 101    2023 Fall taught by GUO Yidi, Tsinghua University from Sep 2023 to Mar 2024.


Apple Inc. in 2015 
715-456 
19 
Exhibit 3a
Apple’s Worldwide PC Market Share, 1980–2014 
 
0%
2%
4%
6%
8%
10%
12%
14%
16%
18%
1980 1983 1986 1989 1992 1995 1998 2001 2004 2007 2010 2013
Source: 
Adapted from InfoCorp., International Data Corp., Gartner Dataquest, and Merrill Lynch data.  
 
Exhibit 3b
PC Manufacturers: Worldwide Market Shares, 2002–2011  
  
2002 
2004 
2006 
2008 
2010 
2011 
2012 
2013 
2014 
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Hewlett-Packarda 
16.0% 
15.8% 
16.5% 
18.9% 
18.5% 
17.1% 
16.6% 
16.6% 
18.4% 
Dell 
15.1% 
17.9% 
16.6% 
14.7% 
12.5% 
12.2% 
11.1% 
12.0% 
13.5% 
Lenovob 
-- 
2.3% 
7.1% 
7.6% 
9.8% 
12.1% 
15.0% 
17.1% 
19.2% 
Acer 
-- 
3.6% 
5.8% 
10.9% 
12.4% 
10.2% 
9.6% 
7.8% 
7.8% 
Toshiba 
3.2% 
3.6% 
3.9% 
4.8% 
-- 
-- 
-- 
-- 
-- 
Fujitsu Siemens 
4.2% 
4.0% 
-- 
-- 
-- 
-- 
-- 
-- 
-- 
IBMb 
5.9% 
5.9% 
-- 
-- 
-- 
-- 
-- 
-- 
-- 
Packard Bell NEC 
3.3% 
-- 
-- 
-- 
-- 
-- 
-- 
-- 
-- 
Apple 
2.3% 
1.9% 
2.3% 
3.4% 
3.9% 
4.7% 
5.0% 
5.4% 
6.4% 
Total shipments  
    (in millions)  
136.9 
177.5 
235.4 
287.6 
346.8 
363.9 
352.4 
315.1 
308.6 
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Source: 
“PC Market Stumbles on HDD Shortage While U.S. Market Sees Worst Annual Growth Since 2001, According to IDC,” 
IDC press release, January 11, 2012; “PC Market Records Modest Gains During Fourth Quarter of 2010, According to 
IDC,” IDC press release, January 12, 2011;  “PC Market Stumbles on HDD Shortage While U.S. Market Sees Worst 
Annual Growth Since 2001, According to IDC,” IDC press release, January 11, 2012; “PC Leaders Continue Growth 
And Share Gains as Market Remains Slow,” IDC press release, January 12, 2015; Apple Inc. annual financial reports; 
and casewriter estimates. 
Note: 
Market share data for Apple are derived from Macintosh unit sales, as reported in the company’s annual reports. The 
sampling of market shares for other companies comes mainly from annual listings of the top-five PC makers, as 
measured by IDC. Absence of a figure indicates that a company placed below the top five in a given year. 
a HP acquired Compaq in mid-2002. The 2002 market share figure for HP includes Compaq sales for the first part of that year.  
b Lenovo acquired IBM’s PC business in mid-2005. The 2005 market share figure for Lenovo incorporates IBM sales for the 
early part of the year. 
 
For the exclusive use of Y. Gu, 2023.
This document is authorized for use only by Yanshan Gu in Business 101    2023 Fall taught by GUO Yidi, Tsinghua University from Sep 2023 to Mar 2024.


715-456 
Apple Inc. in 2015 
20 
Exhibit 4
Shipments and Installed Base of PC Microprocessor (in millions of units) 
Total Shipments  
1994 
1996 
1998 
2000 
2002 
2004 
2006 
2008 
2010 
2012 
2014 
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Intel Technologies 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PC units shipped 
47.8 
76 
105 
156 
126 
170 
230 
287 
329 
344 
322 
PC installed base 
211.4 
347.5 
542.5 
839 
1,111 
1,433 
1,863 
2,411 
3,034 
3,695 
4,237 
Mac units shipped 
NA 
NA 
NA 
NA 
NA 
NA 
5.7 
9.9 
14.4 
17.1 
19.6 
Intel-Mac installed 
base 
NA 
NA 
NA 
NA 
NA 
NA 
5.7 
23.3 
48.9 
83.8 
120.5 
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Motorola (680X0) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Units shipped 
3.9 
0.8 
0.2 
NA 
NA 
NA 
NA 
NA 
NA 
NA 
NA 
Installed base 
24.9 
26.8 
27.5 
NA 
NA 
NA 
NA 
NA 
NA 
NA 
NA 
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PowerPC 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Units shipped 
0.8 
4 
3.5 
4.7 
3.1 
3.5 
NA 
NA 
NA 
NA 
NA 
Installed base 
0.8 
7.8 
14.1 
22.2 
29.4 
36.2 
NA 
NA 
NA 
NA 
NA 
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Source: 
Adapted from Gartner Dataquest, InfoCorp., IDC, Merrill Lynch, Credit Suisse data, and company data. 
Notes: 
Between 5% and 10% of total microprocessor shipments went into non-PC end products. In any given year, as much 
as 60% of microprocessors in the total installed base involved older technologies that were probably no longer in use. 
The figures for PowerPC shipments included microprocessors destined for Sony PlayStation and Xbox 360 machines. 
Figures for “Mac units shipped” over Macintosh calendar-year sales. 
 
NA = Not Available or Not Applicable. 
 
 
Exhibit 5
PC Manufacturers’ Key Operating Measures, 1997–2014 
 
1997 
2000 
2003 
2006 
2008 
2010 
2012 
2014 
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Gross margins (%) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Apple 
21% 
27% 
29% 
29% 
35% 
39% 
44% 
39% 
Dell 
23% 
21% 
19% 
17% 
18% 
19% 
21% 
-- 
Hewlett-Packard 
38% 
31% 
29% 
24% 
24% 
22% 
22% 
23% 
Lenovo 
-- 
13% 
15% 
14% 
15% 
11% 
11% 
13% 
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
R&D/Sales (%) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Apple 
12% 
5% 
8% 
4% 
3% 
3% 
2% 
3% 
Dell 
1% 
2% 
1% 
1% 
1% 
1% 
2% 
-- 
Hewlett-Packard 
7% 
5% 
5% 
4% 
3% 
2% 
3% 
3% 
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Source: 
Compiled from Capital IQ and ThomsonOne, accessed April 2012, March 2015. 
Note: 
All information is on a fiscal-year basis. Apple’s fiscal year ends in September, HP’s in October, Dell’s in January, and 
Lenovo’s in March. 
 
 
For the exclusive use of Y. Gu, 2023.
This document is authorized for use only by Yanshan Gu in Business 101    2023 Fall taught by GUO Yidi, Tsinghua University from Sep 2023 to Mar 2024.


Apple Inc. in 2015 
715-456 
21 
Exhibit 6
Apple’s Competitors: Selected Financial Information, 2004–2014 (in millions of dollars) 
 
2004 
2006 
2008 
2010 
2012 
2013 
2014 
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Microsoft 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Total revenues 
36,835 
44,282 
60,420 
62,484 
73,723 
77,849 
86,833 
Cost of sales 
6,596 
7,650 
11,598 
12,395 
17,530 
20,249 
26,934 
R&D 
7,735 
6,584 
8,164 
8,714 
9,811 
10,411 
11,381 
SG&A 
10,640 
12,276 
16,687 
16,685 
18,426 
20,425 
20,632 
Net income 
8,168 
12,599 
17,681 
18,760 
16,978 
21,863 
22,074 
Total assets 
94,368 
69,597 
72,793 
86,113 
121,271 
142,431 
172,384 
Total liabilities 
19,543 
29,493 
36,507 
39,938 
54,908 
63,487 
82,600 
Total shareholders’ equity 
74,825 
40,104 
36,286 
46,175 
66,363 
78,944 
89,784 
Gross margin 
82.1% 
82.7% 
80.8% 
80.2% 
76.2% 
74.0% 
69.0% 
R&D/sales 
21.0% 
14.9% 
13.5% 
13.9% 
13.3% 
13.4% 
13.1% 
SG&A/sales 
28.9% 
27.7% 
27.6% 
26.7% 
25.0% 
26.2% 
23.8% 
Return on sales 
22.2% 
28.5% 
29.3% 
30.0% 
23.0% 
28.1% 
25.4% 
Market capitalizationa 
313,046 
233,097 
256,302 
223,608 
256,375 
287,691 
343,566 
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Intel 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Total revenues 
34,209 
35,382 
37,586 
43,623 
53,341 
52,708 
55,870 
Cost of sales 
14,301 
17,164 
16,742 
15,132 
20,190 
21,187 
20,261 
R&D 
4,778 
5,873 
5,722 
6,576 
10,148 
10,611 
11,537 
SG&A 
4,659 
6,138 
5,452 
6,309 
8,057 
8,088 
8,136 
Net income 
7,516 
5,044 
5,292 
11,464 
11,005 
9,620 
11,704 
Total assets 
48,143 
48,368 
50,472 
63,186 
84,351 
91,924 
91,956 
Total liabilities 
9,564 
11,616 
10,926 
13,756 
33,148 
33,668 
35,469 
Total shareholders’ equity 
38,579 
36,752 
39,546 
49,430 
51,203 
58,256 
55,865 
Gross margin 
58.2% 
51.5% 
55.5% 
65.3% 
62.1% 
59.8% 
63.7% 
R&D/sales 
14.0% 
16.6% 
15.2% 
15.1% 
19.0% 
20.1% 
20.6% 
SG&A/sales 
13.6% 
17.3% 
14.5% 
14.5% 
15.1% 
15.3% 
14.6% 
Return on sales 
22.0% 
14.3% 
14.1% 
26.3% 
20.6% 
18.3% 
20.9% 
Market capitalization 
142,520 
128,582 
73,919 
118,756 
101,945 
128,919 
172,305 
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Hewlett-Packard 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Total revenues 
79,905 
91,658 
118,364 
126,033 
120,357 
112,298 
111,454 
Cost of sales 
60,621 
69,178 
89,370 
95,654 
89,074 
83,180 
81,505 
R&D 
3,563 
3,591 
3,543 
2,959 
3,399 
3,135 
3,447 
SG&A 
10,496 
11,266 
13,326 
12,718 
13,500 
13,267 
13,353 
Net income 
3,497 
6,198 
8,332 
8,761 
(12,650) 
5,113 
5,013 
Total assets 
76,138 
81,981 
113,331 
124,503 
108,768 
105,676 
103,206 
Total liabilities 
38,574 
43,837 
74,389 
83,722 
83.053 
76,674 
75,339 
Total shareholders’ equity 
37,564 
38,144 
38,942 
40,781 
22,436 
27,269 
26,731 
Gross margin 
23.9% 
24.3% 
24.2% 
22.3% 
21.8% 
21.9% 
23.0% 
R&D/sales 
4.5% 
3.9% 
3.0% 
2.4% 
2.8% 
2.8% 
3.1% 
SG&A/sales 
13.1% 
12.3% 
11.3% 
10.1% 
11.2% 
11.8% 
12.0% 
Return on sales 
4.4% 
6.8% 
7.0% 
7.0% 
--% 
4.6% 
4.5% 
Market capitalization 
60,011 
109,914 
87,433 
98,080 
27,970 
53,386 
73,799 
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
a Market capitalization figures for each company are based on the date the earnings were filed with the SEC. 
 
 
For the exclusive use of Y. Gu, 2023.
This document is authorized for use only by Yanshan Gu in Business 101    2023 Fall taught by GUO Yidi, Tsinghua University from Sep 2023 to Mar 2024.


715-456 
Apple Inc. in 2015 
22 
Exhibit 6 (continued)
 
 
2004 
2006 
2008 
2010 
2012 
2013 
2014 
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Dellb  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Total revenues 
49,121 
57,420 
61,101 
61,494 
56,940 
-- 
-- 
Cost of sales 
40,103 
47,904 
49,998 
50,041 
44,754 
-- 
-- 
R&D 
460 
498 
665 
661 
1,072 
-- 
-- 
SG&A 
4,352 
5,948 
6,966 
7,302 
8,102 
-- 
-- 
Net income 
3,018 
2,583 
2,478 
2,635 
2,372 
-- 
-- 
Total assets 
23,215 
25,635 
26,500 
38,599 
47,540 
-- 
-- 
Total liabilities 
16,717 
21,307 
22,229 
30,833 
36,839 
-- 
-- 
Total shareholders’ equity 
6,498 
4,328 
4,271 
7,766 
10,701 
-- 
-- 
Gross margin 
18.4% 
16.6% 
18.2% 
18.5% 
21.4% 
-- 
-- 
R&D/sales 
0.9% 
0.9% 
1.1% 
1.1% 
1.9% 
-- 
-- 
SG&A/sales 
8.9% 
10.4% 
11.4% 
11.9% 
14.2% 
-- 
-- 
Return on sales 
6.1% 
4.5% 
4.1% 
4.3% 
4.2% 
-- 
-- 
Market capitalization 
103,272 
52,270 
15,964 
26,850 
22,280 
-- 
-- 
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Lenovo 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Total revenues 
2,972 
13,343 
16,351 
16,605 
29,574 
33,873 
38,707 
Cost of sales 
-- 
-- 
13,902 
14,815 
26,128 
29,800 
33,643 
R&D 
-- 
-- 
230 
214 
450 
624 
732 
SG&A 
-- 
-- 
1700 
1,406 
2,342 
2,735 
3,303 
Net income 
135 
22 
484 
129 
473 
635 
817 
Total assets 
-- 
-- 
7200 
8,956 
15,861 
16,882 
18,357 
Total liabilities 
-- 
-- 
5587 
7,350 
13,413 
14,202 
15,332 
Total shareholders’ equity 
-- 
-- 
-- 
1,701 
2,361 
2,667 
3,010 
Gross margin 
13.6% 
4.7% 
15.0% 
10.8% 
11.4% 
12.0% 
13.1% 
R&D/sales 
-- 
-- 
-- 
1.3% 
1.5% 
1.8% 
1.9% 
SG&A/sales 
-- 
-- 
-- 
8.5% 
7.9% 
8.1% 
8.5% 
Return on sales 
4.5% 
0.2% 
3.0% 
0.8% 
1.6% 
1.9% 
2.1% 
Market capitalization 
2,708 
3,380 
5,943 
6,766 
9,172 
10,378 
11,497 
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Samsung 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Total revenues 
69,496 
72,778 
102,844 
131,109 
190,565 
216,709 
195,883 
Cost of sales 
44,898 
50,921 
76,109 
87,050 
120,015 
130,803 
121,857 
R&D 
-- 
-- 
-- 
7,715 
10,757 
13,640 
13,665 
SG&A 
14,626 
14,117 
21,621 
22,251 
-- 
-- 
-- 
Net income 
9,148 
6,720 
4,685 
13,396 
19,075 
24,537 
19,042 
Total assets 
58,508 
68,990 
89,283 
113,862 
169,199 
198,477 
214,588 
Total liabilities 
27,645 
28,342 
35,931 
38,104 
54,084 
56,322 
54,914 
Total shareholders’ equity 
30,863 
40,648 
53,353 
75,758 
109,213 
137,591 
154,063 
Gross margin 
35.4% 
30.0% 
26.0% 
33.6% 
36.6% 
39.4% 
37.3% 
R&D/sales 
-- 
-- 
-- 
5.9% 
5.7% 
6.3% 
7.0% 
SG&A/sales 
21.0% 
19.4% 
21.0% 
17.0% 
-- 
-- 
-- 
Return on sales 
13.6% 
8.1% 
4.4% 
10.6% 
10.0% 
11.3% 
9.7% 
Market capitalization 
54,468 
61,792 
49,763 
101,065 
185,747 
171,095 
158,373 
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Source: 
Created by casewriter using data from Capital IQ, ThomsonOne, and company documents. 
Note: 
All information is on a fiscal-year basis, unless noted otherwise. HP’s fiscal year ends in October, Dell’s in January, 
Lenovo’s in March, Intel’s and Samsung’s in December,  and Microsoft’s in June. 
b Dell was taken private in 2013. 
For the exclusive use of Y. Gu, 2023.
This document is authorized for use only by Yanshan Gu in Business 101    2023 Fall taught by GUO Yidi, Tsinghua University from Sep 2023 to Mar 2024.


Apple Inc. in 2015 
715-456 
23 
Exhibit 7a
Worldwide Smartphone Market Shares by Vendor, 2009–2014  
 
2009 
2010 
2011 
2012 
2013 
2014 
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
Samsung 
3.2% 
7.5% 
19.0% 
39.6% 
31.0% 
24.5% 
Apple 
14.5% 
15.6% 
18.8% 
25.1% 
15.1% 
14.8% 
Lenovo 
-- 
-- 
-- 
3.3% 
4.5% 
7.4%* 
Huawei 
-- 
-- 
-- 
4.0% 
4.8% 
5.7% 
LG 
-- 
-- 
-- 
3.6% 
4.7% 
4.6% 
Nokia 
39.0% 
32.9% 
15.6% 
6.4% 
-- 
-- 
HTC 
4.7% 
7.1% 
8.8% 
6.0% 
2.0% 
1.8% 
RIM 
19.9% 
16.0% 
10.3% 
6.0% 
1.9% 
0.4% 
Total shipments  
      (millions)  
173.5 
304.7 
491.1 
725.3 
1,019.4 
1,301.1 
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
Source: 
Created by casewriter using data from “In a Near Tie Apple Closes the Gap on Samsung in the Fourth Quarter as 
Worldwide Smartphone Shipments Top 1.3 Billion for 2014,” IDC press release, January 29, 2015; “Worldwide 
Smartphone Shipments Top One Billion Units for the First Time,” IDC press release, January 27, 2014; “Apple’s iPhone 
grew to 25.1% global market share in 2012,” Apple Insider, January 25, 2013, http://appleinsider.com/articles/13/01/ 
25/apples-iphone-grew-to-251-global-market-share-in-2012, accessed March 24, 2015; Nathan Olivarez-Giles, 
“Smartphone Shipments Rose 61% Worldwide in 2011,” Los Angeles Times, February 6, 2012; and Lance Whitney, 
“Apple, Android Surge in 2010; Nokia, RIM Slip,” CNET, February 7, 2011, http://www.cnet.com/news/apple-
android-surge-in-2010-nokia-rim-slip/. 
Note: 
The sampling of market shares comes mainly from annual listings of the top-five smartphone makers, as measured by 
IDC. Absence of a figure indicates that a company placed below the top five in a given year. 
 
 
 
For the exclusive use of Y. Gu, 2023.
This document is authorized for use only by Yanshan Gu in Business 101    2023 Fall taught by GUO Yidi, Tsinghua University from Sep 2023 to Mar 2024.


715-456 
Apple Inc. in 2015 
24 
Exhibit 7b
Overview of Smartphone Operating Systems and App Stores (as of late 2014) 
Operating 
System 
Owner 
Major Handset 
Vendors 
Licensing 
Fee 
Approximate 
Number of 
Available Apps 
    
 
 
 
 
iOS  
Apple 
Apple 
Proprietary 
1.2 million 
Windows 
Mobile 
Microsoft 
Microsoft  
No 
    300,000 
Android 
Google 
Samsung, Lenovo, 
Huawei, LG 
No 
1.4 million 
    
 
 
 
 
Sources: Created by casewriter based on company websites and sources, including Dave Smith, “Google Play has more apps 
than Apple now, but it’s still behind in one key area,” BusinessInsider, February 2, 2015, http://www.business 
insider.com/google-play-vs-apple-app-store-2015-2; and Lance Whitney, “Windows Phone Store hits more than 
300,000 apps,” CNet, August 8, 2014, http://www.cnet.com/news/windows-phone-store-hits-more-than-300000-
apps/, accessed March 18, 2015. 
 
 
Exhibit 7c
Worldwide Smartphone Sales to End User by Operating System, 2006–2014 
 (% of total market share)   
 
2006 
2007 
2008 
2009 
2010 
2011 
2012 
2013 
2014 
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Symbian 
62.4% 
63.5% 
52.4% 
46.9% 
37.6%     18.7% 
3.0% 
NAc 
NA 
RIM 
6.9% 
9.6% 
16.6% 
19.9% 
16.0% 
10.9% 
5.0% 
1.9% 
0.4% 
Microsoft 
9.8% 
12.0% 
11.8% 
8.7% 
4.2% 
2.1% 
2.5% 
3.3% 
2.7% 
iOS  
NA 
2.7% 
8.2% 
14.4% 
15.7% 
18.9% 
19.1% 
15.1% 
14.8% 
Linux 
17.6% 
9.6% 
7.6% 
4.7% 
NA 
NA 
NA 
NA 
NA 
Androida 
NA 
NA 
0.5% 
3.9% 
22.7% 
46.4% 
66.4% 
78.7% 
81.5% 
Othersb 
3.3% 
2.6% 
2.9% 
1.5% 
3.8% 
3.0% 
5.0% 
0.2% 
0.6% 
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Source: 
Adapted from Gartner Smartphone Sales quarterly press releases between 2007 and 2014; “Gartner Says Smartphone 
Sales Surpassed One Billion Units in 2014,” Gartner press release (Egham, UK, March 3, 2015); “Gartner Says Annual 
Smartphone Sales Surpassed Sales of Feature Phones for the First Time in 2013,”  Gartner press release (Egham, UK, 
February 13, 2014); “Gartner Says Worldwide Mobile Phone Sales Soared in Fourth Quarter of 2011 with 47 Percent 
Growth,” Gartner press release (Egham, UK, February 15, 2012); “Says Sales of Mobile Devices Grew 5.6 Percent in 
Third Quarter of 2011; Smartphone Sales Increased 42 Percent,” Gartner press release (Egham, UK, November 15, 
2011); “Gartner Says Sales of Mobile Devices in Second Quarter of 2011 Grew 16.5 Percent Year-on-Year; Smartphone 
Sales Grew 74 Percent” (Egham, UK, August 11, 2011); “Gartner Says 428 Million Mobile Communication Devices Sold 
Worldwide in First Quarter 2011, a 19 Percent Increase Year-on-Year” (Egham, UK, May 19, 2011); and “Gartner Says 
Worldwide Mobile Device Sales to End Users Reached 1.6 Billion Units in 2010; Smartphone Sales Grew 72 Percent in 
2010” (Egham, UK, February 9, 2011).  
aAndroid was introduced in 2008; data before that year were not applicable. 
b Includes Bada in 2010 and 2011.  
c Symbian included in “Others” for 2013; Nokia stopped shipping Symbian phones in mid-2013. 
 
 
For the exclusive use of Y. Gu, 2023.
This document is authorized for use only by Yanshan Gu in Business 101    2023 Fall taught by GUO Yidi, Tsinghua University from Sep 2023 to Mar 2024.


Apple Inc. in 2015 
715-456 
25 
Exhibit 8
Worldwide Tablet Shipments by Operating System, 2010–2014  
OS 
2010 
2011 
2012 
2013 
2014 
    
 
 
 
 
 
iOS 
 
 
 
 
 
Sales (millions of units) 
14.8 
40.5 
65.8 
74.3 
64.9 
Market share (percent) 
76.1 
58.9 
45.6 
33.8 
27.5 
    
 
 
 
 
 
Android 
 
 
 
 
 
Sales (millions of units) 
4.6 
26.4 
75.1 
137.5 
159.5 
Market share (percent) 
23.6 
38.4 
52.1 
62.5 
67.6 
    
 
 
 
 
 
Research In Motion (RIM) 
 
 
 
 
 
Sales (millions of units) 
NA 
0.9 
0.8 
0.4 
-- 
Market share (percent) 
NA 
1.3 
0.6 
0.2 
-- 
    
 
 
 
 
 
Windows 
 
 
 
 
 
Sales (millions of units) 
NA 
NA 
1.3 
6.5 
10.9 
Market share (percent) 
NA 
NA 
0.9 
3.0 
4.6 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Others 
 
 
 
 
 
Sales (millions of units) 
0.1 
0.9 
1.2 
1.2 
0.5 
Market share (percent) 
0.3 
1.4 
0.8 
0.5 
0.2 
    
 
 
 
 
 
Source: 
Adapted from Tom Mainelli, “Worldwide and U.S. Media Tablet 2012–2016 Forecast,” IDC Research, April 2012, 
http://www.idc.com, accessed May 2012; and Jean Philippe Bouchard, “Worldwide and U.S. Tablet Plus 2-in-1 2014–
2018 Forecast Update,” IDC Research, December 22, 2014, www.idc.com, accessed March 2015. 
 
Exhibit 9
Worldwide Smartwatch Sales, 2013–2014 (thousands of units, millions US$) 
 
 
 
2013 
 
 
2014 
 
 
Units Shipped  
Revenue    
Mkt. Share  
(Revenue )  
Units 
Shipped 
Revenue  
Mkt. Share 
(Revenue) 
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
Samsung 
800 
240 
33.8% 
1,200 
300     
23% 
Lenovo/Motorola 
-- 
-- 
-- 
500 
125 
10% 
LG 
-- 
-- 
-- 
420 
97 
7% 
Pebble  
300 
45 
6.3% 
700 
91 
7% 
Garmin 
200 
60 
8.4% 
400 
88 
7% 
Sony 
250 
50 
7.0% 
550 
83 
6% 
Fitbit 
450 
59 
8.2% 
600 
72 
6% 
Others 
1,150 
258 
36.2% 
1,625 
283 
34% 
Source: 
Adapted 
from 
“Top 
10 
Smartwatch 
Companies 
2013 
(Sales),” 
Smartwatch 
Group, 
http://www.smartwatchgroup.com/top-10-smartwatch-companies-sales/; and “Top 10 Smartwatch Companies 
2014 (Sales),” Smartwatch Group, http://www.smartwatchgroup.com/top-10-smartwatch-companies-sales-2014/, 
accessed March 22, 2015.  
 
 
For the exclusive use of Y. Gu, 2023.
This document is authorized for use only by Yanshan Gu in Business 101    2023 Fall taught by GUO Yidi, Tsinghua University from Sep 2023 to Mar 2024.


715-456 
Apple Inc. in 2015 
26 
Endnotes 
1 Apple Inc., Form 10-Q, for the Fiscal Quarter Ended December 27, 2014.  
2 This discussion of Apple’s history is based largely on Jim Carlton, Apple: The Inside Story of Intrigue, Egomania, and Business 
Blunders (New York: Times Business/Random House, 1997); David B. Yoffie, “Apple Computer—1992,” HBS No. 792-081 
(Boston: Harvard Business School Publishing, 1992); and David B. Yoffie and Yusi Wang, “Apple Computer—2002,” HBS No. 
702-469 (Boston: Harvard Business School Publishing, 2002). Unless otherwise attributed, all quotations and all data cited in 
this section are drawn from those two cases. 
3 Carlton, Apple, p. 10. 
4 “Steve Jobs Takes Another Bite at Apple,” The Independent, January 6, 1997. 
5 Yoffie, “Apple Computer—1992.”  
6 David B. Yoffie, “Apple Computer—1996,” HBS No. 796-126 (Boston: Harvard Business School Publishing, 1996). 
7 Charles McCoy, “Apple, IBM Kill Kaleida Labs Venture,” Wall Street Journal, November 20, 1995. 
8 Louise Kehoe, “Apple Shares Drop Sharply,” Financial Times, January 19, 1996. 
9 David Kirkpatrick, “The Second Coming of Apple,” Fortune, November 9, 1998. 
10 David Gebler, “Illuminating Apple’s Culture of Secrecy,” Portofolio.com, April 17, 2012, http://www. 
portfolio.com/companies-executives/2012/04/17/david-gebler-on-how-apple-can-shed-its-culture-of-secrecy# 
ixzz1u5HXYOz7, accessed May 2012. 
11 Walter Isaacson, Steve Jobs (New York: Simon and Schuster, 2011), p. 569.  
12 “MacBook Air and the environment,” http://www.apple.com/macbook-air/environment.html, accessed March 2010. 
13 “IDC Expects PC Shipments to Fall by -6% in 2014 and Decline through 2018,” IDC press release, March 4, 2014. 
14 See Angelo Zino, “Computers: Hardware,” S&P Capital IQ Industry Survey (New York: September 2014), p. 26; “IDC 
Expects PC Shipments to Fall by -6% in 2014 and Decline through 2018,” IDC press release; and “PC Leaders Continue Growth 
and Share Gains as Market Remains Slow,” IDC press release, January 12, 2015.  
15 IDC (International Data Corp.) data, as cited in Megan Graham-Hackett, “Computers: Hardware,” Standard & Poor’s 
Industry Surveys, December 8, 2005, p. 7. 
16 Dylan Cathers, “Computers: Hardware,” Standard & Poor’s Industry Surveys, October 27, 2011, p. 15; and Angelo Zino, 
“Computers: Hardware,” S&P Capital IQ Industry Surveys, September 2014. 
17 FY 2014 financial results for Acer, ASUS, HP, and Lenovo, and FY 2013 results for Dell from ThomsonOne, accessed 
February 11, 2015; see also Charles Arthur, “How the ‘Value Trap’ Squeezes Windows PC Manufacturers,” The Guardian, 
January 9, 2014, http://www.theguardian.com/technology/2014/jan/09/pc-value-trap-windows-chrome-hp-dell-lenovo-
asus-acer, accessed February 11, 2015, which reached a similar conclusion for the same companies for 2013.  
18 Peter Misek, Jason North, and Billy Kim, “Computer Hardware—Cutting HP and Dell Estimates: Checks Indicate PC Sales 
Slowing Materially,” Jefferies, March 15, 2012, p. 9; and James Chiu and Kevin YH Chen, “Lenovo: Premium Valuation 
Justified; Initiate with OW,” Piper Jaffray, March 9, 2012, p. 13. 
19 Gartner Personal Computer Quarterly Statistics Worldwide Database, 2/12, cited in Mark Moskowitz, Anthony Luscri, Mike 
Kim, Gokul Hariharan, Alvin Kwock, John DiFucci, Sterling Auty, Tien-tsin Huang, and Harlan Sur, “Global Technology: IT 
Spending Pulse: 2012 Off to a Good Start in Most Tech Segments; Lifting PC and Tablet Forecasts,” JP Morgan, March 13, 2012, 
p. 29. See Rajani Singh, “Worldwide PC 2014–2018 Forecast Update: November 2014,” IDC, December 29, 2014, 
http://www.idc.com/getdoc.jsp?containerId=252724&pageType=PRINTFRIENDLY, accessed February 10, 2015. 
20 Rajani Singh and Linn Huang, “Worldwide and U.S. PC Client Sub Form Factor 2012–2015 Forecast,” IDC, March 2012, p. 4; 
Rajani Singh and David Daoud, “Worldwide PC 2011–2015 Forecast Update: December 2011,” IDC, December 2011, p. 7; and 
Singh, “Worldwide PC 2014–2018 Forecast Update: November 2014,” p. 6. 
21 Thomas W. Smith, “Computers: Hardware,” Standard & Poor’s Industry Surveys, October 22, 2009, p. 18. 
 
For the exclusive use of Y. Gu, 2023.
This document is authorized for use only by Yanshan Gu in Business 101    2023 Fall taught by GUO Yidi, Tsinghua University from Sep 2023 to Mar 2024.


Apple Inc. in 2015 
715-456 
27 
 
22 “Why Buy a Generic PC?” PC Generic, April 30, 2009, http://www.pcgeneric.com/articles/5131/Why-buy-a-generic-PC, 
accessed March 2010; and “Profiting in China’s White-Box PC Market,” Gartner Research, August 21, 2012. 
23 “PC Market Stumbles on HDD Shortage While U.S. Market Sees World Annual Growth Since 2011,” IDC press release, 
January 11, 2012, http://www.idc.com/getdoc.jsp?containerId=prUS23261412, accessed April 2012. 
24 Chiu and Chen, “Lenovo,” p. 1. 
25 Kulbinder Garcha, Deepak Sitaraman, Vlad Rom, Alban Gashi, Talal Khan, and Matthew Cabral, “Hewlett-Packard: Still in 
Transition,” Credit Suisse, February 23, 2012, p. 1, accessed April 2012; and Kulbinder Garcha, Deepak Sitaraman, Vlad Rom, 
Alban Gashi, Talal Khan, and Matthew Cabral, “Hewlett-Packard: Transition continues with reorganization,” Credit Suisse, 
March 21, 2012, p. 1, accessed April 2012. 
26 “PC Market Stumbles on HDD Shortage While U.S. Market Sees World Annual Growth Since 2011,” IDC press release. 
27 “PC Leaders Continue Growth and Share Gains as Market Remains Slow,” IDC press release, January 12, 2015. 
28 See Connie Guglielmo, “Dell Officially Goes Private: Inside The Nastiest Tech Buyout Ever,” Forbes, October 30, 2013, 
http://www.forbes.com/sites/connieguglielmo/2013/10/30/you-wont-have-michael-dell-to-kick-around-anymore/, 
accessed February 10, 2015. 
29 See Shane Rao, “Worldwide PC and x86 Server Microprocessor 4Q14 Vendor Shares,” IDC, January 28, 2015. 
30 Clyde Montevirgen and Karan Kawaguchi, “Semiconductors,” Standard & Poor’s Industry Surveys, May 31, 2007, p. 25. 
31 “Global market share held by operating systems of Desktop PCs from January 2012 to December 2014,” Statista, January 
2015, http://www.statista.com/statistics/218089/global-market-share-of-windows-7/, accessed February 11, 2015. 
32 David B. Yoffie, Dharmesh M. Mehta, and Rudina I. Suseri, “Microsoft in 2005,” HBS Case No. 705-505 (Boston: Harvard 
Business School Publishing, 2006). 
33 Arik Hesseldahl, “What’s Behind Apple’s iWork?” BusinessWeek Online, August 10, 2007, via Factiva, accessed April 2010. 
34 Gary Marshall, “Why you should seriously consider a Chromebook as your next laptop,” TechRadar, May 23, 2014, 
http://www.techradar.com/us/news/mobile-computing/don-t-fear-google-s-chromebooks-they-won-t-go-extinct-like-
netbooks-did-1249814, accessed March 9, 2015; Gregg Keizer, “Mac and Chromebook Sales Erode Windows PCs’ Retail Share,” 
ComputerWorld, September 26, 2014, http://www.computerworld.com/article/2687742/mac-and-chromebook-sales-erode-
windows-pcs-retail-share.html, accessed March 3, 2015; and Singh, “Worldwide PC 2014–2018 Forecast Update: November 
2014.”   
35”PC Leaders Continue Growth and Share Gains as Market Remains Slow,” IDC press release, January 12, 2015. 
36 “Windows 7 Release May Test Apple’s Winning Streak,” Reuters News, October 14, 2009, via Factiva, accessed March 2010. 
37 Dylan Cathers, “Computer Hardware Industry Reports,” Standard & Poor’s NetAdvantage Database, April 19, 2012, p. 6, 
accessed April 2012; and “PC Leaders Continue Growth and Share Gains as Markets Remain Slow,” IDC press release. 
38 Brent Schlender, “How Big Can Apple Get?” Fortune, February 21, 2005, p. 66. 
39 Apple Inc., Form 10-K, October 27, 2014 (Cupertino, CA, 2011), p. 32. 
40 Katie Hafner, “Inside Apple Stores, a Certain Aura Enchants the Faithful,” New York Times, December 27, 2007, p. C1, via 
Factiva, accessed December 2007. 
41 Isaacson, Steve Jobs, p. 389. 
42 Thomas Ricker, “iSuppli: New iPod Nano Costs Apple Less than $83 in Components,” September 19, 2007, 
http://www.engadget.com/2007/09/19/isuppli-new-ipod-nanos-cost-apple-just-59-and-83-in-component/, accessed March 
2010. 
43 Isaacson, Steve Jobs, p. 405. 
44 iTunes was available from 2001 with the original iPod, but the functionality as a store did not come until 2003. 
45 Chris Taylor, “The 99¢ Solution,” Time, November 17, 2003, p. 66, via Factiva, accessed November 2007. 
46 “iTunes Store Tops 10 Billion Songs Sold,” Apple Inc. press release (Cupertino, CA, February 25, 2010). 
For the exclusive use of Y. Gu, 2023.
This document is authorized for use only by Yanshan Gu in Business 101    2023 Fall taught by GUO Yidi, Tsinghua University from Sep 2023 to Mar 2024.


715-456 
Apple Inc. in 2015 
28 
 
47 Apple, Inc., December 21, 2001, Form 10-K405 (filed December 21, 2001); Apple, Inc., December 19, 2002, Form 10-K (filed 
December 19, 2002); Apple, Inc., May 13, 2003, Form 10-Q (filed May 13, 2003); and “Number of iPods sold through 2002: 
600,000,” Apple press release, July 2002, http://www.apple.com/pr/products/ 
ipodhistory/, accessed May 2012. 
48 Bill Shope, Elizabeth Borbolla, and Mark Moskowitz, “Apple Computer: iPod Economics II,” JP Morgan, May 26, 2005, p. 26; 
and Ronald Grover and Peter Burrows, “Universal Music Takes on iTunes,” BusinessWeek, October 22, 2007, p. 30, via Factiva, 
accessed October 2007. 
49 Shope et al., “Apple Computer: iPod Economics II,” p. 26; and Grover and Burrows, “Universal Music Takes on iTunes,” pp. 
8–10. 
50 Michael Arrington, “Spotify Closing New Financing at €200 Million Valuation, Music Labels Already Shareholders,” 
TechCrunch, August 9, 2009, http://techcrunch.com/2009/08/04/spotify-closing-new-financing-at-e200-million-valuation-
music-labels-already-shareholders/, accessed April 2010. 
51 Hannah Karp, “Apple iTunes Sees Big Drop in Music Sales,” Wall Street Journal, October 24, 2014, 
http://www.wsj.com/articles/itunes-music-sales-down-more-than-13-this-year-1414166672, accessed February 10, 2015. 
52 Isaacson, Steve Jobs, p. 474. 
53 Donna Fuscaldo and Mark Boslet, “Jobs Says Apple to Rename Itself Apple Inc.,” Dow Jones News Service, January 9, 2007, 
via Factiva, accessed March 2010. 
54 Darrell Etherington, “iPhone 4S: Siri’s international limitations,” October 14, 2011, http://gigaom.com/ 
apple/iphone-4s-siris-international-limitations/, accessed April 2012.  
55 “Sprint’s commitment to Apple might be less than expected,” S4GRU, February 28, 2012, http://s4gru.com/ 
index.php?/topic/339-sprints-committment-to-apple-might-be-less-than-expected/, accessed May 2012. 
56.See Neil Hughes, “Apple & Samsung combine for 106% of handset profits as competitors continue to bleed cash,” 
AppleInsider, May 8, 2014, http://appleinsider.com/articles/14/05/08/apple-samsung-combine-for-106-of-handset-profits-as-
competitors-continue-to-bleed-cash, accessed March 3, 2015; “Gartner Says Smartphone Sales Surpassed One Billion Units in 
2014,” Gartner press release, March 3, 2015; and Brian X. Chen, “Apple Grabs 93% of the Handset Industry’s Profit, Report 
Says,” New York Times Bits, February 9, 2015, http://bits.blogs.nytimes.com/2015/02/09/apple-grabs-93-of-the-handset-
industrys-profit-report-
says/?mabReward=A4&action=click&pgtype=Homepage&region=CColumn&module=Recommendation&src=rechp&WT.na
v=RecEngine&_r=0, accessed February 25, 2015.  
57 See Apple Inc., Form 10-Q for the period ending December 27, 2014, p. 26, filed January 28, 2015; and “Worldwide 
Smartphone Growth Forecast to Slow from a Boil to a Simmer as Prices Drop and Markets Mature,” IDC press release, 
December 1, 2014. 
58 Andy Rassweiler, “iPhone 4S Carries BOM of $188, IHS iSuppli Teardown Analysis Reveals,” IHS iSuppli Teardown 
Analysis, October 20, 2011, http://www.isuppli.com/Teardowns/News/Pages/iPhone-4S-Carries-BOM-of-$188,-IHS-
iSuppli-Teardown-Analysis-Reveals.aspx, accessed April 2012. 
59 Arik Hesseldahl, “Tearing Down the iPhone 3GS,” BusinessWeek, June 23, 2009, via Factiva, accessed April 2010.  
60 “Fair Labor Association Begins Inspections of Foxconn,” Apple press release, http://www.apple.com/pr/ 
library/2012/02/13Fair-Labor-Association-Begins-Inspections, February 13, 2012. 
61 Jason Kincaid, “Apple Has Sold 450,000 iPads, 50,000 Million iPhones to Date,” April 8, 2010, 
http://techcrunch.com/2010/04/08/apple-has-sold-450000-ipads-50-million-iphones-to-date/, accessed May 2012; and Steve 
Ranger, “iOS versus Android. Apple App Store versus Google Play: Here comes the next battle in the app wars,” ZDNet, 
January 16, 2015, http://www.zdnet.com/article/ios-versus-android-apple-app-store-versus-google-play-here-comes-the-
next-battle-in-the-app-wars/, accessed February 15, 2015. 
62 Ranger, “iOS versus Android.” 
63 Walter S. Mossberg, “Apps that Make the iPhone Worth the Price,” Wall Street Journal, March 26, 2009. 
64 Apple Inc., Apple 10-K, October 27, 2014 (Cupertino, CA, p. 29), accessed February 2014. 
65 Ranger, “iOS versus Android.” 
For the exclusive use of Y. Gu, 2023.
This document is authorized for use only by Yanshan Gu in Business 101    2023 Fall taught by GUO Yidi, Tsinghua University from Sep 2023 to Mar 2024.


Apple Inc. in 2015 
715-456 
29 
 
66 “In a Near Tie, Apple Closes the Gap on Samsung in the Fourth Quarter as Worldwide Smartphone Shipments Top 1.3 
Billion for 2014,” IDC press release, January 29, 2015. 
67 See Rob Price, “Android Just Achieved Something it Will Take Apple years to Do,” Business Insider U.K., online, February 2, 
2015, http://U.K..businessinsider.com/android-1-billion-shipments-2014-strategy-analytics-2015-2, accessed February 17, 
2015. 
68 “In a Near Tie, Apple Closes the Gap on Samsung in the Fourth Quarter,” IDC press release. 
69 Gerry Shih, “After China smartphone success, Lenovo plans leap forward overseas,” Reuters, August 14, 2014, 
http://www.reuters.com/article/2014/08/14/us-lenovo-results-idUSKBN0GE01B20140814, accessed February 15, 2015; and 
“In a Near Tie, Apple Closes the Gap on Samsung in the Fourth Quarter,” IDC press release.  
70 See Xiaohan Tay et al., “Xiaomi: A Disruptive Force in China’s Smartphone Market,” IDC Vendor Profile, IDC, May 2014; 
“In a Near Tie, Apple Closes the Gap on Samsung in the Fourth Quarter,” IDC press release; and Eva Dou, “Xiaomi Expects 
Sales to Surge in 2015,” Wall Street Journal online, http://www.wsj.com/articles/xiaomi-expects-sales-to-surge-in-2015-
1425532934, accessed March 9, 2015.  
71 See Ranger, “iOS versus Android.” 
72 David B. Yoffie, Juan Alcacer, and Renee Kim, “HTC Corp. in 2012,” HBS No. 712-423 (Boston: Harvard Business School 
Publishing, May 2012).  
73 Data are for the first three quarters of 2014; see “Smartphone Apps Processor Revenue Jumped 16 Percent in Q3 2014,” 
Strategy Analytics, January 27, 2015, http://www.strategyanalytics.com/default.aspx?mod=pressreleaseviewer&a0=5638; 
“Qualcomm, Apple, MediaTek grab 80% share in smartphone; applications processor market,” Telecom Lead, July 16, 2014, 
http://www.telecomlead.com/telecom-statistics/qualcomm-apple-mediatek-grab-80-share-smartphone-applications-
processor-market-51828; and “Smartphone Apps Processor Revenue Reached $5.2 Billion in Q2 2014 says Strategy Analytics,” 
PR Newswire, September 29, 2014, http://www.prnewswire.com/news-releases/smartphone-apps-processor-revenue-
reached-52-billion-in-q2-2014-says-strategy-analytics-277467001.html, accessed March 23, 2015. 
74 Erika Brown, Elizabeth Corcoran, and Brian Caulfield, “Apple Buys Chip Designer,” Forbes.com, April 23, 2008, via Factiva, 
accessed April 2010; and Ashlee Vance and Brad Stone, “Apple Buys Intrinsity, a Maker of Fast Chips,” New York Times, April 
27, 2010. 
75 Niley Patel, “Apple sues Samsung: a complete lawsuit analysis,” The Verge, April 19, 2011, 
http://www.theverge.com/2011/04/19/apple-sues-samsung-analysis/, accessed April 2012. 
76 Isaacson, Steve Jobs, p. 396. 
77 Isaacson, Steve Jobs, p. 512. 
78 Peter Sayer, “Ericsson seeks US sales ban of Apple iPhone, iPad in patent lawsuit barrage,” PCWorld, February 27, 2015, 
http://www.pcworld.com/article/2890052/ericsson-seeks-to-block-sales-of-apple-products-in-us-stepping-up-patent-
dispute.html, accessed March 9, 2015. 
79 Isaacson, Steve Jobs, p. 567. 
80 Isaacson, Steve Jobs, p. 527. 
81 “Apple Sells over 300,000 iPads First Day,” Apple Inc. press release (Cupertino, CA, April 5, 2010). 
82 See Apple 10-K, 2012 and 2014. 
83 Tom Mainelli, “Worldwide and U.S. Media Tablet 2012–2016 Forecast,” April 2012, p. 12. 
84 Online Publishers Association, “A Portrait of Today’s Tablet Users,” June 2011, http://onlinepubs. 
ehclients.com/images/pdf/MMF-OPA_--_Portait_of_Todays_Tablet_User_--_Jun2211_%28Final-Public%29, accessed 
December 2011. 
85 Sam Costello, “How Many Apps are in the iPhone App Store,” AboutTech, 
http://ipod.about.com/od/iphonesoftwareterms/qt/apps-in-app-store.htm, accessed February 2014. 
86 Tony Daltario, “Advantage Amazon in the e-book Market,” Motley Fool, April 18, 2012, http://beta. 
fool.com/tdalmoe/2012/04/18/advantage-amazon-ebook-industry/3715/, accessed April 2012. 
For the exclusive use of Y. Gu, 2023.
This document is authorized for use only by Yanshan Gu in Business 101    2023 Fall taught by GUO Yidi, Tsinghua University from Sep 2023 to Mar 2024.


715-456 
Apple Inc. in 2015 
30 
 
87 Brian X. Chen and Nicole Perlroth, “Settlement in Apple Case over E-Books is Approved,” New York Times online, November 
21, 2014, http://www.nytimes.com/2014/11/22/technology/judge-approves-450-million-settlement-in-apple-e-book-
case.html, accessed February 18, 2015. 
88 A. M. (Toni) Sacconaghi Jr., Pierre Ferragu, Alberto Moel, and Stacy A. Rasgon, “Let’s Talk Tablets: A Form Factor 
Revolution?” Bernstein Research, June 2011, p. 13, accessed May 2012.  
89 “Gartner Says Worldwide Tablet Sales Grew 68 Percent in 2013, With Android Capturing 62 Percent of the Market,” Gartner 
press release, March 3, 2014, http://www.gartner.com/newsroom/id/2674215, accessed February 16, 2015; see also “Global 
market share held by tablet operating systems from 2010 to 2014, by quarter,” Statista, 
http://www.statista.com/statistics/273840/global-market-share-of-tablet-operating-systems-since-2010/, accessed February 
16, 2015. 
90 “Worldwide Tablet Shipments Experience First Year Over Year Decline in the Fourth Quarter While Full Year Shipments 
Show Modest Growth,” IDC press release, February 2, 2015. 
91 Rosa Golijan, “Amazon’s $199 Kindle Fire costs estimated $202 to make,” Technolog, http://www. 
technolog.msnbc.msn.com/technology/technolog/amazons-199-kindle-fire-costs-estimated-202-make-119003#/ 
technology/technolog/amazons-199-kindle-fire-costs-estimated-202-make-119003, accessed May 2012. 
92 “Worldwide Tablet Shipments Experience First Year Over Year Decline in the Fourth Quarter,” IDC press release. 
93 “Garter Says World Worldwide Tablet Sales Grew 68 percent in 2013,” Gartner press release; and Don Clark, “Microsoft 
Takes $900 Million Writeoff on Tablet,” Wall Street Journal Digits, July 18, 2013, 
http://blogs.wsj.com/digits/2013/07/18/microsoft-takes-900-million-writeoff-on-struggling-surface-tablet/, accessed March 
17, 2015. 
94 Apple Inc., 2014 Form 10-K, p. 28. 
95 David Goldman, “Tim Cook’s Apple is hot. But can it keep going?” CNNMoney, January 29, 2015, 
http://money.cnn.com/2015/01/29/technology/tim-cook-apple/index.html?iid=EL, accessed February 9, 2015. 
96 “Worldwide Tablet Shipments Experience First Year Over Year Decline in the Fourth Quarter,” IDC press release. 
97 Isaacson, Steve Jobs, p. 533. 
98 “Apple to Launch iCloud on October 12,” Apple press release, October 4, 2011, http://www.apple.com/ 
pr/library/2011/10/04Apple-to-Launch-iCloud-on-October-12.html, accessed April 2012.  
99 Robert McMillon, “Wired Scores Exclusive Aerial Photos of Apple’s ‘Area i51,’” Wired Enterprise, April 6, 2012, 
http://www.wired.com/wiredenterprise/2012/04/apples-secret-data-center/, accessed May 2012. 
100 Caitlin McGarry, “Apple Pay Adoption Keeps Climbing: Chase Says 1 Million Customers on Board,” Macworld, February 
25, 2015, http://www.macworld.com/article/2889012/apple-pay-adoption-keeps-climbing-chase-says-1-million-customers-
on-board.html, accessed February 27, 2015. 
For the exclusive use of Y. Gu, 2023.
This document is authorized for use only by Yanshan Gu in Business 101    2023 Fall taught by GUO Yidi, Tsinghua University from Sep 2023 to Mar 2024.


 
9-705-448
R E V :  N O V E M B E R  2 ,  2 0 0 5  
 
________________________________________________________________________________________________________________ 
 
Professors Giovanni Gavetti and Rebecca Henderson and Research Associate Simona Giorgi prepared this case from published sources. HBS 
cases are developed solely as the basis for class discussion. Cases are not intended to serve as endorsements, sources of primary data, or 
illustrations of effective or ineffective management. 
  
 
Kodak and the Digital Revolution (A) 
 
In February 2003, Daniel A. Carp, Kodak’s CEO and chairman, reviewed 2002 sales data with 
Kodak’s senior executives. Film sales had dropped 5% from 2001 and revenues were down 3%. 2003 
did not look any brighter: Carp expected revenues to grow only slightly and net income to remain 
flat or decrease (see exhibit 1 for information on Kodak’s financial performance and exhibits 2 and 3 
for information on sales of cameras and film rolls in the United States). The film industry was “under 
pressure unlike ever before.” Carp predicted a “fairly long downturn”
1 for traditional photography 
sales as consumers turned to digital cameras, which did not require film. Kodak was moving more of 
its manufacturing to China, where it could boost film sales, and was planning to slash 2,200 jobs, or 
3% of its work force, especially in the photo-finishing business.   
Carp had received a master’s in business from MIT. He had begun his career at Kodak in 1970 as a 
statistical analyst. Since then, he had held a variety of positions at Kodak. In 1997, he became 
president and COO, and was appointed CEO on January 1, 2000. He believed Kodak’s current 
struggle was one of the toughest it had faced. How could he use digital imaging to revitalize Kodak? 
Kodak, 1880-1983: A brief history 
In 1880, George Eastman invented and patented a dry-plate formula and a machine for preparing 
large numbers of plates. He also founded the Eastman Kodak Company in Rochester, New York. In 
1884, he replaced glass photographic plates with a roll of film, believing in “the future of the film 
business.”
2 Although Kodak originally faced severe challenges, it quickly became a household name. 
Eastman believed success came from a user-friendly product that “was as convenient as the 
pencil.”
3 Kodak regarded marketing as essential to its success. It first advertised film in 1885. Eastman 
coined the slogan “You press the button, we do the rest” when he introduced the first Kodak camera 
in 1888. He identified Kodak’s guiding principles: mass production at low cost, international 
distribution, extensive advertising, and customer focus, and growth through continuous research. He 
also articulated Kodak’s competitive philosophy: “Nothing is more important than the value of our 
name and the quality it stands for. We must make quality our fighting argument.”
4 
In the black-and-white film era, Kodak’s leadership came from its marketing and its relationships 
with retailers (for shelf space, and photo-finishing with Kodak paper). Some competitors had better 
products, but consumers liked Kodak’s offerings, and felt no need to pay for an enhanced product.
5 
For the exclusive use of Y. Gu, 2023.
This document is authorized for use only by Yanshan Gu in Business 101    2023 Fall taught by GUO Yidi, Tsinghua University from Sep 2023 to Mar 2024.


705-448 
Kodak and the Digital Revolution (A) 
2 
The idea that money came from consumables, not from hardware, emerged early. In selling 
cameras, Kodak used a razor-blade strategy: it sold cameras for a low cost, and film fueled Kodak’s 
growth and profits. Over time, Kodak’s managers paid progressively less attention to equipment. 
One executive commented, “No matter what they said, they were a film company. Equipment was ok 
as long as it drove consumables.”
6 
With the advent of color film, which required substantial R&D, many firms lagged behind. After 
the early 1960s, attempts to enter the market were rare; the film composition’s balance of chemical 
and physical properties and the know-how embedded in manufacturing made creating compatible 
products expensive and risky. 
Kodak had worked to develop color film since 1921 and spent over $120 million to do so by 1963.
7 
Its photo-finishing process became the industry standard. Most rival brands, although of excellent 
quality when properly processed, fared badly in typical photo shops.
8     
Within Kodak, corporate power centered on Kodak Park’s massive film-making plant. Kodak’s 
CEOs typically came from manufacturing jobs in the Park. They were largely similar; most received 
the same training, and attended MIT’s Sloan School of Business as a sort of finishing academy. Since 
mistakes in the manufacturing process were costly, and profitability was high, Kodak avoided 
anything risky or innovative. It developed “procedures and policies to maintain the status quo.”
9 
Kodak reached $1 billion in sales in 1962.  In the 1960s and 1970s, it introduced new products like 
the 126 and 110 cameras, which moved beyond consumer photography to medical imaging and 
graphic arts. Most of these products exploited silver-halide technology and were incremental 
improvements. By 1976, Kodak controlled 90% of the film market and 85% of camera sales in the 
United States. Its technological strength and speed to market precluded the emergence of serious 
competitors.
10 In 1981, its sales reached $10 billion.  
In 1981, Sony Corporation announced it would launch Mavica, a filmless digital camera that 
would display pictures on a television screen. Pictures could then be printed onto paper. Kodak CEO 
Colby Chandler contended people “liked color prints” and Kodak could introduce its own digital 
camera, but managers became concerned about the longevity of silver-halide technology. A manager 
said, “It sent fear through the company.” The reaction was, “my goodness, photography is dead.”
11  
Exploration and Diversification, 1983 - 1993 
Diversification into other businesses 
Between 1983 and 1993, Kodak acquired IBM’s copier services business; Clinical Diagnostics, 
which produced in-vitro blood analyzers; Mass Memory, which sold floppy disks; and other 
bioscience and lab research firms. It also acquired Sterling Drug, a pharmaceutical firm that sold 
products like Lysol and aspirin, for $5.1 billion. Kodak’s managers felt the pharmaceutical industry 
was related to its core “chemical” business: R&D was pivotal, and margins were high. Between 1987 
and 1992, Kodak’s share of the film market decreased by 5%.
12  
Competition in the core imaging business: Fuji Photo Film Co. 
“We were the imaging company of the world. We literally had no competition for so long, management 
hadn’t become accustomed to it. Historically, if there was a competitor, Kodak would blow them away.”
  
A former Kodak executive
13   
 
For the exclusive use of Y. Gu, 2023.
This document is authorized for use only by Yanshan Gu in Business 101    2023 Fall taught by GUO Yidi, Tsinghua University from Sep 2023 to Mar 2024.


Kodak and the Digital Revolution (A) 
705-448 
3 
Fuji Photo Film Co., headquartered in Tokyo, was founded in 1934 as a comprehensive maker of 
photographic materials. It produced film for movies and other applications, dry plates, and photo 
printing paper. In the 1960s, Fuji started looking for alternatives to developing and producing silver-
halide film and established a joint venture with Rank Xerox (Fuji Xerox).
14 
Fuji entered the U.S. market in 1965 as a private brand supplier. It first marketed film under its 
own name in 1972. In 1976, Fuji was the first to introduce 400-speed color film. Many photo-finishers 
switched to its photographic paper and supplies, which cost 20% less than Kodak’s. Kodak’s 
managers ignored internal analyses of Kodak’s eroding market share: “they didn’t believe the 
American public would buy another film.”
15 See exhibit 4 for data on film market share. 
In 1981, Fuji became the official sponsor of film at the 1984 Olympics. Kodak had balked at the 
cost of officially sponsoring film supplies. Fuji capitalized on the opportunity and boosted its U.S. 
market share to 12%, while its market share in Japan was over 70%. Peter Palermo, then senior vice 
president of imaging, noted, “It was December 7th [Pearl Harbor Day] at Kodak.”
16  
By 1985, other new labels included Konica, Agfa, dozens of private-labels, and Indian, English, 
and Korean brands. Consumers had learned they could get high-quality pictures with film that cost 
much less than Kodak’s did. Retailers devoted more shelf space to private labels because they could 
make higher margins on these products. By the end of 1993, Fuji had 21% market share worldwide.  
In 1986, Fuji began selling a disposable camera, which became a big hit in Japan. Kodak claimed 
its labs had developed similar products early in the 1980s, but it had not patented them, some said 
because of the inconsistency with the razor-blade model.  
Kodak’s exploration of digital imaging, 1983-1989 
In 1983, Colby Chandler created a division to explore new technologies such as digital imaging. 
Kodak hired John White, who had been in the software business, to push Kodak forward. White said: 
Kodak wanted to get into the digital business, but they wanted to do it in their own way, from 
Rochester and largely with their own people. That meant it wasn’t going to work. The difference 
between their traditional business and digital is so great. The tempo is different. The kind of skills 
you need are different. Kay [Whitmore, President] and Colby [Chandler] would tell you they 
wanted change, but they didn’t want to force the pain on the organization.
17  
Chandler saw a silver-halide-based future, but felt Kodak needed to “blend new technologies” 
[and] “anticipate customers' needs, create the products they want, then market those products better 
and more cost effectively than anyone else in the industry.”
18 He felt Kodak could surmount this 
challenge by adopting George Eastman’s original formula: focus on the customer, extensive 
advertising, and mass production at low cost. Additionally, he thought the pace of technological 
change had increased, and Kodak had to act faster. 
In changing, Kodak abandoned its policy of vertical integration. Kodak president Kay Whitmore 
said, "One of the things we’ve learned is that one company can’t do everything. We're prepared to 
acquire if it fits our strategic plan and gets us there sooner, or gives us a technical capacity we don't 
have in-house, or buys a market share that would be hard to build."
19  
With TDK and Matsushita, Kodak developed the 8mm Kodakvision video system. It acquired 
other firms, like the Datatape division of Bell and Howell, which made high technology analog and 
digital recording equipment; and it devoted resources to research. Chandler supported “extensive 
research in chemistry, optics, and increasingly in electronics.”
20 Some executives found it hard to 
believe in something that was not as profitable as traditional film. One senior vice president and 
For the exclusive use of Y. Gu, 2023.
This document is authorized for use only by Yanshan Gu in Business 101    2023 Fall taught by GUO Yidi, Tsinghua University from Sep 2023 to Mar 2024.


705-448 
Kodak and the Digital Revolution (A) 
4 
director of Kodak research noted, "We're moving into an information-based company,” “[but] it's 
very hard to find anything [with profit margins] like color photography that is legal."
21  
In 1986, Kodak introduced the world’s first electronic image sensor with 1.4 million pixels (or 
picture elements), and it established an electronic photography division in 1987. By 1989, it had 
introduced more than 50 products that involved electronic image capture or conversion, including a 
scanner, a continuous digital tone printer, a professional photography image enhancer, and an HDTV 
projection system. Within the information sector, it established four centers of excellence to develop 
image acquisition, storage systems, software, and printer products. Chandler declared Kodak would 
“be the world’s best in chemical and electronic imaging” by “exploring and defining the best ways to 
manage the convergence of conventional imaging science with electronics.”
22 See exhibit 5 for 
Kodak’s R&D expenditures. 
 “Film-based digital imaging,” 1990-1993 
Although Kodak had been the first to introduce an image sensor, the heart of the camera, the first 
widely announced digital product was Photo CD. Kodak wanted to create “film-based digital 
imaging.”
23 It believed new products had to rely on a hybrid film/electronic imaging technology 
because silver-halide technology provided the highest-quality images attainable at the lowest price 
“for the foreseeable future.” Kay Whitmore, who became CEO in 1990, noted, “As this company did 
with black-and-white and color, we intend to set the standards and lead the way in film-based digital 
imaging.”
24  
Kodak planned to sell new hardware products improved by digital features, to license technology 
to computer producers, to have more prints from discs at photofinishers, and to apply the knowledge 
acquired in digital imaging to the motion picture business and commercial products. Money had to 
come from photographic film and paper, but add “the flexibility offered by electronics.”
25  
Kodak introduced two new products in 1991, the first professional digital camera and the Photo 
CD, which it touted in its annual report. This product, developed with Phillips, would combine “the 
best of the photographic medium with the best attributes of electronic imaging.”
26 It started as a blank 
CD. A roll of film could be taken to a photofinisher, and images, rather than being printed, were 
stored on the disc. Images could then be viewed on a TV screen with a special Photo CD player or on 
a computer screen with a CD-ROM. The project was expected to be a $600 million business by 1997 
with $100 million in operational earnings, but there was little evidence that consumers would pay 
$500 for a player that plugged into a TV, plus $20 per disc.
27 The Photo CD was targeted at 
consumers, although its invention team had argued its real potential lay in the commercial market. 
Scott Brownstein, who led the team, said senior managers wanted a quick hit and did not 
“understand our real vision or strategy.”
28 Brownstein’s group wanted to make CD-ROMs compatible 
with the Photo CD, but when senior executives met with Bill Gates, he remembered Whitmore’s lack 
of interest, as he apparently fell asleep.
29 Later, when the Photo CD team worked with the computer 
firms, they had problems explaining the details to Whitmore. 
In late 1993, Whitmore stepped down. Kodak hired George M.C. Fisher, Motorola’s former CEO, 
to replace him. Fisher, after having received his Ph.D. in mathematics, had apprenticed at AT&T’s 
Bell Labs, where he did work related to photography. The first outsider to run Kodak, Fisher felt 
Kodak was built on “imaging,” not film, and that it could grow by focusing on its core business and 
exploiting new digital technologies. 
For the exclusive use of Y. Gu, 2023.
This document is authorized for use only by Yanshan Gu in Business 101    2023 Fall taught by GUO Yidi, Tsinghua University from Sep 2023 to Mar 2024.


Kodak and the Digital Revolution (A) 
705-448 
5 
Back to the core business, 1993-2003 
Fisher divested Kodak’s health segment, except for the health sciences unit, which included X-ray 
film, other diagnostic imaging hardware, and consumables. Kodak sold Sterling Drug, L&F Products, 
and Clinical Diagnostics, using most of the proceeds to pay off debt, as well as Eastman Chemical, 
which had been formed to supply raw materials for Kodak’s photographic business, but now got 8% 
of its sales from Kodak. Fisher demonstrated his confidence in the future of imaging. “I grew up in 
the electronics business and I looked at the photography and imaging business from the electronics 
side and it’s not such a scary event. Electronics will add a lot to photography and a lot to imaging.”
30   
Growing in the film business: Fisher’s legacy in China 
Fisher felt scenarios of silver-halide photography’s future were too pessimistic and that emerging 
markets like China offered overlooked growth opportunities. When he joined Kodak, it was third in 
film share and fourth in paper share in China. He had strong credibility with Beijing officials from his 
time at Motorola. In 1998, Kodak committed $1.2 billion to two joint ventures with the Chinese 
government. By 2002, it moved facilities to China that made digital, conventional, and single-use 
cameras, kiosks, and mini-labs, and it created a network of retail outlets there to increase film sales. 
By early 2002, it had 63% of the Chinese retail film market, with 7,000 Kodak Express film stores. 
Digital imaging in Fisher’s era, 1993 – 1997 
Kodak had spent $5 billion to research digital imaging by 1993, but its product development and 
sales were fragmented and scattered over many divisions. At one time, it had 23 distinct digital 
scanner projects.
31 In 1994, Fisher separated Kodak’s digital imaging operations from its silver-halide 
photographic division. He created a digital and applied imaging division to centralize Kodak’s efforts 
in this area while building on its core capabilities in imaging technology and color science. Carl E. 
Gustin Jr., formerly with Digital Equipment Corporation and Apple Computer, was appointed 
general manager, and John Scully, former CEO of Apple Computer, was hired as a marketing and 
strategy consultant. Fisher also appointed Harry Kavetas, a former IBM executive credited with 
rejuvenating Big Blue's credit unit, as Kodak's chief financial officer.  
Fisher pushed the introduction of the digital print station (a product sold to retailers that allowed 
customers to digitize their photos), new models of digital cameras, and thermal printers and paper to 
make prints from the cameras once the images were loaded into a personal computer. Fisher wanted 
to bring all the digital programs that had languished in Kodak’s labs to market: He believed Kodak 
should participate profitably “in the five links of the imaging chain: image capture, processing, 
storage, output, and delivery of images for people and machines anywhere.”
32 Fisher, who had 
turned Motorola into a premier pager and cell phone producer, believed “Kodak could be successful 
in the equipment business” because it possessed the capabilities to “do much besides make film.”
33  
His first step was to re-engineer the company from top to bottom, and “ten teams of senior managers 
- two of them led by Mr. Fisher - were charged with rethinking everything from product 
development to how to expand Kodak's markets:”
34 
Each business would be required to calculate its customer satisfaction index and to show 
improvements. Every division had three years to reduce defects and improve reliability. Cycle 
times on everything from routine paperwork to manufacturing goods were to be improved by a 
factor of ten over three years.
35   
Fisher met with Bill Gates and other computer executives in order to form alliances and develop 
new products. He felt profitability in hardware could come only with their help, and hoped to “fill in 
the blanks” of Kodak’s digital products (e.g., Photo CD or its $29,000 professional digital camera), 
For the exclusive use of Y. Gu, 2023.
This document is authorized for use only by Yanshan Gu in Business 101    2023 Fall taught by GUO Yidi, Tsinghua University from Sep 2023 to Mar 2024.


705-448 
Kodak and the Digital Revolution (A) 
6 
which had not succeeded.
36 He pushed Kodak to be a high tech-company: “[Fisher] has devoted 
substantial energy to making Kodak like Motorola, capable of producing state-of-the-art products 
every few months. Company factories are churning out an impressive array of digital cameras, 
scanners, and other devices at a breakneck clip.”
37 But competition in the market for digital cameras 
was tough: when Kodak introduced the DC40 in 1995, there were two other models under $1,000, but 
by 1996 there were 25 different brands in the category.  
Many Kodak insiders resisted Fisher’s initiatives. As one industry executive commented, “Fisher 
has been able to change the culture at the very top. But he hasn't been able to change the huge mass 
of middle managers, and they just don't understand this [digital] world.”
38 Fisher, who was used to 
dissent and open discussion in Motorola, where “they argued like cats and dogs, loudly, 
sometimes”
39 felt Kodak’s executives avoided confrontations and venerated authority: “everybody 
looked to the guy above him for what needed to be done.”
40  Fisher tried to introduce the Motorola-
style of open discussion, but change was difficult. The razor-blade culture in Kodak was so deeply 
ingrained that even disposable cameras had been considered almost sacrilegious.   
In late 1997, Fisher admitted that 60% of Kodak’s losses were “costs linked to digital cameras, 
scanners, thermal printers, writeable CDs and other products”
41 and announced a reversal of his 
hardware-based digital strategy: “[O]ur intention is to use whatever technology is available to us to 
truly help people do more with their pictures. Electronic imaging will not cannibalize film. One of the 
mistakes we at Kodak have made is that we’ve tried to do it all. We do not have to pursue all aspects 
of the digital opportunity and we see our opportunity in the output and service side.”
42  
Toward a fully digital world, 1998 – 2003 
Fisher felt Kodak needed a “network and consumables”–based business model: 
We see a networked world in making, taking and processing pictures. We will stick ourselves 
in the middle of that world with services that people are willing to pay for, like creating photo 
albums online or simply sending photos from point A to point B. Or they'll use one of our 13,000 
kiosks…We will always sell film, paper and chemicals...we will let people take pictures and scan 
them in digital form, and we will make money on the different media (CDs or the Internet, for 
example) or material for output--inkjet paper, thermal papers, and traditional silver halide paper.
43  
Fisher wanted Kodak to be a “horizontal company” that outsourced most digital photographic 
equipment and built alliances (e.g., with Intel): “Traditionally, our business is chemically based, and 
we do everything. In the digital world, it is much more important to pick out horizontal layers where 
you have distinctive capabilities. In the computer world, one company specializes in 
microprocessors, one in monitors, and another in disk drives. No one company does it all.”
44 
On the film side, Kodak was caught off guard by Fuji, which slashed prices in 1998 to grab market 
share in the United States, where Kodak still enjoyed the highest margins. Kodak’s market share 
dropped from 46% to 42% in just one year: Its decline in the film business continued into the early 
2000s. See exhibit 6 for changes in film revenue. Fisher contended Fuji was “literally buying presence 
in this country, buying customers in this country, selling film at unbelievably low price because they 
could afford it and because they had an infinite source of money coming out of a protected market in 
Japan.”
45 By late 1999, Kodak had to cut $1.2 billion in costs and 19,900 jobs, almost 20% of its payroll.  
In early 2000, Daniel A. Carp became CEO. Before becoming President and COO in 1997, he had 
been general manager of sales for Kodak Canada, general manager of the consumer electronics 
division, and general manager of the European, African, and Middle Eastern regions. He inherited 
the “horizontal company” and the “network and consumables”–based business model: 
For the exclusive use of Y. Gu, 2023.
This document is authorized for use only by Yanshan Gu in Business 101    2023 Fall taught by GUO Yidi, Tsinghua University from Sep 2023 to Mar 2024.


Kodak and the Digital Revolution (A) 
705-448 
7 
We see digitization in creating a film and a photo-finishing aftermarket that should fuel an 
explosion of pictures and use of digital and 35mm technology. At its core, Kodak's digital strategy 
is to create a profitable bridge between the old and new worlds of photography. Even as it hopes 
to jump-start sales of digital cameras, the company wants to transfer as many of its customers' 
traditional snapshots as possible to digital form.
46 
By 1999, Kodak had become number two in digital cameras in the United States, with a 27% 
market share. Exhibit 7 provides market share data for digital cameras. Kodak had a print-on-
demand website and promised to form joint ventures to popularize new distribution channels such 
as digital photo kiosks and the Internet.
47 Just as the early Kodak pursued the holy trinity of film, 
paper and chemicals, and dominated all three, the new Kodak worships the digital trinity of image 
capture (cameras), services (online photo manipulation) and image output (digital kiosks, inkjet 
printers, paper and inks).
48 
Kodak’s network of 19,000 Picture Maker kiosks at retail stores was also successful. At $15,000 
each, Carp said they were highly profitable and accounted for $200 million in sales; “with 95% of 
customers who used them coming back repeatedly, they produced steady photo paper sales.”
49 See 
exhibit 8 for information on the installed base of kiosks. Kodak also battled with Hewlett Packard for 
the printing segment, investing much of its R&D budget in inkjet printers, which drove sales of high-
margin inkjet cartridges and specialized paper.
 50  
In fall 2000, another round of corporate restructuring brought digital and applied imaging and 
consumer imaging into one division; this move was expected to end the internal war between the 
film and the digital segments.
51 Still, Kodak lost $60 in 2001 on every digital camera it sold.
52 Yet Carp 
invested in digital imaging, and Kodak boosted its advertising as it tried to create an integrated 
marketing effort and message to the customer, with its “Where it all clicks” theme, and consumer 
imaging, digital and applied imaging, and Kodak.com went to market with one campaign.
53 
Kodak also invested heavily in developing software for image manipulation that enhanced what 
could be done on a computer to a digital picture and at a retail store to traditional film. In October 
2002, it launched the first mass-market product for digital film processing. With this software, film 
was still developed traditionally, but digital processing then scanned each negative and analyzed it, 
looking for areas that had been exposed to too much or too little light. It filled in light where needed 
and cut back on it where there was too much. Carp noted, "This is the most important innovation for 
us since color. Using digital technology to enhance photos consumers take with existing analog 
cameras is an extension of Kodak's basic strategy of making it easier to take pictures.”
54 
At Kodak’s 2002 meeting, Carp outlined four paths to move Kodak into the new millennium:
55 
• 
Expand film’s benefits: Kodak would grow its market share by offering premium products 
(e.g., the Max Versatility products), leveraging its distribution, and increasing its exposure 
through more targeted marketing.; 
• 
Drive image output in all forms to achieve higher retail margins. Kodak planned to introduce 
the Perfect Touch premium processing system and expand its portfolio of digital mini-labs; 
• 
Simplify the digital photo experience for consumers, with an emphasis on products such as 
the EasyShare digital camera platform, Picture Maker kiosks, and Picture CDs;  
• 
Grow in emerging markets, where it already operated thousands of Kodak Express Stores. 
By January 2003, digital cameras remained unprofitable; Kodak had weak fourth-quarter earnings 
and announced more layoffs.
56 Yet it controlled most photofinishing transactions in the United States, 
and had 15% of the U.S. digital camera market.
57  
For the exclusive use of Y. Gu, 2023.
This document is authorized for use only by Yanshan Gu in Business 101    2023 Fall taught by GUO Yidi, Tsinghua University from Sep 2023 to Mar 2024.


705-448 
Kodak and the Digital Revolution (A) 
8 
The Digital Imaging Industry   
The digital imaging market expanded in 1993 and 1994 as many products came out. By August 
1994, 22 filmless camera models were sold. In 1995, three models were priced under $1,000. By 1996, 
25 models cost under $1,000. The high end included studio photography like magazines and 
commercial studios. The middle segment included photojournalists and professional photographers. 
Kodak was competitive in each segment. The low end was consumer and business applications like 
real estate, advertising, and website displays. The first low-end product was Apple’s QuickTake 100, 
priced at $749 in early 1994. Major competitors included Logitech’s Pixtura and Kodak’s DC-40. All 
three used the image sensor developed by Kodak in 1986. Other digital products included 35 mm 
scanners, image-editing, and printers; Kodak sold a dye sublimation printer.  
By 1999, digital imaging had four distinct sub-markets: digital cameras, home printing, online 
services, and retail kiosks and mini-labs. Acquiring, digitizing, storing, printing, manipulating, 
transmitting, retrieving and projecting digital images had become easier, and options for each had 
increased. (Figure A on page 9 depicts the digital imaging chain.) 
Falling prices helped drive digital camera sales. Between 2000 and 2002, the estimated average 
price of a 3 megapixel camera had decreased from $865 to $396. New digital cameras with higher 
resolutions were projected to follow roughly the same price trend. Exhibit 9 provides data on sales of 
35mm, instant, and digital cameras. With 6 million units sold in 2001 (almost a 50% increase over 
2000), the installed base of digital cameras in the United States was 13 million, or 12.5% of total US 
households. By September 2002, digital camera sales had increased 60% relative to 2001 and the 
average price for all digital cameras sold had dropped to $350.
58 Competition was based mainly on 
features, functionality, and price, but Sony, Kodak, Olympus, and Hewlett Packard increasingly 
dominated the market. Yet profitability remained elusive for most firms, which were moving their 
manufacturing infrastructures to China to reduce costs. Exhibit 10 shows revenue data for different 
parts of the photography market.   
Almost all traditional film images were processed at retail locations. For digital images, users had 
many processing choices. Printing occurred at the home/office, Internet photo service providers, and 
retail photofinishing. Industry experts estimated that in 2002, most digital prints were done in the 
office or at home, but that home printing would decline to 65% of all digital prints by 2005 (see 
exhibit 11).
59 Hewlett Packard, Lexmark, Epson, and Canon dominated the printing market. Kodak 
had a small role thanks to its relationship with Lexmark. Hewlett Packard and Kodak dominated the 
specialty printing paper niche, which had estimated EBIT margins of 25% after retail mark-up.  
In 2000, over a hundred firms competed in online services, which included digitization, photo 
finishing, and storage. By 2003, Fuji, Kodak/Ofoto, and Shutterfly remained. Ofoto, bought in 2001 
by Kodak, offered free online storage of photos. It charged for prints, enlargements, photo cards, and 
other photo-related products, which it delivered directly to customers. Its clients could have their 
silver-halide pictures digitized and posted online for about $4. In 2002, these services accounted for 
10% of all digital prints.
60 Prices decreased as service fees were eliminated. Industry experts expected 
the model to be profitable in a few years since there was no retail markup.  
For the exclusive use of Y. Gu, 2023.
This document is authorized for use only by Yanshan Gu in Business 101    2023 Fall taught by GUO Yidi, Tsinghua University from Sep 2023 to Mar 2024.


Kodak and the Digital Revolution (A) 
705-448 
9 
Figure A 
The Digital Imaging Chain 
 
 
 
Figure A  The Digital Imaging Chain 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Source: 
Casewriter. 
Source:  Casewriter 
According to one report, 33% of the 45 million images captured in 2001 were printed. Retailers 
processed 15%, but most analysts expected digital mini-labs and kiosks to eventually become the 
dominant channel.
61 Since the 1980s, the photo processing industry had undergone major changes. 
Retailers had formed regional wholesale labs to sustain film processing. During the 1980s and the 
1990s, Kodak and Fuji promoted consolidation and gained substantial control of the market. 
Concurrently, new photo-processing units, which fit into retailers’ shops, enabled local service of 24-
hour and then one-hour processing. As a result, the amount of film sent to wholesale labs for 
processing declined.  
Retailers offered two main processing solutions, mini-labs and kiosks, which bridged between 
traditional inputs and new digital channels. Retailers had turned to digital kiosks, which eliminated 
scanners from the system, and digital mini-labs, which printed high-quality digital files as easily as 
silver-halide based photos were printed. Digital mini-labs and kiosks allowed for digital uploads 
from CDs, Zip discs, floppies, DVDs, and flash cards. Once digitized, images could be archived on 
various media. With more than 5,000 labs in place, Fuji had 60% of the mini-labs market, which was 
almost 15% of the total mini-lab installed base in 2002. It had also agreed to install machines in 2,500 
Wal-Mart and 800 Walgreen’s outlets. These chains handled about 40% of the U.S. photo-processing 
market. Kodak had about 100 digital mini-labs in service because its agreement with Gretag, an 
imaging firm, ended in 2002 when Gretag filed for bankruptcy. Kodak allied with Noritsu Koki to 
close this gap, and projected the sale of 1,000 mini-labs by the end of 2003.
62 It dominated the offering 
of kiosks, with its 34,000 Picture Makers, which offered retailers a modular solution that comprised 
three stations: Picture Maker Order Station, Digital Station, and Print Station. Exhibits 8 and 12 show 
the installed base of mini-labs and kiosks and channel sales, respectively, in the United States. 
Appendix A presents an overview of Kodak’s competitors in digital imaging. 
Image 
Capture 
Digitization 
Transmission 
Retrieval 
Storage 
Printing 
Manipulation 
- Digital camera 
- Film camera 
- Video camera 
- Digital camera’s 
software 
- Scanner at home 
- Kiosks at 
retailers 
- Digital mini-labs 
- Online services 
- Hard disk 
- Floppy disc/ CD 
- Removable storage 
(e.g., compact flash, 
memory stick, 
magnetic diskette) 
- At home: printers, 
inkjet consumables, 
paper 
- Online (paper) 
- At retail stores (paper) 
Online (email, Internet)  
Projection 
Software  
For the exclusive use of Y. Gu, 2023.
This document is authorized for use only by Yanshan Gu in Business 101    2023 Fall taught by GUO Yidi, Tsinghua University from Sep 2023 to Mar 2024.


705-448 
Kodak and the Digital Revolution (A) 
10 
Exhibit 1
Kodak Financial Statements, 1993-2003E ($ millions) 
  
1993 
1994 
1995 
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002E 2003E 
Revenues 
12,670 13,557 14,980 15,968 14,538 13,406 14,089 13,994 13,234 12,692 12,808
    Photography 
5,292 
5,919 6,830 7,659
7,681
7,164
7,411 10,231 9,403
8,761 8,735 
    Professional 
7,382 
7,646 8,184 2,367
2,272
1,840
1,910
1,417
1,459
1,533 1,561 
    Health  
 
 
 
1,627
1,532
1,526
2,120
2,220
2,262
2,279 2,390 
    Other  
 
 
 
4,315
3,053
2,876
2,648
126 
110 
119 
122 
 
 
 
 
 
 
R&D 
864 
859 
935 
1,028
1,044
880 
817 
778 
779 
774 
783 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Operating Profit 
1,248 
1,309 1,941 2,203
1,771
2,065
2,454
2,170
1,233
1,211 1,316 
    Photography 
931 
878 
1,254 1,324
1,072
1,080
1,304
1,430
787 
663 
777 
    Professional 
317 
431 
687 
319 
284 
330 
396 
233 
165 
194 
205 
    Health  
 
 
 
375 
317 
366 
471 
518 
323 
378 
359 
    Other  
  
  
  
185 
98 
289 
283 
-11 
-42 
-24 
-25 
Source: adapted from Salomon Smith Barney, 2002, and company's reports 
Exhibit 2
U.S. Camera Sales, 1983 - 2000 (units in millions)  
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
1983
1984
1985
1986
1987
1988
1989
1990
1991
1992
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
Year
Units Sold
35mm
Digital
35mm
Digital
 
Source: 
Adapted from PMA Marketing Research. 
Exhibit 3     U.S. Film Roll Sales, 1983-2000 (units in hundreds of millions) 
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
1983
1984
1985
1986
1987
1988
1989
1990
1991
1992
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
Year
Units Sold
 
Source: Adapted from PMA Marketing Research 
 
 
For the exclusive use of Y. Gu, 2023.
This document is authorized for use only by Yanshan Gu in Business 101    2023 Fall taught by GUO Yidi, Tsinghua University from Sep 2023 to Mar 2024.


Kodak and the Digital Revolution (A) 
705-448 
11 
 
Exhibit 4
Worldwide Film Market Share, 1990 - 2002E (unit market share, in percent)  
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
1990
1991
1992
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002E
Year
M
arket Share
Fuji
Kodak
Others
 
Source:     Adapted from Merrill Lynch and PhotoMarket  
Exhibit 5
Eastman Kodak R&D Spending, 1982 - 2001 (in millions $) 
  
Sales 
R&D  
R&D / Sales 
1982 
10,815 
710 
6.56% 
1983 
10,170 
746 
7.34% 
1984 
10,600 
838 
7.91% 
1985 
10,631 
976 
9.18% 
1986 
11,550 
1,059 
9.17% 
1987 
13,305 
992 
7.46% 
1988 
17,034 
1,147 
6.73% 
1989 
18,398 
1,253 
6.81% 
1990 
18,908 
1,329 
7.03% 
1991 
19,419 
1,337 
6.89% 
1992 
20,183 
1,419 
7.03% 
1993* 
16,364 
1,301 
7.95% 
 1994** 
13,557 
859 
6.34% 
1995 
14,980 
935 
6.24% 
1996 
15,968 
1,028 
6.44% 
1997 
14,538 
1,230 
8.46% 
1998 
13,406 
922 
6.88% 
1999 
14,089 
817 
5.80% 
2000 
13,994 
784 
5.60% 
2001 
13,234 
779 
5.89% 
* Divestiture of Eastman Chemical Company 
** Divestiture of non-imaging health businesses 
Source: 
adapted from company's reports 
For the exclusive use of Y. Gu, 2023.
This document is authorized for use only by Yanshan Gu in Business 101    2023 Fall taught by GUO Yidi, Tsinghua University from Sep 2023 to Mar 2024.


705-448 
Kodak and the Digital Revolution (A) 
12 
Exhibit 6
Film Revenues Change in the U.S. Food, Drug, and Mass Merchandising Channel, 2001 - 
2002 (in percent) 
  
February-01* 
March-01
April-02
May-02
June-02 
Kodak 
-12.8 
-15.3 
-19.8 
-16.2 
-15.4 
Fuji 
23.6 
14.4 
11.5 
8.3 
8.2 
Polaroid 
-15.5 
-13.4 
-14.2 
-9.5 
-21.1 
Private Label 
4.7 
16.0 
-4.3 
-6.5 
-9.8 
Others 
-42.8 
-49.0 
-53.7 
-25.6 
41.2 
 * Change in revenues over the 4 weeks ended February 2001, March 2001, April 2002, May 2002, and June 2002.  
Source:     Adapted from Morgan Stanley, July 2002  
 
Exhibit 7
U.S. Digital camera market share, 1998-2002 (% of units sold) 
  
1998 
1999 
2000
2001
2002
Sony 
59% 
53% 
28% 
24% 
34% 
Kodak 
17% 
27% 
13% 
15% 
13% 
Olympus 
9% 
9% 
18% 
15% 
20% 
HP 
5% 
3% 
4% 
14% 
5% 
Fuji 
1% 
2% 
5% 
3% 
4% 
Canon 
2% 
1% 
7% 
5% 
9% 
Nikon 
NA 
NA 
4% 
4% 
4% 
Other  
5% 
6% 
21% 
20% 
11% 
Source: 
Adapted from Credit Suisse First Boston, 2002 
 
Exhibit 8
U.S. Kiosks and Mini-labs Installed Base and Share by Type, 2000 - 2006E (units) 
  
2000 
2001 
2002
2003E
2004E
2005
E
2006E 
Compound Annual 
Growth Rate (%)
Kiosks  
21,343 
24,385 
29,159 
36,915 
49,378 
68,549 
96,381 
31.6 
    Photo Printer (%) 
100 
78 
68 
24 
16 
15 
11 
- 
    Digital Printer (%) 
0 
22 
32 
58 
56 
54 
51 
- 
    Order Station (%) 
0 
0 
0 
18 
28 
31 
38 
- 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Mini-labs  
35,780 
36,104 
36,896 
38,230 
39,931 
41,483 
43,557 
3.8 
    Digital (%) 
6 
11 
21 
31 
40 
48 
62 
- 
    Analog (%) 
94 
89 
79 
69 
60 
52 
38 
 - 
Source: 
Adapted from IDC, 2002 
For the exclusive use of Y. Gu, 2023.
This document is authorized for use only by Yanshan Gu in Business 101    2023 Fall taught by GUO Yidi, Tsinghua University from Sep 2023 to Mar 2024.


Kodak and the Digital Revolution (A) 
705-448 
13 
Exhibit 9
Worldwide Camera Sales, 1997 - 2004E ($ in millions)  
Traditional
Instant
Digital
0
5000
10000
15000
20000
25000
30000
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002E
2003E
2004E
Traditional
Instant
Digital
 
Source: Adapted from Salomon Smith Barney 2003 
 
Exhibit 10
Worldwide Photography, Film, Processing, and Output Revenues ($ in millions) 
  
2000 
2001
2002E
2003E
2004E
2005E 
2006E
Cameras  
22,988 
23,394 
24,101 
23,615 
22,443 
20,556 
19,373 
   Digital cameras 
7,236 
8,362 
10,242 
11,235 
11,862 
12,596 
13,222 
   Traditional cameras 
14,740 
14,070 
12,864 
11,539 
9,808 
7,356 
5,517 
   Instant cameras 
1,013 
962 
904 
841 
774 
704 
634 
Film 
17,257 
17,314 
16,940 
16,522 
16,113 
15,691 
15,280 
Paper  
4,304 
4,391 
4,549 
4,818 
5,292 
6,081 
6,900 
   Paper  
4,299 
4,381 
4,410 
4,417 
4,596 
4,792 
5,112 
   CD's 
5 
10 
93 
185 
364 
674 
935 
   DVD's 
0 
0 
46 
163 
332 
615 
853 
Photofinishing  
36,545 
37,389 
36,939 
35,936 
34,996 
34,114 
33,290 
   Amateur 
27,244 
27,890 
27,725 
27,183 
26,680 
26,214 
25,785 
   Professional 
9,301 
9,499 
9,214 
8,753 
8,316 
7,900 
7,505 
 Source: Adapted from Salomon Smith Barney, 2003  
For the exclusive use of Y. Gu, 2023.
This document is authorized for use only by Yanshan Gu in Business 101    2023 Fall taught by GUO Yidi, Tsinghua University from Sep 2023 to Mar 2024.


705-448 
Kodak and the Digital Revolution (A) 
14 
Exhibit 11
Worldwide Digital and Film Image Capture and Print Volume, 2000 - 2006 (millions of 
units) 
* Retail film prints include onsite processing (mini-labs) and wholesale processing 
Source: adapted from IDC, 2002 
 
Exhibit 12
U.S. Film Revenues Share by Channel, 2000 - 2003E (in percent)  
  
2000 
2001
2002
2003E
FDM* 
 
 
 
 
    EK's share 
68.2 
65.2 
65 
64 
    Share of total market 
44.7 
44.2 
45 
45 
Wal-Mart 
 
 
 
 
    EK's share 
53.3 
50.7 
51.4 
29.9 
    Share of total market 
28.3 
29 
29.9 
29.7 
Costco 
 
 
 
 
    EK's share 
61.5 
100 
100 
100 
    Share of total market 
7 
6.8 
7 
7 
Sam's Warehouse 
 
 
 
 
    EK's share 
68.5 
100 
100 
91.6 
    Share of total market 
6 
6 
5.4 
5.5 
Other warehouse 
 
 
 
 
    EK's share 
63 
62 
62.3 
62.4 
    Share of total market 
4 
4 
3 
3 
Specialty retailers 
 
 
 
 
    EK's share 
63 
60.3 
60.1 
60.1 
    Share of total market 
10 
10 
9.7 
9.8 
* Food, Drug, and Mass Merchandising Channel 
Source:     Adapted from Lehman Brothers, 2003  
 
 
  
2000 
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005 
2006 
CAGR (%)
Digital 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Digital images captured 
33,397 
44,840 
61,005 
78,996 
105,817 
147,105 
195,654 
34.3 
Digital images printed 
14,363 
19,062 
24,851 
31,764 
35,680 
41,307 
48,376 
20.5 
    Home / Office  
12,369 
15,085 
19,387 
23,823 
25,088 
27,121 
29,781 
14.6 
    Retail 
1,350 
3,015 
4,075 
5,597 
7,528 
9,973 
12,975 
33.9 
    Internet 
645 
962 
1,389 
2,344 
3,063 
4,213 
5,620 
42.3 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Film 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    Retail* 
100,445 
100,833 
100,995 
100,833 
100,632 
100,330 
99,828 
-0.2 
For the exclusive use of Y. Gu, 2023.
This document is authorized for use only by Yanshan Gu in Business 101    2023 Fall taught by GUO Yidi, Tsinghua University from Sep 2023 to Mar 2024.


Kodak and the Digital Revolution (A) 
705-448 
15 
 Appendix A 
Competition in Digital Imaging 
Competitor 
Overview 
Canon, Inc. 
In 2002, Canon had approximately $23.4 billion in sales and net income of $1.04 
billion. Its camera segment, which included film cameras, video cameras, and 
digital cameras, accounted for 16.5% of sales, with margins of 12%,
63 an increase of 
1.5% over 2000.
64 Digital cameras generated 44% of camera sales, and had an 
operating margin of 14.1%.
65 Since Canon brought out its 2002 models, it was the 
top domestic producer, with a market share of 23%. Its global market share in 
digital still cameras was 12%.  
Fuji Photo 
Film Co. 
Fuji’s imaging solutions division, which included photographic film, photo 
printing paper, developing services, cameras and digital cameras, accounted for 
32.7% of 2002 sales. Its operating margin was estimated to be 29%.
66 By 2000, Fuji 
was one of the two leading digital camera manufacturers, with a global share 
estimated at 20%. In the digital camera business, Fuji’s operating profit margin for 
2001 was estimated at 5%, while its traditional mainstay business (color film, color 
paper, X-ray film, and photo-sensitive plates and film) generated over 15%.
67 
Fuji’s strategy in digital imaging was similar to Kodak’s in emphasizing the 
coexistence of film and digital imaging. A major part of Fuji’s digital strategy was 
the installation of digital mini-labs to expand its market share in photographic film. 
Both companies focused on the incremental effects of digital technology on 
traditional film-based halide technology. The weighting of digital products in 
overall sales was estimated to have surpassed 50% for the first time in 2001, with a 
contribution to operating profit of 50%.  
Hewlett 
Packard 
Co. 
   In January 2002, Hewlett Packard’s CEO Carly Fiorina argued that digital imaging
was the next big thing in the computing and communications industries.
68 Hewlett 
Packard's imaging and printing research teams filed for 2,500 related patents in 
2001 alone. By 2002, it had a 7.5% global market share in digital cameras. Its success 
in digital imaging was based on aggressive pricing of cameras and printers, with 
the aim of increasing sales of high-margin inkjet consumables.  
Nikon 
   In the 1990s, Nikon’s share in traditional film cameras maintained a stable market 
share of 20% on a unit base.
69 In 2000, it had a market share of 6% for compact and 
digital cameras, which had lower margins than traditional cameras did. It was also 
expanding into 2-megapixel cameras. Analysts had compared Nikon’s strategy in 
digital imaging with Canon’s because of its aim to “link digital cameras sales to 
peripherals, printing paper, ink, and other consumables, graphic engines, and 
CMOS sensors.”
70 From 2000 to 2002, digital still cameras contributed increasingly 
to the imaging business but its scale of operation remained relatively small.
71 
Sony Corp. 
   During the 1990s, Sony found success with its original Mavica, which stored 
images on 3.5-inch floppy disks, which were more familiar to Americans than were 
the image-storage chips used by most Japanese vendors
72. In 1999, it had an 80% 
market share in the low-end segment, which accounted for 46% of digital sales. 
Sony held the number-one position in 2001 in the United States, with a 23% share, 
and the number-two position in Europe (with a share of 16%, second to Canon) and 
Japan (17% share versus Fuji’s 25%). Sony maintained EBITDA margins of more 
than 10% on its digital photo products. 
For the exclusive use of Y. Gu, 2023.
This document is authorized for use only by Yanshan Gu in Business 101    2023 Fall taught by GUO Yidi, Tsinghua University from Sep 2023 to Mar 2024.


705-448 
Kodak and the Digital Revolution (A) 
16 
Endnotes 
 
1 BusinessWeek, “Daniel Carp, Kodak: Not a Pretty Picture,” Feb. 3, 2003. 
2 A. Swasy (1997), Changing Focus: Kodak and the Battle to Save a Great American Company, Times Business, 
Random House. 
3 Kodak website. 
4 Eastman Kodak (1988), Focus on the future: a guide to Kodak’s business units and products 
5 J. Sutton (1999), Technology and Market Structure, The MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.  
6 A. Swasy, Changing Focus. 
7 J. Sutton (1999), Technology and Market Structure, The MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.  
8 J. Sutton (1999), Technology and Market Structure, The MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.  
9 A. Swasy, Changing Focus. 
10 Salomon Brothers, Eastman Kodak Company: A Changing Image, Nov. 30, 1994. 
11 A. Swasy, Changing Focus. 
12 Salomon Brothers, Eastman Kodak Company: A Changing Image, Nov. 30, 1994. 
13 A. Swasy, Changing Focus. 
14 HSBC, Fuji Photo Film, Oct. 22, 2002. 
15 A. Swasy, Changing Focus. 
16 A. Swasy, Changing Focus. 
17 A. Swasy, Changing Focus. 
18 Eastman Kodak, Annual Report 1985. 
19 Wall Street Journal, “Kodak Facing Big Challenges in Bid to Change,” May 22, 1985. 
20 Eastman Kodak, Annual Report 1983. 
21 Wall Street Journal, “Kodak Facing Big Challenges in Bid to Change,” May 22, 1985. 
22 Eastman Kodak, Annual Report 1989. 
23 Eastman Kodak, Annual Report 1991. 
24 Eastman Kodak, Annual Report 1991. 
25 Eastman Kodak, Annual Report 1991.  
26 Eastman Kodak, Annual Report 1991. 
27 Fortune, “Getting digital imaging in focus,” May 1, 1995. 
28 A. Swasy, Changing Focus. 
29 A. Swasy, Changing Focus. 
30 A. Swasy, Changing Focus. 
31 BusinessWeek, “Kodak’s new focus,” Jan. 30, 1995. 
32 PR Newswire, “Kodak’s CEO unveils new corporate strategy,” May 3, 1994. 
For the exclusive use of Y. Gu, 2023.
This document is authorized for use only by Yanshan Gu in Business 101    2023 Fall taught by GUO Yidi, Tsinghua University from Sep 2023 to Mar 2024.


Kodak and the Digital Revolution (A) 
705-448 
17 
 
33 Fortune, “Digital imaging had better boom before Kodak film busts,” May 1, 1995. 
34 The Economist, “Picture imperfect,” May 28, 1994. 
35 A. Swasy, Changing Focus. 
36  Forbes, “George Fisher,” June 5, 1995. 
37 BusinessWeek, “Can George Fisher Fix Kodak?,” Oct. 20, 1997. 
38 BusinessWeek, “Can George Fisher Fix Kodak?,” Oct. 20, 1997. 
39 A. Swasy, Changing Focus.  
40 BusinessWeek, “Kodak’s new focus,” Jan.  30, 1995 
41 Electronics, “Kodak changes digital strategy,” Nov. 17, 1997 
42 Denver Post, “Kodak’s chief outlines photo giant’s challenges,” Nov. 9, 1997. 
43  Money, “Keeping Kodak focused,” Jan. 1999. 
44 Money, “Keeping Kodak focused,” Jan. 1999. 
45 Denver Post, “Kodak’s chief outlines photo giant’s challenges,” Nov. 9, 1997. 
46 Forbes, “Razors with no blades,” Oct. 18, 1999. 
47 The Economist, “Business: Develop or Die,” Sept. 30, 2000. 
48 Forbes, “Kodak’s Digital Moment, “ Aug. 21, 2000 
49 Forbes, “Razors with no blades.” 
50 Salomon Smith Barney (J. Rosenzweig), Eastman Kodak, Feb. 14, 2002. 
51 Rochester Business Journal, “Kodak’s CEO wraps up year of challenge,” Dec. 8, 2000. 
52 CNBC/Dow Jones Business Video, Eastman Kodak President & CEO, interview by Mark Haines and Rick 
Schottenfeld, 1 May 2001. 
53 Salomon Smith Barney (J. Rosenweig), Eastman Kodak, Feb. 2001. 
54  Knight Ridder Tribune Business News, “Kodak Launches Digital Film Processing Technology,” 
Oct. 6, 2002. 
55 Salomon Smith Barney (J. Rosenzweig, S. Crane), Kodak, May 15, 2002. 
56 The Wall Street Journal, “Kodak Posts Disappointing Net, Plans New Layoffs,” Jan. 23, 2003. 
57 Credit Suisse First Boston, Pixels & Profits, Oct. 2002. 
58 International Data Corporation, The battle for digital images: worldwide photo printer forecast, 2001-2006, IDC 
#28366, November 2002. 
59 International Data Corporation, The battle for digital images: worldwide photo printer forecast, 2001-2006, IDC 
#28366, November 2002. 
60 Lyra Research. 
61 International Data Corporation, The Image Bible, 2002-2006, IDC #28258, November 2002. 
62 BusinessWeek, “Big Yellow’s digital dilemma,” Mar. 24, 2003. 
63 HSBC, Canon, Mar. 27, 2002. 
64 Morgan Stanley, Canon, F2002 earnings preview, Jan. 28, 2003. 
65 HSBC, Canon, Mar. 27, 2002, HSBC estimates and assumptions. 
For the exclusive use of Y. Gu, 2023.
This document is authorized for use only by Yanshan Gu in Business 101    2023 Fall taught by GUO Yidi, Tsinghua University from Sep 2023 to Mar 2024.


705-448 
Kodak and the Digital Revolution (A) 
18 
 
66 HSBC, Fuji Photo Film, Oct. 22, 2002 
67 HSBC, Fuji Photo Film, Feb. 2000. 
68 Wireless Week, “Digital imaging: Just a click away,” July 1, 2002.  
69 Commerzbank, Nikon, July 2001. 
70 Commerzbank, Nikon, July 2001. 
71 Morgan Stanley, Nikon, May 14, 2002. 
72 BusinessWeek, “Fuji: Beyond Film,” Nov. 22, 1999. 
For the exclusive use of Y. Gu, 2023.
This document is authorized for use only by Yanshan Gu in Business 101    2023 Fall taught by GUO Yidi, Tsinghua University from Sep 2023 to Mar 2024.


 
9-707-519
R E V :  O C T O B E R  4 ,  2 0 0 7  
 
________________________________________________________________________________________________________________ 
 
Professor Mikołaj Jan Piskorski and Alessandro L. Spadini (MBA 2006) prepared the original version of this case, “Procter & Gamble: 
Organization 2005 (A),” HBS No. 707-401, which is being replaced by this version prepared by the same authors. HBS cases are developed solely 
as the basis for class discussion. Cases are not intended to serve as endorsements, sources of primary data, or illustrations of effective or 
ineffective management. 
 
M I K O Ł A J  J A N  P I S K O R S K I  
A L E S S A N D R O  L .  S P A D I N I  
Procter & Gamble: Organization 2005 (A) 
 
When [Lafley] took over in June 2000, on the same day as CEO Durk Jager's 
sudden resignation, the company was the sort of ink-stained mess you'd find in a 
Tide commercial. It had slammed four profit warnings into two quarters. . . . Its stock 
had dropped by half in the previous six months—losing a crushing $70 billion in 
market value. And the combative Jager, whose 17 volatile months on the job had 
made his the shortest CEO tenure in Procter & Gamble's grand 165-year history, had 
left the company unsure of its footing. The day Lafley got the keys, no one had high 
hopes.1 
Fortune, September 2002 
A.G. Lafley (MBA 77) did not have much time to decide how to turn around Procter & Gamble 
(P&G).  His predecessor, Durk Jager, had introduced an aggressive restructuring program – 
Organization 2005 – designed to generate bolder innovations and accelerate their global rollout in 
order to double P&G sales to $70 billion by 2005 and achieve annual earnings growth of 13-15 
percent.  At the core of the program lay a radical new organizational design.  In the past, P&G’s chain 
of formal command put geography first, followed by product, and then by function.  In the new 
design, P&G was structured as three interdependent global organizations, one organized by product 
category, one by geography, and one by business process.  The early results of the reorganization had 
been abysmal: flat sales and negative core earnings growth had caused P&G to issue four profit 
warnings.  Lack of immediate results coupled with substantial job reductions – an integral part of the 
Organization 2005 restructuring – contributed to sagging employee morale.  In a short time, Lafley 
had to decide whether or not to put an end to this new design and return to the previous 
organizational structure that had worked well in the past. 
The organizational problems were aggravated by strategic concerns.  Many analysts questioned 
whether it made sense for P&G, a $38 billion multinational consumer-products company, to compete 
in over 50 categories, ranging from toilet paper to pharmaceuticals, with more than 300 brands.2  
Though traditionally P&G could rely on its marketing and R&D expertise to justify its presence 
across multiple markets, in the previous couple of years focused competitors had been steadily taking 
away market share in many product lines and regions, suggesting perhaps that the corporate 
advantage had withered away.  As Lafley contemplated his organizational decision, he also had to 
decide whether he could create more value by splitting the company into sets of stand-alone 
businesses.  
For the exclusive use of Y. Gu, 2023.
This document is authorized for use only by Yanshan Gu in Business 101    2023 Fall taught by GUO Yidi, Tsinghua University from Sep 2023 to Mar 2024.


707-519 
Procter & Gamble: Organization 2005 (A) 
2 
Procter & Gamble History, 1837-1948 
The Procter & Gamble Company was founded in Cincinnati, Ohio by an English immigrant 
William Procter, and James Gamble, an immigrant from Ireland.  Both men had arrived in Cincinnati 
separately, forced to stop there to tend to illnesses while on their way West.  Each independently 
decided to settle to found a business.  Procter became a candlemaker and Gamble a soapmaker.  After 
marrying sisters, they formed a partnership in 1837.3 At that time, Cincinnati, nicknamed 
“Porkopolis”, was the country’s largest meatpacking center allowing for inexpensive access to animal 
fat – a primary raw material for candles and soap.  This attracted many new entrants, such that by 
1845 P&G had to compete with as many as 14 other local manufacturers of unbranded soaps and 
candles.4  To differentiate itself P&G embarked on an aggressive investment strategy building a large 
factory in the 1850s despite rumors of impending civil war.  During the war P&G operated day and 
night to supply the Union armies, and by the war’s end sales had more than quintupled to over $1 
million.5  When soldiers returned home carrying its high-quality products, distinguished by their 
characteristic moon-and-stars packaging, P&G quickly developed a national reputation.6  Rapid 
growth and a series of innovations in human-resource management, R&D, distribution, marketing, 
and organizational design soon followed.  
From its inception, P&G focused on product innovation.  In 1879, Gamble’s son James Norris 
Gamble, a trained chemist, developed Ivory, the first American soap comparable to fine European 
imports.  James transformed P&G’s soap- and candle-making processes from an art to a science by 
soliciting help from chemistry professors.  Ivory, first marketed nationally in 1882 for its superior 
purity, transformed P&G into a branded-goods producer. Mass-scale production of Ivory began at an 
enormous new plant, Ivorydale, in 1887 to meet rapidly growing national demand. P&G 
simultaneously instituted one of the first profit-sharing programs to maintain harmony with its 
workforce. The company started paying dividends in 1890 and has done so continuously ever since.7  
The same year, P&G established one of the first centralized R&D labs in industry.8  R&D ultimately 
led to diversification into many other chemistry-based consumer industries, including cooking oils, 
laundry detergents, personal-care products, paper products, and even pharmaceuticals (see Exhibit 
1).9  P&G also innovated by establishing a direct sales force in 1919, disintermediating wholesalers.  
Direct distribution to stores enhanced P&G’s insight into retail customers and enabled the company 
to tie production more closely to demand.  P&G established one of the first market-research 
departments in 1924 and invented the soap opera in 1933.  “Guiding Light,” which first aired as a 15-
minute radio serial in 1937, is still being produced by a P&G-owned production studio and appears 
daily on CBS.10  
Throughout the 1920s brand managers were encouraged to be entrepreneurial and to manage 
brands as individual companies. Competitive brand management was institutionalized in 1931, 
formally empowering each brand manager to target different consumer segments.  The organization 
started forming around product lines so that quicker and more consumer-focused business decisions 
could be made by brand managers at lower levels in the corporate hierarchy.  In 1943 P&G created its 
first product-category division, the drug-products department, focused on a growing line of 
personal-care products. Strong centralized functions were retained, however, in areas such as R&D 
and manufacturing.  Tide, a revolutionary synthetic detergent launched in 1946, was developed by 
R&D against the wishes of brand management through a secret 5-year program known as “Project 
X.” Upper management eventually fast-tracked the project; Tide captured market leadership in just 4 
years (and still held it over 50 years later), validating R&D’s independence.11   
For the exclusive use of Y. Gu, 2023.
This document is authorized for use only by Yanshan Gu in Business 101    2023 Fall taught by GUO Yidi, Tsinghua University from Sep 2023 to Mar 2024.


Procter & Gamble: Organization 2005 (A) 
707-519 
3 
Diverging Organizational Structures (1948–1987) 
In 1948, P&G established its first international sales division to manage its rapidly growing 
foreign businesses.12  Over the next forty years P&G would steadily build its foreign presence, while 
carefully managing its US operations.  The two types of operations led to two very different modes of 
organizational architectures.  The United States, with a large homogenous market, lent itself to 
nationwide brand and product division management.  Western Europe, which represented the lion’s 
share of P&G’s overseas division, was a heterogeneous market with different languages, cultures, 
and laws, and therefore adopted a decentralized hub-and-spoke model.   
United States 
Product Division Management
In 1954, P&G created individual operating divisions to 
better manage growing lines of products, each with its own line and staff organizations (see Diagram 
1).  Within this model, the organization developed along two key dimensions: functions and brands.  
Brand managers bore responsibility for profitability and could focus on matching company strategy 
with product-category dynamics.  Brand managers in the same product division competed in the 
marketplace but shared access to strong divisional functions.  Those divisional functions transferred 
best practices and talent across many brands, fostering leading-edge competencies in R&D, 
manufacturing, and market research in a rapidly developing consumer-products industry.  A 
corporate basic-research department helped to make innovative connections across divisions, leading 
to inventions like fluoride toothpaste in 1955. 
Diagram 1
U.S. Divisional Structure in 1955 
Source: Procter & Gamble. 
Advent of Matrix
 In 1987, the United States made a historic shift away from the competitive 
brand-management system put in place in 1931; brands would now be managed as components of 
category portfolios by category general managers.  At the same time, product categories were 
beginning to require more differentiated functional activities.  Thus 39 U.S. category business units 
were created, each run by a general manager to whom both brand and dedicated functional 
managers would report (see Diagram 2).13 Each category business unit had its own sales, product-
development, manufacturing, and finance functions. To retain functional strengths, a matrix 
reporting structure was set up whereby functional leaders reported directly to their business 
leadership and also had a dotted-line reporting relationship to their functional leadership.  For 
example, all sales employees’ dotted-line reporting relationships would ultimately filter up to the 
Vice President of Sales for the United States. 
U.S. President 
Manufacturing 
Sales 
R&D 
 
Brand 
Managers
Soaps and 
Detergents VP
Foods VP 
Toilet 
Goods VP
Corporate 
Functions 
Basic 
Research 
For the exclusive use of Y. Gu, 2023.
This document is authorized for use only by Yanshan Gu in Business 101    2023 Fall taught by GUO Yidi, Tsinghua University from Sep 2023 to Mar 2024.


707-519 
Procter & Gamble: Organization 2005 (A) 
4 
Diagram 2
U.S. Matrix Category/Function Business Unit Structure, 1987 
Source: Procter & Gamble. 
Western Europe 
Geographic Management
In Europe, the P&G organization developed along three 
dimensions: country, function, and brand (see Diagram 3). “P&G began expanding globally after 
World War II,” explained former P&G CEO John Pepper, “but the company created ‘mini-U.S.es’ in 
each country.”14 In fact, P&G’s first president of overseas operations, Walter Lingle, established this 
model to tailor products and processes to local tastes and norms.  The result was a portfolio of self-
sufficient subsidiaries led by country general managers (GMs) who adapted P&G technology and 
marketing expertise to local markets.15  New product technologies were sourced from U.S. R&D labs 
in Cincinnati and then qualified, tested, and adapted by local R&D and manufacturing organizations 
in each country.  In 1963, the European Technical Center (ETC) in Brussels was inaugurated to house 
a European corporate R&D and process-engineering function.  ETC developed products and 
manufacturing processes that country managers could choose to adapt to and launch in their own 
countries.   
Diagram 3
 Initial European Organizational Design 
 
 
Country-Specific Functions,
Managed Locally 
• Sales, Distribution 
• Marketing, Market Research 
• Product Development 
• Manufacturing, Engineering 
• Purchasing 
• Finance 
• Information Technology 
• Human Resources 
 
 
Geographic 
Line- 
Management 
Small Product-
Categories in 
Country Silos 
 
 
President, Overseas 
Operations 
Country 
Managers 
Corporate Functions (Brussels):   
R&D, Process Design, 
Engineering, Finance, etc.  
Category Business Units 
Centralized Functions 
U.S. President 
Laundry 
Division VP 
R&D   VP 
R&D 
Laundry 
Director
Divisions 
Household Cleaning 
Division VP 
Mfg  VP 
Mfg 
Laundry 
Director 
Detergent GM 
Mfg 
Detergent 
Tide 
Brand 
Manager 
R&D 
Detergent 
Sales   VP 
Sales 
Laundry 
Director
Sales 
Detergent 
Brands 
 
 
Source:  Procter & Gamble. 
For the exclusive use of Y. Gu, 2023.
This document is authorized for use only by Yanshan Gu in Business 101    2023 Fall taught by GUO Yidi, Tsinghua University from Sep 2023 to Mar 2024.


Procter & Gamble: Organization 2005 (A) 
707-519 
5 
In this model country managers, not brand managers, had responsibility for profitability and 
market strategy.  The Brussels regional headquarters was very hands-off, serving mostly as a legal, 
tax-accounting, and public-relations entity.  This structure ultimately led to a situation in which 
innovations and brands could take more than 10 years to globalize.16 Pampers, for example, was 
launched in the United States in 1961, in Germany in 1973, and in France not until 1978.17  Not only 
were European functional organizations embedded in country silos, but European corporate 
functions were also completely disconnected from the U.S. operation.  Corporate R&D in Europe, for 
example, had little contact with labs in Cincinnati.  Furthermore, focus on product categories and 
brands was fragmented by country, virtually precluding region-wide category or branding strategies. 
Advent of Category Management
 By the early 1980s P&G operated in 27 countries and 
derived a quarter of its $11 billion in revenues from overseas operations.  At that scale, it was 
becoming clear that the European globalization model was not very effective.18  Unstandardized and 
subscale manufacturing operations in each country were expensive and unreliable.  Products were 
tweaked unnecessarily, creating pack-size and formulation variations that added no value for the 
consumer but significant cost and complexity to the supply chain.  Country R&D labs were expensive 
to maintain and reinvented the wheel with each new product initiative.  Therefore, beginning in the 
early 1980s, Europe attempted to promote cross-border cooperation across functions and to shift 
focus from country management to product-category management. Headquarters in Brussels 
encouraged the formation of regional committees composed of large-country managers and corporate 
functional leaders to eliminate needless product variations, coordinate marketing communications, 
prioritize product launches, and orchestrate competitive responses across the region.  Unsurprisingly, 
many small-country managers objected that there was no “typical” European consumer and that this 
initiative would lead to neglect of local consumer preferences.  The strategy eventually proved 
successful, however, and Europe was split into three subregions whose leaders were given secondary 
responsibilities for coordinating particular product categories across the entire continent.  In the early 
1980s, Europe was fully restructured around product categories.  Product-category division VP 
positions were established and assigned continent-wide divisional profit-and-loss responsibility.  
Country GMs were replaced with multiple-country product-category GMs who reported to the 
division VPs.  Thus, for example, the GM responsible for marketing and selling laundry detergents in 
Germany would report to the VP of laundry for Europe. 
Diagram 4
European Category Management in the Early 1980s 
Country Categories 
Brussels Corporate Functions 
Europe President 
Europe 
Laundry 
Division VP 
Corporate 
Finance 
Continental Categories 
Europe  
Paper Division VP 
Corporate 
Mfg 
Germany 
Detergent 
GM  
 
Ariel 
Brand 
Manager 
Germany 
Detergent
Mfg 
Corporate 
R&D 
Germany 
Fabric 
Softener GM
Germany 
Detergent
R&D 
Country Brand Managers 
and Local Functions 
 
Note: Ariel is P&G’s primary European laundry detergent brand 
Source:  Procter & Gamble. 
For the exclusive use of Y. Gu, 2023.
This document is authorized for use only by Yanshan Gu in Business 101    2023 Fall taught by GUO Yidi, Tsinghua University from Sep 2023 to Mar 2024.


707-519 
Procter & Gamble: Organization 2005 (A) 
6 
Global Matrix (1987–1995) 
In the late 1980s, attractive expansion opportunities in Japan and developing markets led P&G to 
question its globalization model, particularly in anticipation of the new challenge of appealing to 
more diverse consumer tastes and income levels.  In Europe, increased focus on cross-border 
category management had proven successful, but corporate functions in Brussels still lacked direct 
control of country functional activities.  Therefore, P&G started migrating to a global matrix structure 
of categories and functions.  First, Europe’s country functions were consolidated into continental 
functions characterized by dotted-line reporting through functional leadership and direct reporting 
through the regional business managers (see Diagram 5).  Global functional senior vice presidencies 
were created to manage functions across all regions.  Then, in 1989, to better coordinate category and 
branding strategies worldwide, P&G created global category presidencies reporting directly to the 
CEO.19  All country category GMs had dotted-line reporting to their global category president; 
however, career progression and promotion remained in the hands of regional line management.  
Global category presidents were given direct responsibility for managing a fully globalized corporate 
R&D function, subdivided by category rather than region.  Global R&D vice presidencies were 
established to manage R&D for a given product division worldwide; they reported directly to global 
category presidents and were dotted-line reports to the global SVP of R&D.  This structure allowed 
for the creation of global technical centers in different regions, each with a core competency in a 
specific product category.  Together, the global category presidents and R&D VPs developed 
product-category platform technologies that could be applied to global branding strategies.  In 1995 
this structure was extended to the rest of the world through the creation of four regions—North 
America, Latin America, Europe/Middle East/Africa, and Asia—each of which had its own 
president with responsibility for profit and loss.   
Diagram 5
Global Matrix Structure Partial Organization Chart, 1995–1998   
 
Source: Adapted from Procter & Gamble Organization Chart, 1998 
Note: Boldface boxes represent positions with responsibility for profitability. Only partial matrix reporting is shown - same structure is in place for IT, finance, etc.  
Some names may have been modified to facilitate comparisons with other diagrams. 
Global 
Categories 
Country  
Categories 
CEO 
Regional 
Categories 
Europe 
Detergent VP 
(Brussels) 
Detergent  
Sales Manager 
Germany  
Ariel Brand 
Manager 
Germany 
Regions 
Europe 
President 
(Brussels) 
Global  
Functions
 
Sales SVP 
(Cincinnati) 
 
 
R&D SVP 
(Cincinnati) 
R&D Global 
Detergent VP 
(Cincinnati) 
Product Supply 
SVP 
(Cincinnati) 
Global Detergent 
Category Leader 
 (Cincinnati) 
Detergent 
Germany GM 
(Germany) 
 
Detergent R&D 
Director, Europe 
(Brussels) 
Detergent  
Sales Director, 
Europe 
(Brussels) 
Detergent 
Product Supply 
Director, Europe 
(Brussels) 
For the exclusive use of Y. Gu, 2023.
This document is authorized for use only by Yanshan Gu in Business 101    2023 Fall taught by GUO Yidi, Tsinghua University from Sep 2023 to Mar 2024.


Procter & Gamble: Organization 2005 (A) 
707-519 
7 
P&G’s matrix organizational structure facilitated tremendous top- and bottom-line improvements 
(see Exhibits 2, 3 and 4).  The creation of powerful and independent global functions promoted the 
pooling of knowledge, transfer of best practices, elimination of intraregional redundancies, and 
standardization of activities.  The new matrix organization also allowed for manufacturing, 
purchasing, engineering, and distribution to be integrated, in 1987, into one global product-supply 
function, which managed the supply chain from beginning to end.  Regionally managed product-
supply groups could extract massive savings by consolidating country manufacturing plants and 
distribution centers into higher-scale regional facilities.  In 1993, as part of the massive 
“Strengthening Global Effectiveness” (SGE) restructuring program, the product-supply organization 
integrated the supply chain of a string of acquisitions that P&G had made, primarily in beauty care. 
Standardization allowed for quick rationalization of acquired assets and smooth integration into the 
existing manufacturing-and-distribution network; 30 of 147 plants were eliminated.20  Meanwhile a 
stronger global sales organization with regional leadership was transformed into the Customer 
Business Development (CBD) function.  CBD developed closer global relationships with big 
customers, one result of which was the unprecedented step of co-locating with Wal-Mart in 
Bentonville, Arkansas, to pursue joint strategic planning.  Coupled with its early supply-chain 
initiatives, this undertaking allowed P&G to be a first mover in electronic integration with customers, 
leading to disproportionate share growth with mass discounters.  Finally, significant initial 
standardization in IT systems was made possible by a globally managed IT organization.  By 1997, 
financial and accounting information storage had been consolidated at three global data-storage 
centers. 
Global category management also generated impressive benefits. Global category managers 
developed close relationships with strong global R&D product-category organizations, helping to 
standardize and accelerate global product launches. By the early 1990s, it took only four years, on 
average, to globalize a new initiative.  This advance allowed P&G to quickly inject new technologies 
into recently acquired beauty care brands like Pantene, Olay, and Old Spice.  For example, two-in-one 
shampoo-and-conditioner technology was developed at the Sharon Woods beauty-care global 
technical center in Cincinnati in the mid-1980s.  The hair-care global category president then helped 
roll it out globally under the Pantene brand name with a consistent worldwide marketing message 
and identity.  In just over a decade, increased global focus on product categories helped P&G’s 
beauty-care division to grow from a $600 million orphan to a highly strategic $7 billion business. 
Matrix Runs into Problems (1995–1998) 
Strong regional functions had produced extraordinary competitive advantages, but as the 
organization entered the mid-1990s they appeared to create gridlock.  The matrix management 
structure had never been symmetrical.  Though most functions nominally had straight-line reporting 
through regional management and only dotted-line reporting through functional management, the 
function retained a high degree of de-facto control because it determined career paths and promotion 
for its employees.  Ultimately each function developed its own strategic agenda, which largely 
revolved around maximizing its own power within the company rather than cooperating with other 
functions and business units to win in the marketplace. Management by functional conflict initially 
served as an effective system of checks and balances but eventually led to poor strategic alignment 
throughout the company.  For example, while product supply made global efforts to reduce the 
number of chemical suppliers for P&G products, R&D sought out high-performance ingredients to 
enhance product performance, no matter where they came from.  Neither sought an optimal tradeoff 
between performance and cost; each tried to maximize its particular parameter.  It was very difficult 
for regional managers focused on particular countries to address these global functional conflicts.  If, 
For the exclusive use of Y. Gu, 2023.
This document is authorized for use only by Yanshan Gu in Business 101    2023 Fall taught by GUO Yidi, Tsinghua University from Sep 2023 to Mar 2024.


707-519 
Procter & Gamble: Organization 2005 (A) 
8 
for example, product supply wanted to use a less expensive replacement surfactant in laundry 
formulations, it could demonstrate huge potential savings that a lone country manager would be 
hard-pressed to dispute.  
It also became clear that the matrix structure had not fully resolved the tension between regional 
and product-category management.  Regional managers still had sole responsibility for financial 
results, and thus it was they who ultimately chose whether or not to launch initiatives made available 
by the global category-management organizations.  R&D divisions and global category leaders were 
aligned globally by product category, and therefore fought hard to globalize new technological and 
brand innovations quickly.  But they still had to obtain agreement from each regional manager, and 
sometimes even from large-country managers, to launch a product in a given area.  Regional 
managers would often hesitate to launch a particular product even if it made sense for the company 
strategically because it could weaken their upcoming profit and loss statement.  As a result, the 
company’s track record of globalizing innovation and brands had stagnated and seemed to be falling 
behind that of more focused rivals.  For example, Cover Girl, a U.S. cosmetics brand that P&G had 
acquired in 1989, still had not been globalized by 1997.  By contrast Maybelline, acquired by L’Oreal in 
1996, was globalized in just a few years and was on its way to becoming a billion-dollar brand.   
To make matters worse, competitors were catching up quickly. P&G had been a first mover in 
supply-chain consolidations and integration with customers, but by the latter half of the decade over 
200 other vendors had opened “embassies” to Wal-Mart in Bentonville. As a result P&G’s shares in 
big-box discount stores had fallen by 3.3 percent since 1993 in categories representing roughly two-
thirds of the business.21  As a result, sales grew only 2.6 percent in 1997 and 1998 by contrast to 8.5 
percent on average in the 1980s.  Ultimately, the question was whether the matrix organizational 
structure was internally coherent or scalable over the long term.  Full accountability for results could 
not really be assigned to regional profit centers because they couldn’t fully manage functional 
strategy and resource allocation.  Many believed that this scenario had created a culture of risk 
aversion and avoidance of failure above all else.  With over 100 profit centers, it just seemed like there 
were “too many cooks in the kitchen.”  Furthermore, as P&G diversified, an ever-increasing number 
of country product-category GM positions would have to be created.  By the mid-1990s, for example, 
Germany alone had roughly a dozen category GMs. 
Organization 2005 
In September 1998, P&G announced a six-year restructuring plan -- Organization 2005. The 
company estimated that the plan would cost $1.9 billion over five years and would achieve $900 
million in annual after-tax cost savings by 2004. It called for voluntary separations of 15,000 
employees by 2001, with almost 10,500 overseas.22 Forty five percent of all job separations would 
result from global product-supply consolidations and a quarter from exploitation of scale benefits 
arising from more standardized business processes.23  The plan also called to eliminate six 
management layers, reducing the total from 13 to 7.24  The second part of Organization 2005 entailed 
dismantling the matrix organizational structure and replacing it with an amalgam of interdependent 
organizations: Global Business Units with primary responsibility for product, Market Development 
Organizations with primary responsibility for markets, and a Global Business Services unit 
responsible for managing internal business processes.  This radically new organizational design, 
described in detail below, was designed to improve the speed with which P&G innovated and 
globalized its innovations.  Many at the company expected that, once in place, Organization 2005 
should generate consistent sales growth of 6–8 percent and profit growth of 13–15 percent per year.   
For the exclusive use of Y. Gu, 2023.
This document is authorized for use only by Yanshan Gu in Business 101    2023 Fall taught by GUO Yidi, Tsinghua University from Sep 2023 to Mar 2024.


Procter & Gamble: Organization 2005 (A) 
707-519 
9 
GBU Functions 
Corporate Functions 
Brands
 
MDOs 
Categories
CEO 
Western 
Europe 
MDO 
President 
Global 
Business 
Services VP  
Detergent 
R&D VP 
Detergent 
Product Supply 
VP 
Global 
Detergent 
Care VP 
Detergent 
NBD VP 
Detergent 
IT VP 
GM Ariel 
(marketing) 
GM Germany 
(sales) 
MDOs are compensated based on sales growth; GBUs are compensated on 
profitability, and GBS is compensated on cost management. 
GBS service-line managers interact with GBUs, MDOs, and Corporate Functions. 
Source: Adapted from P&G organizational chart, 1999 
Note: Boldface boxes represent positions with responsibility for profitability. 
Some names may have been changed to facilitate comparisons with other diagrams. 
Corporate 
New Ventures 
President 
GBS service line 1 manager 
GBS service line 2 manager 
GBUs
Detergent 
GBU 
President 
Chief 
Financial 
Officer 
…
… 
… 
…
…
…
Global Business Units (GBUs) 
Global Business Units were responsible for product development, brand design, business strategy 
and new business development. Each operated autonomously focusing on a different product 
category, such as Fabric and Home Care or Tissue and Towel (see the middle section of Exhibit 5).  In 
total, there were seven GBUs each with complete profit responsibility, and benchmarked against 
focused product-category competitors.  Each GBU was led by a president, who reported directly to 
the CEO and was a member of the global leadership council that determined overall company 
strategy.  At a GBU level, Vice Presidents of Marketing, R&D, Product Supply, New Business 
Development, and support functions such as IT implementation reported to the GBU President (see 
the middle section of Diagram 6).  The new business development function of GBUs was managed 
separately from the rest of the GBU.  To assure that the R&D divisions of different GBUs would share 
technological innovations, a technology council composed of the GBU R&D VPs would be formed to 
cross-pollinate ideas.  This structure would increase agility and reduce costs through accelerated 
global standardization of manufacturing processes and better coordination of marketing activities 
across countries. Organizing product supply by product category rather than geography, for 
example, would allow for global standardization of diaper-manufacturing processes, which were still 
on 12 different regional platforms.25  Combined with elimination of the arduous process of obtaining 
launch approval from regional managers, this scenario would finally allow for systematically faster 
global rollouts of innovations and new brands.  
Diagram 6
Initial Design of Organization 2005, Partial Organization Chart, 1999 
For the exclusive use of Y. Gu, 2023.
This document is authorized for use only by Yanshan Gu in Business 101    2023 Fall taught by GUO Yidi, Tsinghua University from Sep 2023 to Mar 2024.


707-519 
Procter & Gamble: Organization 2005 (A) 
10 
Market Development Organizations (MDOs) 
Market Development Organizations (MDOs) were designed to take responsibility for “tailoring 
the company’s global programs to local markets and [for using] their knowledge of local consumers 
and retailers to help P&G develop market strategies to guide the entire business.”26  Customer 
Business Development functions previously dispersed among various business units would be 
consolidated regionally and converted into the line functions in each MDO. Consumer Market 
Knowledge, field sales, and support functions would report to CBD.  In total, there were seven MDOs 
(see the top part of Exhibit 5). Unlike the GBUs, they did not have complete profit responsibility, but 
were instead compensated on sales growth.  Each MDO was led by a president who reported directly 
to the CEO and, like the GBU presidents, sat on the global leadership council.  
Global Business Services (GBS) 
The third leg of the new organizational structure, Global Business Services (GBS) unit was given 
an ambitious plan to standardize, consolidate, streamline, and ultimately strengthen business 
processes and IT platforms across GBUs and MDOs around the world.  Before GBS, business services, 
and IT systems for processes like accounting transactions, payroll processing, and facilities 
management were duplicated and performed differently across regions.  Centralizing responsibility 
for managing these processes could lead to economies of scale, while at the same time allowing GBUs 
and MDOs to focus on their core competencies.  GBS was organized as a cost center. The head of GBS 
reported directly to the CEO, but was not a member of the global leadership council.  
The first task of GBS was to move the entire company onto a single shared SAP software system, 
which would require re-engineering 70 percent of the company’s IT systems.  In total, 72 systems 
across 70 countries had to be standardized and globalized.  Then a set of “service lines” (see the right 
side of Exhibit 5) for business and employee support were created and managed centrally by 
business-process directors.  GBS established three “follow-the-sun” service centers, in Costa Rica, 
England, and the Philippines, to perform business-process work 24 hours a day.  This arrangement 
allowed GBS to achieve critical mass in business-process execution and to take advantage of wage 
arbitrage.   
Routines and HR policies 
In addition to changes in the formal architecture, Organization 2005 sought to change the routines 
in the organization.  Many decisions that had once been made by committee were now assigned to 
individuals.  As a result, many business tasks that had taken months, such as obtaining advertising-
copy approvals, could now be accomplished in days. Budgeting processes were also streamlined, 
integrating formerly separate marketing, payroll, and initiative budgets into a single business-
planning process whereby all budget elements could be reviewed and approved jointly.27  Finally, 
P&G also overhauled its incentive system, while maintaining the promote-from-within policy.  The 
performance-based portion of compensation for upper-level executives increased from 20 percent (10 
percent up or down) to 80 percent (40 percent up or down) of base pay.28 Stock-option compensation, 
formerly limited to 9000 employees, was extended to 100,000.29  
For the exclusive use of Y. Gu, 2023.
This document is authorized for use only by Yanshan Gu in Business 101    2023 Fall taught by GUO Yidi, Tsinghua University from Sep 2023 to Mar 2024.


Procter & Gamble: Organization 2005 (A) 
707-519 
11 
Organization 2005 in action 
To implement the extensive restructuring program, on January 1, 1999, the P&G board installed a 
new CEO, Durk Jager.  A long time P&G employee, Jager had been a key player in developing the 
plans for Organization 2005 while occupying the position of COO.  He hoped to use Organization 
2005 to change P&G’s risk-averse regionally managed structure so that it could launch new 
blockbuster brands based on new technologies rather than incremental improvements of existing 
products.30 To this end, he allocated a large share of P&G’s resources to GBU NBD groups and a 
Corporate New Ventures function (see Exhibit 6).  This led to the development of several new 
categories and brands such as Febreze, Swiffer, and Dryel.  To drive his vision, Jager frequently 
scrutinized P&G’s R&D portfolio and personally stewarded new technologies through the pipeline 
that he felt were promising. 
In October 1999, P&G’s fiscal first quarter results showed immediate acceleration in business 
performance.  Sales were up 5 percent over the previous year, a marked improvement over the 2.6 
percent annual revenue growth P&G had experienced the previous two years.  Core net earnings, 
excluding restructuring costs, increased by 10 percent.  Though these numbers fell short of the long-
term goals, they were quite respectable for the first full quarter of any restructuring program.  As a 
consequence, P&G’s stock appreciated significantly (see Exhibit 7).  The stock price reached an all-
time high of $118.38, when the next quarterly report came out on January 30, 2000, stating that sales 
grew an impressive 7 percent and core net earnings increased 13 percent (see Exhibits 8 and 9) 
Yet, the situation deteriorated drastically on March 7, 2000, when P&G announced that instead of 
the expected 8 percent increase in quarterly earnings, the core earnings would be 10 percent lower 
than the 1999 January-March quarter, despite an increase in revenue.  Higher-than-expected raw-
material costs, delays in FDA approvals, and particularly intense international competition were 
blamed for the situation.  That day the company’s stock lost 30 percent of its value, closing at $57.25, 
less than a half of what it traded at in January.  Jager told analysts:  
We've had a track record of meeting our bottom-line commitments [and] have learned that 
we simply can't focus on the top line to make the bottom line grow. We are getting more 
innovations to market faster because of our Organization 2005 structure and culture changes.31 
This has been a transition year.  Going forward we are going to focus on P&G basics—hard-
nosed cost management as well as accelerating sales growth.32 
Other executives noted that the company had 50 new products in the pipeline, including Impress, a 
patented food wrap that formed a water-tight seal with the application of pressure. The growing 
sales of Febreze, Swiffer, and Dryel were also expected to help reverse the crisis quickly.  Yet, the 
situation became even worse when P&G announced its official quarterly numbers on April 25, 2000. 
Core net earnings excluding restructuring costs had fallen 18 percent while sales increased 6 percent 
despite a 2 percent hit from exchange-rate changes. “We are redoubling our efforts to manage costs,” 
Jager told analysts.33  The stock lost 10 percent of its value, giving back some gains to close in the 
mid-60s.34 
Despite executives’ promises, P&G disappointed once again on June 8, 2000.  Fourth-quarter 
profits were flat, against the expectations of 15-17 percent increase. P&G also lowered its future 
quarterly sales growth estimates to 2–3 percent, casting doubt on whether Organization 2005 was 
even lifting the top line.  Increased competition, lower volume growth and negative currency effects 
were again blamed for the disappointing results.  Market-research companies confirmed P&G’s poor 
competitive position citing its loss of U.S. market share in 16 out of 30 categories since the preceding 
year.35 P&G stock lost 7 percent, falling to $57 after the announcement; it had been the worst-
performing component of the Dow over the previous six months.36 Jager had no choice but to resign. 
For the exclusive use of Y. Gu, 2023.
This document is authorized for use only by Yanshan Gu in Business 101    2023 Fall taught by GUO Yidi, Tsinghua University from Sep 2023 to Mar 2024.


707-519     -12- 
 
Exhibit 1
Research-&-Development-Driven Category Diversification 
 
Source:  Procter & Gamble, 1999 Annual Report (Cincinnati: Procter & Gamble, 1999), pp. 3-5, http://www.pg.com/investors/annualreports.jhtml, accessed March 2006. 
 
For the exclusive use of Y. Gu, 2023.
This document is authorized for use only by Yanshan Gu in Business 101    2023 Fall taught by GUO Yidi, Tsinghua University from Sep 2023 to Mar 2024.


707-519     -13- 
 
Exhibit 2
Procter & Gamble Net Sales, 1985-2000 
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
1985
1986
1987
1988
1989
1990
1991
1992
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
Billions of Dollars
Product-supply restructuring begins; 
Blendax acquired, marking entry into 
EU oral- care market
SGE 
restructuring 
begins
Organization 2005 
restructuring begins
Richardson Vicks 
acquired; Pantene, 
Vicks, Clearasil 
brands brought into 
the fold
Noxell (Cover Girl and 
Noxzema) acquired, marking 
entry into color cosmetics
Old Spice acquired, 
marking entry into mass 
fragrances
Max Factor, SKII, Hugo Boss perfume, and Betrix acquired, 
marking entry into prestige skin care, men’s fine fragrances, 
and the European color-cosmetics market
Tambrands acquired; 
leadership position in tampon 
market captured 
Iams and PUR acquired, 
marking entry into pet-care and 
water-purification markets
VP Schickedanz acquired, 
marking entry into EU paper 
products market 
 
Source: 
Procter & Gamble. 
 
For the exclusive use of Y. Gu, 2023.
This document is authorized for use only by Yanshan Gu in Business 101    2023 Fall taught by GUO Yidi, Tsinghua University from Sep 2023 to Mar 2024.


707-519 
Procter & Gamble: Organization 2005 (A) 
14 
Exhibit 3
P&G Income Statement, Fiscal Years 1992-2000 
1992 
1993 
1994 
1995 
1996 
1997 
1998 
1999 
2000 
Net Sales 
29,362 
30,433 
30,385 
33,482 
35,284 
35,764 
37,154 
38,125 
39,951 
Cost of Goods Sold 
17,324 
17,683 
17,338 
19,561 
20,938 
20,510 
20,896 
21,027 
21,018 
Gross Profit 
12,038 
12,750 
13,047 
13,921 
14,346 
15,254 
16,258 
17,098 
18,933 
Total SG&A 
9,171 
9,589 
9,377 
9,677 
9,531 
9,766 
10,203 
10,845 
12,165 
      Advertising Expense* 
2,693 
2,973 
2,996 
3,284 
3,254 
3,466 
3,704 
3,639 
3,793 
      R&D Expense* 
861 
956 
964 
1,148 
1,399 
1,469 
1,546 
1,726 
1,899 
Operating Income 
2,867 
3,161 
3,670 
4,244 
4,815 
5,488 
6,055 
6,253 
6,768 
Net Interest Expense 
(510) 
(552) 
(482) 
(488) 
(221) 
(239) 
(347) 
(650) 
(722) 
Other non-op Income 
425 
404 
158 
244 
120 
- 
- 
235 
304 
Restructuring Charges 
- 
(2,705) 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
(814) 
Other Items 
103 
41 
- 
- 
(45) 
- 
- 
- 
- 
Income Tax Expense 
1,013 
80 
1,135 
1,355 
1,623 
1,834 
1,928 
2,075 
1,994 
Net Income from Cont. Ops. 
1,872 
269 
2,211 
2,645 
3,046 
3,415 
3,780 
3,763 
3,542 
Employees (‘000) 
106 
103.5 
96.5 
99.2 
103 
106 
110 
110 
110 
Source: Procter & Gamble Annual Reports. 
 
Exhibit 4
P&G Cash Flow Statements, Fiscal Years 1992-2000 
 
1992 
1993 
1994 
1995 
1996 
1997 
1998 
1999 
2000 
Net Income 
1,872 
269 
2,211 
2,645 
3,046 
3,415 
3,780 
3,763 
3,542 
Depreciation 
1,051 
1,140 
1,134 
1,253 
1,358 
1,487 
1,598 
2,148 
2,191 
Asset Writedowns 
- 
2,705 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
Other Operating Activities 
125 
(1,065) 
196 
181 
328 
(26) 
(101) 
(60) 
463 
Change in Working Capital 
(23) 
289 
108 
(511) 
(574) 
1,006 
(392) 
(307) 
(1,521) 
Cash from Op. Activities 
3,025 
3,338 
3,649 
3,568 
4,158 
5,882 
4,885 
5,544 
4,675 
Capital Expenditure 
(1,911) 
(1,911) 
(1,841) 
(2,146) 
(2,179) 
(2,129) 
(2,559) 
(2,828) 
(3,018) 
Sale of PP&E 
291 
725 
105 
310 
402 
520 
555 
434 
419 
Cash Acquisitions 
(1,240) 
(138) 
(295) 
(623) 
(358) 
(150) 
(3,269) 
(137) 
(2,967) 
Invest. In Marketable Sec. 
- 
(306) 
23 
96 
(331) 
(309) 
63 
356 
221 
Cash from Investing 
(2,860) 
(1,630) 
(2,008) 
(2,363) 
(2,466) 
(2,068) 
(5,210) 
(2,175) 
(5,345) 
Net Change in Debt 
1,019 
(215) 
(664) 
(490) 
(38) 
(660) 
2,853 
1,341 
3,030 
Net Purch. Of Com. Stock 
(49) 
(55) 
(14) 
(115) 
(432) 
(1,652) 
(1,929) 
(2,533) 
(1,430) 
Total Dividends Paid 
(788) 
(850) 
(949) 
(1,062) 
(1,202) 
(1,329) 
(1,462) 
(1,626) 
(1,796) 
Other Financing Activities 
71 
77 
36 
67 
89 
134 
158 
212 
- 
Cash from Financing 
253 
(1,043) 
(1,591) 
(1,600) 
(1,583) 
(3,507) 
(380) 
(2,606) 
(196) 
FX Rate Adj. 
(26) 
(119) 
1 
50 
(63) 
(31) 
(96) 
(18) 
(13) 
Net Change in Cash 
392 
546 
51 
(345) 
46 
276 
(801) 
745 
(879) 
Source: 
Procter & Gamble Annual Reports. 
For the exclusive use of Y. Gu, 2023.
This document is authorized for use only by Yanshan Gu in Business 101    2023 Fall taught by GUO Yidi, Tsinghua University from Sep 2023 to Mar 2024.


707-519     -15- 
 
Exhibit 5
Organization 2005 Structure, 1999 
Customers (Wal-Mart, Target, Costco, Kroger, Safeway, CVS, Tesco, Carrefour, etc.) 
North 
America 
Asia, 
Australia, 
India 
China 
Northeast 
Asia 
Latin 
America 
CEEMEA¹ 
Western 
Europe 
Consumers around the world 
Corporate Functions – Corporate New Ventures, Engineering, etc. 
GBS 
Employee 
Services 
Accounting & 
Financial 
Reporting 
Workplace 
Services 
Employee 
Purchases 
IT Business 
Solutions 
Business 
Information 
Central IT 
Services 
 
Fabric and 
Home Care† 
•Tide 
•Mr. Clean 
•Lenor 
•Joy 
•Downy 
•Dawn/Fairy 
•Cheer 
•Cascade 
•Bounce 
•Ace Bleach 
 
Snacks & 
Beverages 
•Pringles 
•Folgers 
•Millstone 
•Jiff 
•Crisco 
•Sunny 
Delight 
•Punica 
•Olean 
 
Beauty Care 
•Pantene 
•Olay 
•Cover Girl 
•H&S 
•Old Spice 
•Secret 
•SK-II 
•Zest 
•Clearasil 
•Noxzema 
•Hugo Boss 
 
Healthcare 
OTC/ 
Pharma. 
•Vicks 
•Scope 
•Crest 
•Pepto 
•Metamucil 
•Nyquil 
•PUR 
•Iams 
•Actonel 
•Macrodantin 
Tissue & 
Towel 
•Bounty 
•Charmin 
•Puffs 
•Tempo 
 
Feminine 
Protection 
•Always 
•Tampax 
•Whisper 
 
 
Baby Care 
•Pampers 
•Luvs 
•Babysan 
 
 
•Febreeze 
•Swiffer 
•Dryel, Fit 
F i
•Torengos 
•Cooking 
Schools 
 
 
•Thermacare 
 
 
 
 
 
 
GBUs 
Marketing 
Market Research 
R&D 
Manufacturing 
Purchasing  
Distribution 
Finance 
HR 
GBU IT 
 
 
 
 
New Business 
Development 
 
MDOs  
CBD* 
Field Sales** 
CMK*** 
External Relations 
Recruiting 
HR 
MDO IT 
 
† Laundry Division is in Fabric and Home Care 
*CBD = customer business development (primary sales function)              
**Field Sales = local teams responsible for monitoring in-store execution, shelf presence, etc. 
***CMK = consumer market knowledge 
¹CEEMEA = Central Europe, Middle East, and Africa 
Source: Adapted from Procter & Gamble organization charts, 1999
For the exclusive use of Y. Gu, 2023.
This document is authorized for use only by Yanshan Gu in Business 101    2023 Fall taught by GUO Yidi, Tsinghua University from Sep 2023 to Mar 2024.


707-519     -16- 
 
Exhibit 6
Jager's Vision for Organization 2005 
 
Source: 
Excerpted from Procter & Gamble, 1999 Annual Report (Cincinnati: Procter & Gamble, 1999), pp. 3-5, http://www.pg.com/investors/annualreports.jhtml, accessed March 2006. 
 
For the exclusive use of Y. Gu, 2023.
This document is authorized for use only by Yanshan Gu in Business 101    2023 Fall taught by GUO Yidi, Tsinghua University from Sep 2023 to Mar 2024.


707-519     -17- 
 
Exhibit 7
Procter & Gamble Share Price History, 1997–2000 
50
60
70
80
90
100
110
120
Oct-97
Dec-97
Feb-98
Apr-98
Jun-98
Aug-98
Oct-98
Dec-98
Feb-99
Apr-99
Jun-99
Aug-99
Oct-99
Dec-99
Feb-00
Apr-00
Jun-00
Aug-00
Dollars per Share
Organization 2005 
announced internally
Jager promoted from 
COO to CEO
Organization 
2005 announced 
to analysts
Organization 
2005 structure in 
place
P&G in talks to 
acquire Warner 
Lambert
Stock loses 30% in one day as 
P&G announces it will miss 
earnings estimates by at least 
10%
With another miss 
imminent, Jager 
resigns and Lafley 
takes over
 
Source: 
Procter & Gamble. 
 
For the exclusive use of Y. Gu, 2023.
This document is authorized for use only by Yanshan Gu in Business 101    2023 Fall taught by GUO Yidi, Tsinghua University from Sep 2023 to Mar 2024.


707-519     -18- 
 
Exhibit 8
P&G GBU Financial Data, 1998–2000 Fiscal Years 
  
Fabric & Home Care† 
 
Paper 
 
Beauty Care 
 
Health Care 
 
Food & Beverage 
  
1998 
1999 
2000 
 
1998 
1999 
2000 
 
1998 
1999 
2000 
 
1998 
1999 
2000 
 
1998 
1999 
2000 
Net Sales 
11,019 
11,415 
12,157 
 
11,685 
12,190 
12,044 
 
7,469 
7,376 
7,389 
 
2,889 
2,876 
3,909 
 
4,620 
4,655 
4,634 
EBIT 
2,240 
2,417 
2,318 
 
1,772 
2,195 
1,817 
 
1,379 
1,457 
1,393 
 
381 
372 
540 
 
477 
528 
566 
Depreciation 
295 
293 
354 
 
611 
638 
664 
 
198 
198 
194 
 
105 
107 
159 
 
135 
149 
153 
Net Earnings 
1,406 
1,497 
1,450 
 
990 
1,278 
1,069 
 
845 
917 
894 
 
232 
242 
335 
 
294 
328 
364 
Total Assets 
 
5,047 
5,477 
 
 
8,184 
8,415 
 
 
3,754 
3,497 
 
 
1,556 
2,229 
 
 
2,598 
2,611 
CapEx 
 
638 
807 
 
 
1,327 
1,282 
 
 
285 
310 
 
 
143 
195 
 
 
237 
235 
Key Brands 
Tide, Ariel,  
Downy, Lenor 
 
Pampers, Always 
Charmin, Bounty 
 
Pantene, Olay, 
Covergirl, SK-II 
 
Vics, Actonel 
 
Folgers, Pringles,
Jiff, Crisco 
Source: Procter & Gamble, 2000 Annual Report (Cincinnati: Procter & Gamble, 2000), p. 40, http://www.pg.com/investors/annualreports.jhtml, accessed March 2006. 
Note: All numbers in Millions of 2000 U.S. dollars. The difference between GBU totals and the corporate is attributable to corporate eliminations, or corporate level assets.  
† Fabric and Home Care includes Laundry Division. 
Exhibit 9
 P&G Regional Sales/Profit Breakdowns, 2000 Fiscal Year
Exhibit 10
P&G Organic Volume and Sales Growth, 1998-2000 Fiscal Years 
 
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
70%
North America
Europe, Middle East,
Africa
Asia
Latin America
Sales
Profits
  
Source: 
Procter & Gamble, 2000 Annual Report (Cincinnati: Procter & Gamble, 2000), 
http://www.pg.com/investors/annualreports.jhtml, accessed March 2006 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Source: 
Casewriters’ calculations. Excludes acquisitions, divestitures and currency effects. 
0%
1%
2%
3%
4%
5%
6%
1998
1999
2000
Organic Sales Growth
Organic Volume Growth
For the exclusive use of Y. Gu, 2023.
This document is authorized for use only by Yanshan Gu in Business 101    2023 Fall taught by GUO Yidi, Tsinghua University from Sep 2023 to Mar 2024.


Procter & Gamble: Organization 2005 (A) 
707-519 
19 
Exhibit 11
Financial Comparisons with Key Competitors 
2000 Fiscal Year Income Statement (In Millions of 2000 Dollars) 
 
Unilever
Colgate
Kimberly-Clark 
L’Oreal
Net Sales 
44,254
9,358
13,982 
11,709
Cost of Goods Sold 
4,000
7,607 
Gross Profit 
5,358
6,375 
SG&A 
3,300
3,113
Operating Income 
2,058
3,262 
1,780
Depreciation 
338
673
356
Operating Profit 
2,981
1,720
2,589 
1,424
Net Interest Expense 
204
243 
101
Other Non-Operating Inc (Exp) 
73
275 
-100
Special Items 
9
1 
0
Pre-Tax Earnings 
2,396
1,598
2,622 
1,223
Income Tax Expense 
503
759 
451
Minority Interest 
33
63 
Earnings from Cont. Ops. 
1,017
1,062
1,800 
954
2000 Fiscal Year Supplemental Items 
 
Unilever
Colgate
Kimberly-Clark 
L’Oreal
Advertising Expense 
6,144
551
349 
ND
 R&D Expense 
1,114
176
277 
360
Capital Expenditures 
1,249
367
1,170 
444
 
 
Employees 
261,000
38,300
66,300 
48,200
Average Rates of Growth, 1999 and 2000 Fiscal Years 
 
Unilever
Colgate
Kimberly-Clark 
L’Oreal
Sales Growth 
2%
7%
10% 
13%
Volume Growth 
2%
6%
9% 
ND
Source: 
Procter & Gamble Annual Reports. 
 
For the exclusive use of Y. Gu, 2023.
This document is authorized for use only by Yanshan Gu in Business 101    2023 Fall taught by GUO Yidi, Tsinghua University from Sep 2023 to Mar 2024.


707-519 
Procter & Gamble: Organization 2005 (A) 
20 
Appendix:  Selected Competitors of P&G 
Unilever 
Unilever was founded in 1930 through a merger of a Dutch margarine company Margarine Unie 
with British soap company Lever Brothers. In 2000 Unilever generated $44 billion in revenues and 
employed 261,000 people, making it the second-largest consumer products company, after $50bn 
Nestlé.  Fifty percent of Unilever’s sales came from foods, 22 percent from home care and 26 percent 
from personal care.37  Unilever managed 1600 brands, with a quarter of them generating 91 percent of 
revenue.38  Unilever’s products were extremely diverse, including Lipton tea, Ben & Jerry’s ice cream, 
Calvin Klein fragrances, Dove personal cleansers, Axe deodorants, I Can’t Believe It’s Not Butter 
margarine, Slim-Fast diet foods, Q-Tips, Domestos toilet cleaner, and Vaseline petroleum jelly.  Unilever 
was one of the most diversified consumer-products companies – largely by acquiring hundreds of 
small to medium-sized local companies.  Unilever wanted to expand its share of revenues from 
developing countries from 33 percent to 50 percent by 2010.  Unilever considered itself a “truly 
multilocal multinational,” and utilized a highly decentralized organizational structure in which 
geographic organizations bore sole responsibility for financial performance and full control over 
resource allocation across brands and product categories.39 Functional organizations such as 
manufacturing, R&D, marketing, and sales were managed regionally, and often by country, for 
maximum responsiveness to local needs. 
In February 2000 Unilever announced a restructuring plan -- Path to Growth -- aimed at annual 
sales growth of 5 percent and operating margins of 15 percent within four years.  The 1200 brands 
that together generated only 9 percent of revenue were to be eliminated, as were 25,000 jobs and a 
quarter of manufacturing plants.  The remaining brands would receive additional  $400 million in 
advertising and promotional spend in addition to $320 million that would otherwise go to the 
marginal brands.  Supply-chain information-technology systems would be standardized and 
improved to optimize this new fully integrated network of manufacturing plants and distribution 
facilities.  Purchasing was to be further automated and centralized to reduce costs.  The program was 
expected to cost $3.2 billion through 2004, including asset writedowns.  To align management with 
the new growth targets, performance-based pay would increase from 40 percent to 100 percent of 
base pay.  Once this first-stage streamlining of brands and supply-chain systems was completed, 
further reduction in overheads would become possible through significant business simplification. 
Beginning in 2004, some financial processes would be consolidated into a small number of shared 
service centers around the world.40  
To aid the new plan, Unilever unveiled its new organizational structure in April 2000.  Each 
regional organization would be split into two divisions: foods and home and personal care (HPC).  
Each division would possess its own sales, marketing, and regional innovation functions.  Regional 
presidents would retain profit responsibility but would manage the two divisions as separate entities.   
In pursuit of a more global focus on products and brands, each regional president would serve on 
either a foods or an HPC executive committee.  Each executive committee would be chaired by a 
divisional director whose compensation would be based on global divisional performance. The R&D 
and supply-chain functions would then be globally consolidated by product division.  This 
arrangement would allow the individual foods and HPC supply chains to develop platform 
manufacturing and distribution solutions across regions. Large global technical centers would focus 
on core technologies that would ultimately be adapted regionally in smaller regional innovation 
centers.41  Just as Path to Growth got under way, Unilever made its largest-ever acquisition, 
Bestfoods,  for $24.4 billion, bringing the large global brands Hellmann’s and Knorr into the fold 
along with an array of U.S. favorites like Skippy peanut butter and Mazola cooking oil.   
For the exclusive use of Y. Gu, 2023.
This document is authorized for use only by Yanshan Gu in Business 101    2023 Fall taught by GUO Yidi, Tsinghua University from Sep 2023 to Mar 2024.


Procter & Gamble: Organization 2005 (A) 
707-519 
21 
Colgate-Palmolive 
In 2000 Colgate-Palmolive (CP) generated $9.4 billion in revenues and employed 38,000 people.  
Since 1990, revenues had been growing at 5 percent compound rate, while net profits soared at 13 
percent per annum.  Seventy-five percent of Colgate’s sales came from roughly 25 global brands, with 
Colgate toothpaste being a multibillion-dollar brand in its own right.  CP enjoyed global share 
leadership in oral care, where its namesake dentifrice brand had literally become the word for 
toothpaste in many languages.  Colgate also had an almost 40 percent share of the global 
dishwashing-liquid market and a leadership share in the global high-end pet-nutrition market. Oral 
care, personal care, and pet nutrition had rapidly grown share in the preceding five years.42 
CP managed its business through four regional reporting subsidiaries.  Each subsidiary had two 
product-category divisions: oral/personal/household care and pet nutrition.  In a matrix reporting 
structure similar to P&G’s, general managers of regions were balanced by heads of product-category 
divisions.  R&D was an almost purely corporate function, with major global technical centers 
delivering platform technologies to be commercialized around the world.  Manufacturing used large 
regional focused factories, purchasing was being centralized regionally, and SAP already ran 80 
percent of Colgate’s systems worldwide.43 
Kimberly-Clark 
Kimberly-Clark (KC), the world’s largest tissue manufacturer, focused its $14-billion, 64,000-
employee business almost entirely on paper products. Fifty-five percent of sales came from North 
America, 15 percent from Europe, and 30 percent from the rest of the world.  KC had the highest 
operating margin of any paper company (nearly 18 percent, versus the second-highest, P&G Paper, at 
just over 12 percent).44  Kleenex and Huggies were global billion-dollar brands, and KC had number-
one or number-two market share in over 80 countries.  Huggies had surpassed the category creator, 
Pampers, in the United States in 1992 and currently held a commanding 15 percent share 
advantage.45  KC had averaged 6–8 percent sales growth and double-digit earnings growth for 15 
years.46  In Europe, KC was in the process of shifting from a country-based sales force to a customer-
based sales force; each of KC’s 32 main customers was assigned a dedicated sales force.47   
L’Oreal 
L’Oreal was the largest beauty company in the world in 2000, with sales of $12.8 billion in 150 
countries and 48,000 employees.  L’Oreal’s sales were concentrated primarily in 15 global brands. The 
L’Oreal brand alone had global sales of over $4 billion; the largest luxury brand, Lancôme, had global 
sales of nearly $2 billion.  Excluding changes in financial reporting, L’Oreal’s sales had increased by 
over 150 percent since 1996, largely through acquisition and rapid globalization of strong local 
brands.48 L’Oreal managed its business by distribution channel and geography.   Brands were 
typically slotted into one of the following divisions: consumer (grocery, pharmacy, and mass 
discounter), luxury (department-store counters, specialty retail, or L’Oreal-owned retail stores), 
professional (salons), and active cosmetics (dermatologists).  Global brand teams were based on the 
brand’s continent of origin, along with dedicated R&D resources.  These teams developed the global 
“brand key,” or essence of the brand, along with formulations, packaging, and strategy.  Regional 
brand teams negotiated with global brand teams to fine-tune execution locally.  Interestingly, brands 
were managed as if they were separate businesses; cooperation was minimal, even within categories.  
This approach was meant to engender competition and to maintain distinctive offerings.  L’Oreal 
prided itself on its R&D capabilities, spending 3 percent of sales on R&D in 2000.   
For the exclusive use of Y. Gu, 2023.
This document is authorized for use only by Yanshan Gu in Business 101    2023 Fall taught by GUO Yidi, Tsinghua University from Sep 2023 to Mar 2024.


707-519 
Procter & Gamble: Organization 2005 (A) 
22 
Endnotes 
 
1 Katrina Brooker, “P&G’s Un-CEO,” Fortune, September 16, 2002, http://faculty.msb.edu/homak/ 
HomaHelpSite/WebHelp/P&G_s_Un-CEO_Fortune_9-16-02.htm, accessed May 2005. 
2 Jim Gingrich, The P&G Train Has Left the Station—Is It Too Late to Hop On?  Sanford C. Bernstein & 
Company, October 9, 2000. 
3 
Procter 
& 
Gamble, 
“A 
Company 
History, 
1837–Today,” 
Procter 
& 
Gamble 
Web 
site, 
www.pg.com/translations/history_pdf/english_history.pdf, accessed April 2006. 
4 “Why Pigs?” Big Pig Gig Website, http://www.bigpiggig.com/contact/news/news.php?id=31, accessed 
March 2005. 
5 Davis Dyer, Fredrick Dalzell, and Rowena Olegario, Rising Tide (Boston, MA: Harvard Business School 
Press, 2004), p. 18. 
6 Procter & Gamble, “A Company History, 1837–Today.” 
7 Ibid. 
8 Ibid. 
9 Procter & Gamble, 1999 Annual Report (Cincinnati: Procter & Gamble, 1999), pp. 5–6. 
10 Procter & Gamble, “A Company History, 1837–Today.” 
11 Dyer, Dalzell, and Olegario, Rising Tide, pp. 68–73. 
12 Procter & Gamble, “A Company History, 1837–Today.”  
13 Dyer, Dalzell, and Olegario, Rising Tide, p. 198. 
14 Patrick Larkin, “P&G Plan: Sweeping Changes,” The Cincinnati Post, September 10, 1998, 
http://www.cincypost.com/business/1998/pg091098.html, accessed August 2005. 
15 Christopher A. Bartlett, “P&G Japan: The SK-II Globalization Project,” HBS No. 303-003 (Boston: Harvard 
Business School Publishing, 2004), p. 2. 
16 Ibid., p. 2. 
17 A.V. Vedpuriswar, “Procter & Gamble,” http://www.vedpuriswar.org/book/Procter%20&%20 
Gamble.htm, accessed June 2005.  
18 Ibid., p. 2. 
19 Ibid., p. 293. 
20 Ibid., p. 289. 
21 Andrew McQulling, Procter & Gamble, UBS Warburg, July 28, 2000. 
22 Ibid. 
23 Ibid. 
24 Patrick Larkin, “P&G Plan: Sweeping Changes,” The Cincinnati Post, September 10, 1998, 
http://www.cincypost.com/business/1998/pg091098.html, accessed August 2005. 
25 Bartlett, “P&G Japan: The SK-II Globalization Project,” p. 6. 
 
For the exclusive use of Y. Gu, 2023.
This document is authorized for use only by Yanshan Gu in Business 101    2023 Fall taught by GUO Yidi, Tsinghua University from Sep 2023 to Mar 2024.


Procter & Gamble: Organization 2005 (A) 
707-519 
23 
 
26 Procter & Gamble, “Linking Opportunity with Responsibility Sustainability Report,” Procter & Gamble 
Web site, www.pg.com/translations/sustainability_pdf/english_sustainability.pdf, accessed October 2005.  
27 Bartlett, “P&G Japan: The SK-II Globalization Project,” p. 5. 
28 Ibid., p. 5. 
29 Larkin, “P&G Plan: Sweeping Changes.”  
30 Garth Alexander, “P&G Gambles on Shake-up to Beat Crisis,” The Sunday Times, September 18, 1998. 
31 Kevin Max, “Procter & Gamble Gets Slammed After Earnings Warning,” The Street.com Web site, March 
7, 2000, http://www.thestreet.com/pf/brknews/consumer/896216.html, accessed April 2006. 
32 Chris Isidore and Martha Slud, “P&G Warning Hurts Dow,” CNN Money Web site, March 7, 2000, 
http://money.cnn.com/2000/03/07/companies/procter, accessed April 2006. 
33 “P&G Earnings Tumble,” CNN Money Web site, http://money.cnn.com/2000/04/25/companies/ 
procter/, accessed April 2006. 
34 Ibid. 
35 Robert Berner, “What’s Driving P&G’s Executive Spin Cycle?” BusinessWeek Online, http://www. 
businessweek.com/bwdaily/dnflash/june2000/nf00608h.htm, accessed April 2006. 
36 “P&G CEO Quits Amid Woes,” CNN Money Web site, http://money.cnn.com/2000/06/08/ 
companies/procter/, accessed April 2006. 
37 
Unilever, 
“Charts 
1995–2005,” 
Unilever 
Web 
site, 
http://www.unilever.com/ourcompany/ 
investorcentre/financial_reports/charts_1995.asp, accessed April 2006. 
38 Andrew Lorenz, “Unilever Crosses the Rubicon,” The Sunday Times, February 7, 2000. 
39 Unilever, “Unilever’s Approach to Corporate Responsibility,” Unilever Web Site, http://www. 
unilever.com/Images/2001%20Social%20Review%20of%202000%20Data_tcm13-5331.pdf, accessed May 2006. 
40 
Unilever, 
“Unilever 
Plans 
for 
Faster 
Growth,” 
Unilever 
Web 
site, 
http://www. 
unilever.com/ourcompany/newsandmedia/pressreleases/2000/growth.asp, accessed May 2006. 
41 Unilever, “Realignment of Senior Management Structure at Unilever,” Unilever Web site, http://www. 
unilever.com/ourcompany/newsandmedia/pressreleases/2000/management.asp, accessed May 2006. 
42 Colgate-Palmolive Company, 2000 Annual Report (New York: Colgate-Palmolive Company, 1999), 
http://investor.colgate.com/annual/annual.cfm, accessed April 2006. 
43 Ibid. 
44 Andrew Shore, Kimberly-Clark Corporation: Cry no More, Deutsche Bank, February 2, 2004. 
45 Ibid. 
46 Kimberly-Clark Company, 2001 Annual Report (Dallas: Kimberly-Clark, 2001), pp. 1–30. 
47 Ibid., p. 13. 
48 L’Oreal SA, 2000 Annual Report (Paris: L’Oreal SA, 2000), pp. 1–19. 
For the exclusive use of Y. Gu, 2023.
This document is authorized for use only by Yanshan Gu in Business 101    2023 Fall taught by GUO Yidi, Tsinghua University from Sep 2023 to Mar 2024.


 
_______
 
Dr. Rich
Harvard
manage
serve as
 
Copyrig
800-545-
not be d
E .  T A T
R I C H A
 
Ho
 
So
1948. 
tempe
secon
subse
forma
denie
assem
Com
Po
produ
amon
mana
So
restor
comm
somew
no pr
mean
Lackin
packa
          
1 Sakiy
2 Interv
3 Sakiy
Sakiya,
4 Sakiy
5 Sakiy
6 Sakiy
_______________
hard T. Pascale of 
d Business School. I
ment team that fou
s endorsements, sou
ght © 1983, 1989, 2
-7685, write Harva
digitized, photocop
U M  C H R I S T I A N
R D  T .  P A S C A L E
onda (B
oichiro Honda
His exploits
erament and 
nd-story wind
equently plac
al presentatio
d),4 hit a wo
mble a motorc
mpany Bac
ostwar Japan 
ucing clip-on
ng these, but 
agerial, nor tec
oichiro Honda
red and the 
mitment, he e
what mislead
ractical mean
ns of livelihoo
ng marketing
aged a motorc
                       
ya, Tetsuo. “The S
views with Hond
ya, Tetsuo. Honda
, “Honda’s Foun
ya, “Honda’s Fou
ya, Honda Motor, p
ya, “Honda’s Fou
_______________
Stanford Graduate
It is based largely o
unded Honda of A
urces of primary da
011 President and 
ard Business Schoo
ied, or otherwise re
S E N  
 
B) 
a, an inventiv
s have receiv
bouts of ‘‘ph
dow,2 climbed
ed the teeth 
n to Honda’s
orker on the 
ycle engine.6 
ckground 
was in desp
 engines that
his prior exp
chnical basis 
a viewed “te
world made
stablished th
ding, since the
ns of support
od, he purch
g know-how,
cycle convers
                       
Story of Honda’s
da executives, To
a Motor: The Men
nders,” Series #4. 
unders,” Series #7
p. 72. 
unders,” Series #2
_______________
e School of Busine
on internal Honda 
America. HBS cases
ata, or illustrations 
Fellows of Harvar
ol Publishing, Bosto
eproduced, posted,
ve genius with
ved wide cov
hilandering,’’
d inside a sep
in his own 
s bankers requ
head with a
erate need of
t converted b
perience as a
for a viable en
echnology” a
e a better p
e Honda Tec
e organization
t. Under this 
hased 500 wa
, he entered 
sion kit for bi
  
 
s Founders,” Asa
okyo, Japan, July 
n, The Managemen
7 and #8. 
2. 
 
________________
ess wrote this case
sources and interv
s are developed so
of effective or inef
rd College.  To ord
on, MA 02163, or g
, or transmitted, wi
h a legendary
verage in the
1 he is variou
ptic tank to r
mouth),3 app
uesting financ
a wrench,5 an
f transportati
bicycles into 
n automotive
nterprise. 
s the vehicle
lace in whic
hnical Resear
n was compo
organization
ar surplus en
into an exclu
cycles. The H
hi Evening News,
1980. 
nt, The Machines,
_______________
e with the collabor
views with founder
olely as the basis fo
ffective managemen
der copies or reque
go to www.hbsp.h
ithout the permissi
y ego, founded
e Japanese pr
usly reported
retrieve a visi
peared inebri
cing vital to th
nd stripped 
ion. Motorcy
makeshift “m
e repairman 
e through wh
ch to live. R
rch Institute i
osed of himse
nal umbrella,
ngines and re
usive arrange
Honda Motor 
, June 1-August 2
, Kadonsha Inter
R
_______________
ration of Professor 
s of Honda Motor 
or class discussion. 
nt. 
est permission to re
arvard.edu/educat
ion of Harvard Bus
d the Honda 
ress. Known 
d to have toss
iting supplier
iated and in 
he firm’s surv
naked before
cle manufact
mopeds.” So
provided nei
hich Japanese
Reflecting the
in 1946. The 
elf and a few a
, he began to
etrofitted them
ement with a
Company wa
29, 1979, Series #
rnational. Tokyo,
9-384-
R E V :  M A R C H  1 6
________________
E. Tatum Christia
Co., Ltd., and the J
Cases are not inte
eproduce materials
tors. This publicati
siness School. 
Motor Co., Lt
for his mer
sed a geisha 
r’s false teeth
costume bef
vival (the loan
e his enginee
turers prolifer
ichiro Honda
ither the fina
e society cou
e intensity o
term institute
associates and
o tinker, and
m for bicycle
a distributor,
as formed. Fu
2 and #3. 
, Japan, 1982, p 6
-050
6 ,  2 0 1 1  
______ 
ansen of 
Japanese 
ended to 
s, call 1-
ion may 
td., in 
curial 
out a 
h (and 
fore a 
n was 
ers to 
rated, 
a was 
ancial, 
uld be 
f this 
e was 
d had 
, as a 
e use. 
, who 
urther 
69; also 
For the exclusive use of Y. Gu, 2023.
This document is authorized for use only by Yanshan Gu in Business 101    2023 Fall taught by GUO Yidi, Tsinghua University from Sep 2023 to Mar 2024.


384-050 
Honda (B) 
2 
tinkering led, in turn, to the introduction of the “A-design”—a 2-stroke, 50cc engine. The engine had 
numerous defects, and sales did not materialize. Scraping by on occasional orders, the company lost 
money in 1947 and grossed $55,000 in 1948. 
In 1949, Soichiro Honda turned to friends. Raising $3,800, he developed and introduced the 2-
stroke, D-type engine. This engine, generating 3 hp, was more reliable than most on the market and 
enjoyed a brief spurt of popularity. Recruiting a work force of 70 employees, Honda produced 
engines one at a time and approached an annualized production rate of 100 units per month by the 
end of 1949. 
Success was short-lived, however. Honda’s exclusive distributor elected to artificially limit sales to 
80 units per month in order to maintain high margins. Soichiro Honda was irate and vowed to avoid 
such dependencies in the future. In late 1949 he set out to raise additional financing but suffered a 
second setback when competitors leapfrogged the 2-stroke design and introduced quieter and more 
powerful 4-stroke engines. 
A classic dilemma now faced the struggling enterprise. Honda’s engine was obsolete, and his 
distribution system held him at ransom. Without additional financing he could not correct these 
deficiencies, and banks and investors did not regard him as a sound management risk. 
In late 1949, an intermediary urged him to accept a partner—Takeo Fujisawa. Fujisawa was 
prepared to invest 2 million yen (about $7,500). More important, Fujisawa brought financial expertise 
and marketing strengths. 
Despite Fujisawa’s presence, the firm continued to falter. No further capital could be raised in 
1950. Fujisawa pressed his partner to quit tinkering with his noisy 2-stroke engine and join the 
industry leaders with a 4-stroke design, since it was clear that competition had threatened Honda 
with extinction. At first too proud to accept this counsel, in 1951 he unexpectedly unveiled a 
breakthrough design that doubled horsepower over competitive 4-stroke engines. With this 
innovation, the firm was off and putting, and by 1952 demand was brisk.7 
Honda’s superior 4-stroke engine enabled Fujisawa to raise $88,000 in 1952. With these funds, 
Fujisawa committed to reduce dependency on suppliers and distributors by becoming a full-scale 
motorcycle manufacturer. To forestall technological obsolescence, he encouraged Honda to stay 
abreast of technological developments. He also sought more flexible channels of distribution. 
Unfortunately, Honda was a relatively late entrant; the best Fujisawa could do was to arrange for 
several distributors to carry Honda as a secondary line. He compensated for weak product 
positioning by going directly to the consumer with advertising. 
In late 1952 a sewing machine plant was purchased and converted to a crude motorcycle factory. 
Neither partner had managerial or manufacturing experience, and there was no real plan other than 
to work as long as necessary each day to keep up with orders. Honda’s more powerful engine and 
superior stamped motorcycle frame created considerable interest, and demand remained strong. 
Employment leaped from 150 in 1951 to 1,337 by the end of 1952. Honda integrated into the 
production of chains, sprockets, and motorcycle frames. Altogether, these factors greatly complicated 
the management task. There were no standardized drawings, procedures, or tools. For several years 
the plant was, in effect, a collection of semi-independent “activities” sharing the same roof. 
Nonetheless, by the beginning of 1959 Honda had become a significant participant in the industry, 
with 23% market share (see Exhibit 1). 
                                                          
 
7 Sakiya, Honda Motor, pp. 71–72. 
For the exclusive use of Y. Gu, 2023.
This document is authorized for use only by Yanshan Gu in Business 101    2023 Fall taught by GUO Yidi, Tsinghua University from Sep 2023 to Mar 2024.


Honda (B) 
384-050 
3 
Honda’s successful 4-stroke engine eased the pressures on Fujisawa by increasing sales and 
providing easier access to financing. For Soichiro Honda, the higher-horsepower engine opened the 
possibility of pursuing one of his central ambitions in life: to build and to race a high-performance, 
special-purpose motorcycle—and win. Winning provided the ultimate confirmation of his design 
abilities. Racing success in Japan came quickly. As a result, in 1959 he raised his sights to the 
international arena and committed the firm to winning at Great Britain’s Isle of Man—the 
“Olympics” of motorcycle racing.8 Again, Honda’s inventive genius was called into play. Shifting 
most of the firm’s resources into this racing effort, he embarked on studies of combustion that 
resulted in a new configuration of the combustion chamber, which doubled horsepower and halved 
weight. Honda leapfrogged past European and American competitors—winning in one class, then 
another, winning the Isle of Man manufacturer’s prize in 1959, and sweeping the first five positions 
by 1961.9 
Throughout the 1950s, Fujisawa sought to turn his partner’s attention from enthusiasm with 
racing to the more mundane requirements of running an enterprise. By 1956, as the innovations 
gained from racing had begun to pay off in vastly more efficient engines, Fujisawa pressed Honda to 
adapt this technology for a commercial motorcycle.10 He had a particular segment in mind. Most 
motorcyclists in Japan were male, and the machines were used primarily as an alternative form of 
transportation to trains and buses. However, a vast number of small commercial establishments in 
Japan still delivered goods and ran errands on bicycles. Trains and buses were inconvenient for these 
activities. The purse strings of these small enterprises were controlled by the Japanese wife—who 
resisted buying conventional motorcycles because they were expensive, dangerous, and hard to 
handle. Fujisawa challenged his partner: Can you use what you’ve learned from racing to come up 
with an inexpensive, safe-looking motorcycle that can be driven with one hand (to enable carrying 
packages)?11 
The First Breakthrough 
In 1958 the Honda 50cc Supercub was introduced—with an automatic clutch, 3-speed 
transmission, automatic starter, and the safe, friendly look of a bicycle (without the stigma of the 
outmoded mopeds). As a rule of thumb, a 50cc engine is 50% cheaper to make than a 100cc engine. 
Achieving high horsepower with a small engine thereby reaps automatic cost savings—making the 
new bike affordable. Innovative design provided a cost advantage without requiring Honda to 
manufacture more efficiently than its competitors. (This was fortunate since the firm, having 
expanded into three plants in the 1950s, had still not achieved a well-integrated production process.) 
Overnight, Honda was overwhelmed with Supercub orders. Demand was met through makeshift, 
high-cost, company-owned assembly and farmed-out assembly through subcontractors.12 By the end 
of 1959 Honda had skyrocketed into first place among Japanese motorcycle manufacturers. Of its 
total sales that year of 285,000 units, 168,000 were Supercubs.13 The time seemed appropriate to build 
an automated plant with a 30,000-unit-per-month capacity. “It wasn’t a speculative investment,” 
                                                          
 
8 Sakiya, “Honda’s Founders,” Series #11. 
9 Ibid. 
10 Ibid., Series #13; also Sakiya, Honda Motor, p. 117. 
11 Sakiya, “Honda’s Founders,” Series #11. 
12 Pascale, Richard T., Interviews with Honda executives, Tokyo, Japan, September 10, 1982. 
13 Data provided by Honda Motor Company. 
For the exclusive use of Y. Gu, 2023.
This document is authorized for use only by Yanshan Gu in Business 101    2023 Fall taught by GUO Yidi, Tsinghua University from Sep 2023 to Mar 2024.


384-050 
Honda (B) 
4 
recalls one executive. “We had the proprietary technology, we had the market, and the demand was 
enormous.”14 The plant was completed in mid-1960. 
Distribution Channels 
Fujisawa utilized the Supercub to restructure Honda’s channels of distribution. For many years, 
Honda had rankled under the two-tier distribution system that prevailed in the industry. As noted 
earlier, these problems had been exacerbated by Honda’s being carried as a secondary line by 
distributors whose loyalties lay with older, established manufacturers. Further weakening Honda’s 
leverage, all manufacturer sales were on a consignment basis. 
Fujisawa had characterized the Supercub to Honda’s distributors as “something much more like a 
bicycle than a motorcycle.” The traditional channels, to their later regret, agreed. Under amicable 
terms, Fujisawa began selling the Supercub directly to retailers—and primarily through bicycle 
shops. Since these shops were small and numerous (approximately 12,000 in Japan), sales on 
consignment were unthinkable. A cash-on-delivery system was installed—giving Honda significantly 
more leverage over its dealerships than the other motorcycle manufacturers enjoyed.15 
Honda Enters U.S. Market 
Soichiro Honda’s racing conquests in the late 1950s had given substance to his convictions about 
his abilities. Success fueled his appetite for new and different challenges. Explosive sales of the 
Supercub in Japan provided the financial base for new quests. The stage was now set for the 
exploration of the U.S. market. 
From the Japanese vantage point, the American market was vast, untapped, and affluent. “We 
turned toward the United States by a process of deduction,” states one executive. “Our experiments 
with local Southeast Asian markets in 1957 and 1958 had little success. With little disposable income 
and poor roads, total Asian exports had reached a meager 1,000 units in 1958.16 The European 
market, while larger, was heavily dominated by its own name-brand manufacturers, and the popular 
mopeds dominated the low-price, low-horsepower end.” 
Two Honda executives—the designated president of American Honda Motor Company, 
Kihachiro Kawashima, and his assistant—arrived in the United States in late 1958. Their itinerary: 
San Francisco, Los Angeles, Dallas, New York, and Columbus. Kihachiro Kawashima recounts his 
impressions:17 
My first reaction after traveling across the United States was “How could we have been so 
stupid to start a war with such a vast and wealthy country!” My second reaction was 
discomfort. I spoke poor English. We dropped in on motorcycle dealers who treated us 
discourteously and, in addition, gave the general impression of being motorcycle enthusiasts 
who, secondarily, were in business. There were only 3,000 motorcycle dealers in the United 
States at the time, and only 1,000 of them were open five days a week. The remainder were 
open on nights and on weekends. Inventory was poor, manufacturers sold motorcycles to 
                                                          
 
14 Pascale interviews. 
15 Ibid. 
16 Ibid. 
17 Ibid. 
For the exclusive use of Y. Gu, 2023.
This document is authorized for use only by Yanshan Gu in Business 101    2023 Fall taught by GUO Yidi, Tsinghua University from Sep 2023 to Mar 2024.


Honda (B) 
384-050 
5 
dealers on consignment, the retailers provided consumer financing, and after-sale service was 
poor. It was discouraging. 
My other impression was that everyone in the United States drove an automobile—making 
it doubtful that motorcycles could ever do very well in the market. However, with 450,000 
motorcycle registrations in the United States and 60,000 motorcycles imported from Europe 
each year it didn’t seem unreasonable to shoot for 10% of the import market. I returned to 
Japan with that report. 
In truth, we had no strategy other than the idea of seeing if we could sell something in the 
United States. It was a new frontier, a new challenge, and it fit the “success against all odds” 
culture that Mr. Honda had cultivated: I reported my impressions to Fujisawa—including the 
seat-of-the-pants target of trying, over several years, to attain a 10% share of the U.S. imports. 
He didn’t probe that target quantitatively. We did not discuss profits or deadlines for 
breakeven. Fujisawa told me if anyone could succeed, I could, and authorized $1 million for 
the venture. 
The next hurdle was to obtain a currency allocation from the Ministry of Finance. They 
were extraordinarily skeptical. Toyota had launched the Toyopet in the United States in 1958 
and had failed miserably. “How could Honda succeed?” they asked. Months went by. We put 
the project on hold. Suddenly, five months after our application, we were given the go-ahead—
but at only a fraction of our expected level of commitment. “You can invest $250,000 in the U.S. 
market,” they said, “but only $110,000 in cash.” The remainder of our assets had to be in parts 
and motorcycle inventory. 
We moved into frantic activity as the government, hoping we would give up on the idea, 
continued to hold us to the July 1959 start-up timetable. Our focus, as mentioned earlier, was to 
compete with the European exports. We knew our products at the time were good, but not far 
superior. Mr. Honda was especially confident of the 250cc and the 305cc machines. The shape 
of the handlebar on these larger machines looked like the eyebrow of Buddha, which he felt 
was a strong selling point. Thus, after some discussion and with no compelling criteria for 
selection, we configured our start-up inventory with 25% of each of our four products—the 
50cc Supercub and the 125cc, 250cc, and 305cc machines. In dollar-value terms, of course, the 
inventory was heavily weighted toward the larger bikes. 
The stringent monetary controls of the Japanese government together with the unfriendly 
reception we had received during our 1958 visit caused us to start small. We chose Los Angeles 
where there was a large second- and third-generation Japanese community, a climate suitable 
for motorcycle use, and a growing population. We were so strapped for cash that the three of 
us shared a furnished apartment that rented for $80 per month. Two of us slept on the floor. 
We obtained a warehouse in a run-down section of the city and waited for the ship to arrive. 
Not daring to spare our funds for equipment, the three of us stacked the motorcycle crates 
three-high, by hand; swept the floor; and built and maintained the parts bin. 
We were entirely in the dark the first year. We were not aware that the motorcycle business 
in the United States occurs during a seasonable April-to-August window—and that our timing 
coincided with the closing of the 1959 season. Our hard-learned experiences with 
distributorship in Japan convinced us to try to go to the retailers direct. We ran ads in the 
motorcycle trade magazine for dealers. A few responded. By spring 1960, we had 40 dealers 
and some of our inventory in their stores— mostly larger bikes. A few of the 250cc and 305cc 
bikes began to sell. Then disaster struck. 
For the exclusive use of Y. Gu, 2023.
This document is authorized for use only by Yanshan Gu in Business 101    2023 Fall taught by GUO Yidi, Tsinghua University from Sep 2023 to Mar 2024.


384-050 
Honda (B) 
6 
By the first week of April 1960, reports were coming in that our machines were leaking oil 
and encountering clutch failure. This was our lowest moment. Honda’s fragile reputation was 
being destroyed before it could be established. As it turned out, motorcycles in the United 
States are driven much farther and much faster than in Japan. We dug deeply into our precious 
cash reserves to air freight our motorcycles to the Honda testing lab in Japan. Throughout the 
dark month of April, Pan Am was the only enterprise in the United States that was nice to us. 
Our testing lab worked 24-hour days bench testing the bikes to try to replicate the failure. 
Within a month, a redesigned head gasket and clutch spring solved the problem. In the 
meantime, events had taken a surprising turn. 
Throughout our first eight months, following Mr. Honda’s and our own instincts, we had 
not attempted to move the 50cc Supercubs. While they were a smash success in Japan (and 
manufacturing couldn’t keep up with demand there), they seemed wholly unsuitable for the 
U.S. market where everything was bigger and more luxurious. As a clincher, we had our sights 
on the import market—and the Europeans, like the American manufacturers, emphasized the 
larger machines. 
We used the Honda 50s ourselves to ride around Los Angeles on errands. They attracted a 
lot of attention. One day we had a call from a Sears buyer. While persisting in our refusal to 
sell through an intermediary, we took note of Sears’s interest. But we still hesitated to push the 
50cc bikes out of fear they might harm our image in a heavily macho market. But when the 
larger bikes started breaking, we had no choice. We let the 50cc bikes move. And surprisingly, 
the retailers who wanted to sell them weren’t motorcycle dealers; they were sporting goods 
stores. 
The excitement created by Honda Supercub began to gain momentum. Under restrictions 
from the Japanese government, we were still on a cash basis. Working with our initial cash and 
inventory, we sold machines, reinvested in inventory, and sunk the profits into additional 
inventory and advertising. Our advertising tried to straddle the market. While retailers 
continued to inform us that our Supercub customers were normal everyday Americans, we 
hesitated to target toward this segment out of fear of alienating the high-margin end of our 
business—sold through the traditional motorcycle dealers to a more traditional “black leather 
jacket” customer. 
An Advertising Twist 
As late as 1963, Honda was still working with its original Los Angeles advertising agency, its ad 
campaigns straddling all customers so as not to antagonize one market in pursuit of another. 
In the spring of 1963, while fulfilling a routine class assignment, an undergraduate advertising 
major at UCLA submitted an ad campaign for Honda. Its theme was “You Meet the Nicest People On 
a Honda.” Encouraged by his instructor, the student passed his work on to a friend at Grey 
Advertising. Grey had been soliciting the Honda account—which, with a $5-million-a-year budget, 
was becoming an attractive potential client. Grey purchased the student’s idea—on a tightly kept 
nondisclosure basis. Grey attempted to sell the idea to Honda.18 
Interestingly, the Honda management team, which by 1963 had grown to five Japanese executives, 
was badly split on this advertising decision. The president and treasurer favored another proposal 
from another agency. The director of sales, however, felt strongly that the Nicest People campaign 
                                                          
 
18 Ibid. 
For the exclusive use of Y. Gu, 2023.
This document is authorized for use only by Yanshan Gu in Business 101    2023 Fall taught by GUO Yidi, Tsinghua University from Sep 2023 to Mar 2024.


Honda (B) 
384-050 
7 
was the right one—and his commitment eventually held sway. Thus, in 1963, Honda adopted a 
strategy that directly identified and targeted that large, untapped segment of the marketplace that 
was to become inseparable from the Honda legend.19 
The Nicest People campaign drove Honda’s U.S. sales at an even greater rate. By 1964 nearly one 
out of every two motorcycles sold was a Honda. As a result of the influx of medium-income leisure-
class consumers, banks and other consumer credit companies began to finance motorcycles—shifting 
away from dealer credit, which had been the traditional purchasing mechanism available. Honda, 
seizing the opportunity of soaring demand for its products, took a courageous and seemingly risky 
position. Late in 1964 it announced that thereafter, it would cease to ship on a consignment basis but 
would require cash on delivery. Honda braced itself for a revolt that never materialized. While nearly 
every dealer questioned, appealed, or complained, none relinquished the Honda franchise. In one fell 
swoop, Honda shifted the power relationship from the dealer to the manufacturer. Within three 
years, C.O.D. sales would become the pattern for the industry.20 
Honda’s growth on several dimensions is shown in Exhibit 2. Automobiles were introduced into 
the product line in 1963, shifting resources and management attention heavily in that direction in the 
ensuing years. 
25 Years Later 
In late 1972, anticipating the company’s twenty-fifth anniversary, Fujisawa, 62, raised the issue of 
retirement. “We are strong dominating individuals,” he said. “I must step aside and let the younger 
men lead our company.” Soichiro Honda, 66, also conceded to retire. In September 1973, the two 
stepped down. States one source: “Fujisawa retired early to provide Mr. Honda with an opportunity 
to retire, also. It is a reflection of Fujisawa’s genuine personal friendship with Mr. Honda.”21 
                                                          
 
19 Ibid. 
20 Ibid. 
21 Sakiya, Tetsuo. “The Story of Honda’s Founders,” Asahi Evening News, August 29, 1979. 
For the exclusive use of Y. Gu, 2023.
This document is authorized for use only by Yanshan Gu in Business 101    2023 Fall taught by GUO Yidi, Tsinghua University from Sep 2023 to Mar 2024.


384-050 
Honda (B) 
8 
Exhibit 1
Motorcycle Production in Japan by Japanese Makers 
Calendar 
Year 
 
Honda 
 
Yamaha 
 
Suzuki
 
Kawasaki
 
Other
 
Total 
1950 
1951 
1952 
1953 
1954 
1955 
1956 
1957 
1958 
1959 
1960 
1961 
1962 
1963 
1964 
1965 
1966 
1967 
1968 
1969 
1970 
1971 
1972 
1973 
1974 
1975 
1976 
1977 
1978 
1979 
1980 
1981 
531 
2,380 
9,659 
29,797 
30,344 
42,557 
55,031 
77,509 
117,375 
285,218 
649,243 
935,859 
1,009,787 
1,224,695 
1,353,594 
1,465,762 
1,422,949 
1,276,226 
1,349,896 
1,534,882 
1,795,828 
1,927,186 
1,873,893 
1,835,527 
2,132,902 
1,782,448 
1,928,576 
2,378,867 
2,639,588 
2,437,057 
3,087,471 
3,587,957 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
2,272 
8,743 
15,811 
27,184 
63,657 
138,153 
129,079 
117,908 
167,370 
221,655 
244,058 
389,756 
406,579 
423,039 
519,710 
574,100 
750,510 
853,317 
1,012,810 
1,164,886 
1,030,541 
1,169,175 
1,824,152 
1,887,311 
1,653,891 
2,241,959 
2,792,817 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
9,079 
18,444 
29,132 
66,363 
95,862 
155,445 
186,392 
173,121 
271,438 
373,871 
341,367 
448,128 
402,438 
365,330 
398,784 
407,538 
491,064 
594,922 
641,779 
839,741 
686,666 
831,941 
1,031,753 
1,144,488 
1,100,778 
1,551,127 
1,764,120 
- 
- 
- 
- 
200 
- 
5,083 
6,793 
7,018 
10,104 
9,261 
22,038 
31,718 
34,954 
33,040 
48,745 
67,959 
79,194 
78,124 
102,406 
149,480 
208,904 
218,058 
250,099 
354,615 
274,022 
284,478 
335,112 
326,317 
308,191 
521,846 
521,333 
6,960 
21,773 
69,586 
131,632 
133,929 
205,487 
245,459 
280,819 
283,392 
425,788 
520,982 
531,003 
342,391 
229,513 
128,175 
112,852 
118,599 
77,410 
34,946 
21,091 
20,726 
22,838 
25,056 
22,912 
17,276 
28,870 
20,942 
7,475 
2,225 
79 
- 
- 
7,491 
24,153 
79,245 
161,429 
164,473 
259,395 
332,760 
410,064 
501,332 
880,629 
1,473,084 
1,804,371 
1,674,925 
1,927,970 
2,110,335 
2,212,784 
2,447,391 
2,241,847 
2,251,335 
2,576,873 
2,947,672 
3,400,502 
3,565,246 
3,763,127 
4,509,420 
3,802,547 
4,235,112 
5,577,359 
5,999,929 
5,499,996 
7,402,403 
8,666,227 
Source: 
Japan Automobile Manufacturers Association, Inc. 
Note: 
KD sets and scooters are included. 
For the exclusive use of Y. Gu, 2023.
This document is authorized for use only by Yanshan Gu in Business 101    2023 Fall taught by GUO Yidi, Tsinghua University from Sep 2023 to Mar 2024.


Honda (B) 
384-050 
9 
Exhibit 2
Honda’s Financial Performance and U.S. Motorcycle Sales 
 
Calendar 
Year 
 
Gross Sales 
(million yen) 
Honda U.S. 
Motorcycle 
Sales (units)
Outside 
Financing 
(million yen)
 
 
Employees 
1948 
1949 
1950 
1951 
1952 
1953 
1954 
1955 
1956 
1957 
1958 
1959 
1960 
1961 
1962 
1963 
1964 
1965 
1966 
1967 
1968 
1969 
1970 
1971 
1972 
1973 
1974 
1975 
1976 
1977 
1978 
14.3 
34.6 
82.8 
330.3 
2,438 
7,729 
5,979 
5,525 
7,882 
9,786 
14,188 
26,165 
49,128 
57,912 
64,552 
83,206 
97,936 
123,746 
106,845 
141,179 
193,871 
244,895 
316,331 
332,931 
327,702 
366,777 
519,897 
563,805 
668,677 
849,635 
922,280 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
1,315 
6,052 
27,840 
65,869 
110,470 
227,308 
272,900 
181,200 
174,706 
272,600 
441,200 
656,800 
707,800 
556,300 
628,500 
343,900 
444,624 
439,822 
401,114 
1 
2 
- 
- 
15 
60 
- 
120 
- 
360 
720 
1,440 
4,320 
8,640 
9,090 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
18,180 
- 
- 
- 
- 
19,480 
24,350 
- 
25,500 
29,600 
- 
20 
70 
90 
150 
1,337 
2,185 
2,494 
2,459 
2,377 
2,438 
2,705 
3,355 
4,053 
5,406 
5,798 
6,816 
7,696 
8,481 
9,069 
11,283 
13,165 
16,614 
17,511 
18,079 
18,297 
18,287 
18,455 
18,505 
19,069 
19,968 
21,316 
Note:  
Above figures are related solely to Honda Motor Co.. Ltd., and are not consolidated 
with those of its subsidiaries. 
 
For the exclusive use of Y. Gu, 2023.
This document is authorized for use only by Yanshan Gu in Business 101    2023 Fall taught by GUO Yidi, Tsinghua University from Sep 2023 to Mar 2024.


 
_______
 
Dr. Rich
Harvard
Cases ar
 
Note: Th
“Strategy
 
Copyrig
800-545-
not be d
 
E .  T A T
R I C H A
 
Ho
 
Th
indus
impre
prefer
comp
comp
Th
Comp
periph
result
mana
comm
establ
repres
A-typ
As
define
engin
hamp
Ho
motor
had a
introd
more 
stroke
explo
manu
and o
_______________
hard T. Pascale of S
d Business School. 
re not intended to s
his case is based large
y Alternaties for the 
ght © 1983, 1989, 2
-7685, write Harva
digitized, photocop
U M  C H R I S T I A N
R D  T .  P A S C A L E
onda (A
he two decad
stry. By the en
egnable mark
rence to pur
etitors and 
etition intens
he Japanese i
pany. Its foun
herally in the
ted in the d
ageable and 
mitment to a
lished in 194
sented Hond
pe, 2-stroke en
s of 1948, Ho
ed motorcycl
nes for bicycle
pered by infer
onda expand
rcycle. Honda
a superior s
duction of a 4
powerful tha
e design that 
it this advan
ufacturing exp
other ancillary
_______________
Stanford Graduate 
This case was dev
serve as endorseme
ely on HBS No. 587
British Motorcycle I
011 President and 
ard Business Schoo
ied, or otherwise re
S E N  
 
A) 
des from 196
nd of that pe
ket positions 
rchase from 
lost position
sified. 
nvasion of th
nder, Soichir
e automotive i
downsizing 
economically
a technologic
46. This inst
da’s opening 
ngine. 
onda’s Japan
e industry. M
es. A few larg
rior technolog
ed its presen
a’s engine at 
stamped met
4-stroke engin
an Honda’s. R
doubled hors
ntage, Honda 
pertise to bec
y parts crucial
_______________
School of Busines
veloped from publ
ents, sources of prim
7-210, “Note on the M
Industry,” 1975. 
Fellows of Harvar
ol Publishing, Bosto
eproduced, posted,
60 to 1980 w
eriod, previou
were faced w
them, these 
n despite tec
he world mo
o Honda, a v
industry prio
of Honda’s 
y affordable 
cally based s
titute, dedica
move in the
nese competit
Most competit
ger manufactu
gy and materi
ce in the fall 
3 hp was mo
tal frame. Th
ne by several 
Responding t
sepower with
acquired a p
ome a fully in
l to motorcyc
 
________________
s prepared this cas
lished sources. HB
mary data, or illust
Motorcycle Industry
rd College.  To ord
on, MA 02163, or g
, or transmitted, wi
witnessed a s
usly well-fina
with extinctio
U.S. manuf
chnological s
otorcycle mar
visionary inv
or to World W
ambitions; m
product for 
strategy, the 
ated to impro
e motorcycle
tion consisted
tors operated
urers endeavo
ials that resul
of 1949, intro
ore reliable th
his introduct
larger compe
to this threat,
h no additiona
plant, and ov
ntegrated pro
le performan
_______________
se with the collabo
BS cases are develo
trations of effective
y—1975,” and on a p
der copies or reque
go to www.hbsp.h
ithout the permissi
strategic reve
anced Americ
on. Although 
facturers had
shifts that c
rket was spea
ventor and in
War II. Howev
motorcycles 
the average 
Honda Tec
ovements in 
 field. In 194
d of 247 Japa
d in ill-equipp
ored to copy E
ted in unrelia
oducing a lig
han most of i
tion coincide
etitors. These
, Honda follo
al weight. Em
ver the next t
oducer of eng
nce. 
R
_______________
oration of Professor
oped solely as the 
e or ineffective man
published report of th
est permission to re
arvard.edu/educat
ion of Harvard Bus
ersal in the 
can competito
most consum
d been dislod
ould have b
arheaded by 
ndustrialist, h
ver, Japan’s po
were a mor
Japanese. R
hnical Resea
internal com
47, Honda in
anese particip
ped job shops
European mo
able products
htweight 50c
ts contempor
ed closely, h
e engines wer
owed in 1951 
mbarking on a
two years it d
gines, frames,
9-384-
R E V :  M A R C H  1 6
________________
r E. Tatum Christia
basis for class dis
nagement. 
he Boston Consulting
eproduce materials
tors. This publicati
siness School. 
world motor
ors with seem
mers had an i
dged by Jap
been emulate
the Honda M
had been inv
ostwar devast
re technolog
Reflecting Ho
arch Institute
mbustion eng
ntroduced its
pants in a lo
s, adapting cl
otorcycles but
. 
cc, 2-stroke, D
raries’ engine
however, with
re both quiete
with a super
a bold campai
developed en
, chains, spro
-049
6 ,  2 0 1 1  
______ 
ansen of 
scussion. 
g Group, 
s, call 1-
ion may 
rcycle 
mingly 
initial 
panese 
ed as 
Motor 
volved 
tation 
gically 
onda’s 
e was 
gines, 
s first 
oosely 
lip-on 
t were 
D-type 
es and 
h the 
er and 
rior 4-
ign to 
nough 
ockets, 
For the exclusive use of Y. Gu, 2023.
This document is authorized for use only by Yanshan Gu in Business 101    2023 Fall taught by GUO Yidi, Tsinghua University from Sep 2023 to Mar 2024.


384-049 
Honda (A) 
2 
Motorcycle manufacturers in the Japanese industry tended to minimize risk by investing in one 
winning design and milking that product until it became technologically obsolescent. Beginning in 
the 1950s, Honda began to depart from this pattern—seeking simultaneously to (1) offer a 
multiproduct line, (2) take leadership in product innovation, and (3) exploit opportunities for 
economies of mass production by gearing designs to production objectives. Most notably, in 1958 
Honda’s market research identified a large, untapped market segment seeking a small, 
unintimidating motorcycle that could be used by small-motorcycle businesses for local deliveries. 
Honda designed a product specifically for this application: a step-through frame, automatic 
transmission, and one-hand controls that enabled drivers to handle the machine with one hand while 
carrying a package in the other. The 50cc Honda was an explosive success. Unit sales reached 3,000 
per month after six months on the market. Deciding to make this the product of the future, Honda 
gambled, investing in a highly automated 30,000-unit-per-month manufacturing plant—a capacity 10 
times in excess of demand at the time of construction. 
Honda’s bold moves set the stage for a yet bolder decision—to invade the U.S. market. The 
following section depicts the sequence of events as taken from a Harvard Business School case on the 
motorcycle industry.1 
In 1959 . . . Honda Motor Company . . . entered the American market. The Japanese motorcycle 
industry had expanded rapidly since World War II to meet the need for cheap transportation. In 1959, 
Honda, Suzuki, Yamaha, and Kawasaki together produced some 450,000 motorcycles. With sales of 
$55 million in that year, Honda was already the world’s largest motorcycle producer. . . 
In contrast to other foreign producers who relied on distributors, Honda established a U.S. 
subsidiary, American Honda Motor Company, and began its push in the U.S. market by offering very 
small lightweight motorcycles. The Honda machine had a three-speed transmission, an automatic 
clutch, five horsepower (compared with two and a half for the lightweight motorcycle then sold by 
Sears, Roebuck), an electric starter, and a step-through frame for female riders. Generally superior to 
the Sears lightweight and easier to handle, the Honda machines sold for less than $250 retail, 
compared with $1,000–$1,500 for the bigger American or British machines. 
Honda followed a policy of developing the market region by region, beginning on the West Coast 
and moving eastward over a period of four to five years. In 1961 it lined up 125 dealers and spent 
$150,000 on regional advertising. Honda advertising represented a concerted effort to overcome the 
unsavory image of motorcyclists that had developed since the 1940s, given special prominence by the 
1953 movie The Wild Ones, which starred Marlon Brando as the surly, destructive leader of a 
motorcycle gang. In contrast, Honda addressed its appeal primarily to middle-class consumers and 
claimed, “You meet the nicest people on a Honda.” This marketing effort was backed by heavy 
advertising, and the other Japanese exporters also invested substantial sums: $1.5 million for Yamaha 
and $0.7 million for Suzuki. 
Honda’s strategy was phenomenally successful. Its U.S. sales rose from $500,000 in 1960 to $77 
million in 1965. By 1966, Honda, Yamaha, and Suzuki together had 85% of the U.S. market. From a 
negligible position in 1960, lightweight motorcycles had come to dominate the market. 
The transformation and expansion of the motorcycle market during the early 1960s benefited 
British and American producers as well as the Japanese. British exports doubled between 1960 and 
1966, while Harley-Davidson’s sales increased from $16.6 million in 1959 to $29.6 million in 1965. 
Two press reports of the mid-1960s illustrate these traditional manufacturers’ interpretation of the 
Japanese success: 
                                                          
 
1 D. Purkayastha and R. Buzzell, “Note on the Motorcycle Industry—1975,” HBS No. 578-210, pp. 5–7. 
For the exclusive use of Y. Gu, 2023.
This document is authorized for use only by Yanshan Gu in Business 101    2023 Fall taught by GUO Yidi, Tsinghua University from Sep 2023 to Mar 2024.


Honda (A) 
384-049 
3 
“The success of Honda, Suzuki, and Yamaha in the States has been jolly good for us,” Eric 
Turner, chairman of the board of BSA Ltd., told Advertising Age. “People here start out by 
buying one of the low-priced Japanese jobs. They get to enjoy the fun and exhilaration of the 
open road and frequently end up buying one of our more powerful and expensive machines.” 
The British insist that they’re not really in competition with the Japanese (they’re on the lighter 
end). The Japanese have other ideas. Just two months ago Honda introduced a 444cc model to 
compete, at a lower price, with the Triumph 500cc. [Advertising Age, December 27, 1965] 
“Basically we do not believe in the lightweight market,” says William H. Davidson, son of 
one of the founders and currently president of the company (Harley-Davidson). “We believe 
that motorcycles are sports vehicles, not transportation vehicles. Even if a man says he bought 
a motorcycle for transportation, it’s generally for leisure time use. The lightweight motorcycle 
is only supplemental. Back around World War I, a number of companies came out with 
lightweight bikes. We came out with one ourselves. We came out with another one in 1947 and 
it just did not go anywhere. We have seen what happens to these small sizes.” [Forbes, 
September 15, 1966] 
Meanwhile, the Japanese producers continued to grow in other export markets. In 1965, domestic 
sales represented only 59% of Honda’s total of $316 million, down from 98% in 1959. Over the same 
period, production volume had increased almost fivefold, from 285,000 to 1.4 million units. In 
Europe, where the Japanese did not begin their thrust until the late 1960s, they had captured a 
commanding share of key markets by 1974. 
In short, by the mid-1970s the Japanese producers had come to dominate a market shared by 
European and American producers 20 years earlier. . . 
It was often said that Honda created the market for the recreational uses of motorcycles through 
its extensive advertising and promotional effort. 
The company achieved a significant product advantage through a heavy commitment to R&D and 
advanced manufacturing techniques. Honda used its productivity-based cost advantage and R&D 
capability to introduce new models at prices below those of competitive machines. New products 
could be brought to market very quickly; the interval between conception and production was 
estimated to be only 18 months. Honda was also reported to have a “cold storage” of designs that 
could be introduced if the market developed. . . . 
Since 1960, Honda had consistently outspent its competitors in advertising. It had also established 
the largest dealership network in the U.S. On average, Honda dealers were larger than their 
competitors. In new markets, Honda had been willing to take short-term losses in order to build up 
an adequate selling and distribution network. 
In 1975, the Boston Consulting Group was retained by the British government to diagnose the 
British motorcycle industry and the factors contributing to its decline. The remainder of this case, 
reflecting on Honda’s strategy, consists of excerpts from that report:2 
The market approach of [Honda] has certain common features which, taken together, may be 
described as a “marketing philosophy.” The fundamental feature of this philosophy is the emphasis it 
places on market share and sales volume. Objectives set in these terms are regarded as critical, and 
defended at all costs. 
                                                          
 
2 Boston Consulting Group, “Strategy Alternatives for the British Motorcycle Industry,” Her Majesty’s Stationary Office, 
London, 30 July 1975, pp. 16–17, 23, 39–43, 54–55. 
For the exclusive use of Y. Gu, 2023.
This document is authorized for use only by Yanshan Gu in Business 101    2023 Fall taught by GUO Yidi, Tsinghua University from Sep 2023 to Mar 2024.


384-049 
Honda (A) 
4 
The whole thrust of the marketing program . . . is towards maintaining or improving market share 
position. . . . We have seen some ways in which this goal is pursued. It is worth adding, as an 
example of how pervasive this objective is . . . that in an interview with a Honda personnel director, 
we were told that the first question a prospective Honda dealer is asked is the level of his market 
share in his local area. “I don’t know why, but this company places an awful lot of emphasis on 
market share” was the comment. . . . We shall return to the reasons why market shares are critical for 
commercial success in the industry. 
We were also told by representatives of [Honda] that their primary objectives are set in terms of 
sales volume rather than short-term profitability. Annual sales targets—based on market share 
penetration assumptions and market growth prospects—are set, and the main task of the sales 
company is to achieve these targets. The essence of this strategy is to grow sales volume at least as 
fast or faster than any of your competitors.  
A number of more specific policies follow from this general philosophy, and our descriptions of 
each of the Japanese competitors provide ample examples of these policies: 
1. Products are updated or redesigned whenever a market threat or opportunity is perceived. 
2. Prices are set at levels designed to achieve market share targets and will be cut if necessary. 
3. Effective marketing systems are set up in all markets where serious competition is intended, 
regardless of short-term cost. 
4. Plans and objectives look to long-term payoff. 
The results of these policies for the Japanese competitors have, of course, been spectacularly 
successful. Over the last fifteen years, the rates of growth of the four major Japanese companies have 
been as shown in Table A. 
Table A
Growth of Japanese Production 
 
Production in 1959 
(000 units) 
Production in 1974 
(000 units)
Average Annual 
Growth Rate 
(% p.a.)
    
 
Honda 
285 
2,133 
14 
Yamaha 
64 
1,165 
21 
Kawasaki 
10 
355 
27 
Suzuki 
96 
840 
16 
    
 
Source: 
Japan Automobile Industry Association. 
Selling and distribution systems
We have so far discussed market share as a function of the 
product features and prices of particular models. Market share across all cc classes is also influenced 
by what we shall call the selling and distribution system (s and d system). Within the s and d system 
we include all the activities of the marketing companies (or importers) in each national market: 
• 
Sales representation at the dealer level 
• 
Physical distribution of parts and machines 
• 
Warranty and service support 
For the exclusive use of Y. Gu, 2023.
This document is authorized for use only by Yanshan Gu in Business 101    2023 Fall taught by GUO Yidi, Tsinghua University from Sep 2023 to Mar 2024.


Honda (A) 
384-049 
5 
• 
Dealer support 
• 
Advertising and promotion 
• 
Market planning and control 
We also include the effects of the dealer network established by the marketing companies: 
• 
Numbers and quality of dealers 
• 
Floor space devoted to the manufacturers’ products 
• 
Sales support by dealers 
The s and d system supports sales of the manufacturer across the whole model range, and its 
quality affects market shares in each cc class where the manufacturer is represented. Table B 
compares the s and d systems of the four full-line Japanese manufacturers in the USA, and shows that 
high market shares both overall and in each cc class go with high levels of expenditure on s and d and 
with extensive dealer networks. 
The interaction between product-related variables and s- and d-related variables is complex. The 
better the product range in terms of comprehensiveness, features, and price, and the more 
sophisticated the s and d system of the sales company, the easier it will be to attract good dealers. 
This is because good products, which are well supported at the marketing company level, lead to 
good retail sales. Equally, good dealers themselves improve retail sales, and active competition 
between dealers can lead to retail discounting which acts as a volume-boosting price cut to the public. 
The manufacturers’ products and s and d system therefore influence sales both directly, at retail, and 
proximately, through their effect on the dealer network. 
In particular cc categories, each manufacturer’s position is substantially influenced by its specific 
product offerings. For example, Kawasaki are strong in the 750cc-and over class due to the Z-1, and 
Yamaha have been weak due to its poor 750cc model. Outstanding products obtain market shares 
that are unusually high for a manufacturer, and weak products lead to atypically low market shares. 
For products of average attraction, however, market shares seem to move towards some equilibrium 
level. For each manufacturer, this level in the USA appears to be: 
Honda 
40–50%
Yamaha 
15–25%
Kawasaki 
10–15% 
Suzuki 
9–12% 
As overall market leaders, the Japanese have dominated pricing in the motorcycle industry. It is 
therefore appropriate to begin this analysis by examining the extent to which the experience curve 
concept appears to explain the performance of the Japanese. Unfortunately, it is impossible directly to 
determine unit cost performance data for competitors, since the data are not publicly available. 
Sources can be found, however, for unit price and production volume data. Over the long term, price 
behavior is a useful guide to movements in the underlying costs, and so an experience curve analysis 
on prices can be extremely revealing. 
Japanese price performance
In Figure A, price experience curves are drawn for the Japanese 
motorcycle industry as a whole, based on aggregate data collected by MITI. These curves show price 
reduction performance of a consistent nature for each of the size ranges of motorcycle considered, the 
rate of price reduction being most rapid of all in the largest range, 126–250cc, which is following an 
experience curve slope of 76%. The other slopes are more shallow, at 81% and 88%, but there is no 
For the exclusive use of Y. Gu, 2023.
This document is authorized for use only by Yanshan Gu in Business 101    2023 Fall taught by GUO Yidi, Tsinghua University from Sep 2023 to Mar 2024.


384-049 
Honda (A) 
6 
mistaking the fact that real prices are descending smoothly over time. These experience-based price 
reductions clearly go a long way towards explaining the historical competitive effectiveness of the 
Japanese in the marketplace in small and medium motorcycles. 
Table B
The Selling and Distribution Systems of Japanese Companies in the U.S.A. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Est’d Total S&D 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Expenditure by 
Advertising 
Dealers 1974 
1974 % Share
Lowest % 
Highest %
 
Sales Company 
Expenditure
 
Units Sold
of Total
Share of Any 
Share of any
 
1974 ($m) 
1972 ($m) 
Numbers
per Dealer
Market (units)
cc Class 
cc Class
    
 
 
 
Honda 
90–100 
8.1 
1,974 
220 
43 
34 
61 
Yamaha 
40–45 
4.2 
1,515 
135 
20 
4 
34 
Kawasaki 
30–35 
2.2 
1,018 
127 
13 
9 
19 
Suzuki 
25–30 
3.0 
1,103 
98 
11 
5 
16 
    
 
 
 
Source: 
R.L. Rolk, Motorcycle Dealer News, Ziff-Davis Market Research Dept., BCG estimates. 
For the purposes of strategy development . . . it is [helpful] to look more closely at price 
performance in the larger bike models. The Honda CB 750 has been the pacesetter in superbikes in 
terms of both market penetration and pricing. In Figure B, price experience curves are plotted for this 
product and for two other large Honda bikes. The prices of other Japanese manufacturers have been 
broadly comparable to Honda’s in the equivalent size range (they usually tend if anything to price at 
a slight premium relative to Honda), so that we may use Honda as a good “benchmark” for the 
Japanese competition in big bikes in general. 
Figure A
Japanese Motorcycle Industry: Price Experience Curves, 1959–1974 
 
Source: 
MITI. 
126–250 cc
51–125 cc
< 50 cc
Slope 76%
Slope 81%
Slope 88%
10
1
100
(¥000
1965)
Average
Price
Cumulative Volume
(million units)
80
60
40
20
For the exclusive use of Y. Gu, 2023.
This document is authorized for use only by Yanshan Gu in Business 101    2023 Fall taught by GUO Yidi, Tsinghua University from Sep 2023 to Mar 2024.


Honda (A) 
384-049 
7 
Figure B
Honda Large Bikes: Price Experience Curves 
 
 
It is clear from Figure B that price performance in the large bikes has been consistent with that in 
small: real prices have declined along experience curve slopes in the region of 85%–87%. This has also 
been true of the price in the United States, when converted into yen terms. 
An interesting feature of the curves is that the prices in the United States are so much higher than 
[those] of the same products in Japan. As shown in Table C, the premiums are high across almost the 
entire range of bikes and are far larger than seems necessary, even allowing for the extra costs 
CB750
Price
500
400
400
CB450
CL350
Year
68
69
70
71
72
73
74
75
Honda prices in U.S.
Honda prices in U.S.
Honda prices in U.S.
Retail list price
(¥000, 1965)
Honda's Cumulative Volume
(Million Units > 250 cc)
Honda prices in Japan
Honda prices in Japan
85% Slope
87% Slope
87% Slope
300
300
300
200
200
200
100
100
100
2
4
6
8
1
2
3
4
For the exclusive use of Y. Gu, 2023.
This document is authorized for use only by Yanshan Gu in Business 101    2023 Fall taught by GUO Yidi, Tsinghua University from Sep 2023 to Mar 2024.


384-049 
Honda (A) 
8 
incurred for duty, freight, and packing in shipping bikes from Japan to the United States. This 
certainly suggests that there is no possibility that the Japanese are “dumping” their products in the 
U.S. market: quite the reverse. Furthermore, it may well indicate that competitive though the 
Japanese have been in the United States, based on the downward trends in their real price levels over 
time, there may well be plenty of scope for them to be even more competitive in the future if 
seriously challenged in that market. They could simply reduce their margins on exports to the United 
States to levels more in line with those enjoyed in their domestic business. 
Table C
Honda Price Premium, USA vs. Japan 
Premium on retail list prices, 1974 
 
 
Japan Price 
U.S. 
 
 
Model 
¥000 
$ Equiv. 
Price ($) 
Premium 
 
CB 750 
CB 550 
CB 450 
CB 360 
CB 350 
MT 250 
MT 125 
CB 125 
395 
355 
303 
253 
275 
218 
158 
166 
1411 
1268 
1082 
904 
982 
779 
564 
593 
2024 
1732 
1471 
1150 
1363 
965 
743 
640 
43% 
37% 
36% 
26% 
39% 
24% 
32% 
8% 
 
Premium allowing for freight, duty and packing 
 
CB 750, U.S. retail price 1975  =  
Price to dealer 
Price to distributor 
 
Japan list price 
 
Price to distributor 
Ocean freight to LA 
Duty 
Packaging costs 
$2112 
$1584 (75% of 2112) 
$1373 (65%) 
 
¥440,000 or 
$1517 (equivalent) 
$  986 (65%) 
      60 
      63 (3% U.S. Retail Price) 
      40 
$  163 
Thus, indicated price to U.S. distributor for equal manufacturer’s margin to that on bikes sold in Japan 
 
 = $  986 + 163 
    $1149 
Thus, premium in U.S.A. even after allowing for freight, duty and packing 
 
 = (1373/1149 - 1) × 100 
 = 20% 
Note: The versions of the smaller bike models shipped to the States may be slightly more expensive 
than their Japanese equivalents (extra lighting, etc.). The versions of the larger bikes are, however, 
reported to be identical in both markets. 
 
 
Japanese cost performance
The implication of the downward trends in real prices for the 
Japanese is, of course, that there have been underlying experience-based cost reductions: that the 
decline has not been accounted for simply by a reduction in margins. . . . However, the major 
Japanese manufacturers have been continuously profitable, and this suggests that cost reductions 
have indeed taken place in parallel with real price reductions. On the other hand, all the Japanese 
For the exclusive use of Y. Gu, 2023.
This document is authorized for use only by Yanshan Gu in Business 101    2023 Fall taught by GUO Yidi, Tsinghua University from Sep 2023 to Mar 2024.


Honda (A) 
384-049 
9 
motorcycle manufacturers also make a significant proportion of products other than motorcycles (in 
1974 about 35% of Honda’s turnover, and about 40% of Suzuki’s, was accounted for by cars; of 
Yamaha Motor’s turnover about 40% was in products such as boats and snowmobiles). It is, perhaps, 
reasonable to question whether these products are sufficiently profitable to “subsidize” the 
motorcycle business. 
. . . It seems clear that . . . none of [the three major Japanese] manufacturers is subsidizing the 
motorcycle business from other businesses. Indeed, Honda was actually losing money in its car 
business in 1974, which suggests that their motorcycle business that year may have shown returns of 
the order of 20% (BIT) compared with the 12.4% return earned by the company overall. The overall 
inference from this profit performance must be that each manufacturer has indeed achieved an 
experience curve effect on costs in parallel with those achieved on price. The existence of this 
experience curve effect in the motorcycle industry has important strategy implications. 
Competitive Strategy Implications 
As we have discussed, failure to achieve a cost position—and hence cost reductions over time–
equivalent to your competitors’ will result in commercial vulnerability. At some point your 
competitors will start setting prices which you cannot match profitably, and losses will ensue. The 
strategic importance of the experience curve is that it explains clearly the two possible long-term 
causes of uncompetitive costs: 
• 
Relative growth: failure to grow as rapidly as competitors, thereby progressing more slowly 
than them along the experience curve. 
• 
Relative slopes: failure to bring costs down the characteristic experience curve slope achieved 
by competitors. . . . 
Summary 
From the perspective of the writers of the BCG study, a fundamental cause for the Japanese 
success was their high productivity. The motorcycle industry was exhibiting the effects that 
differences in growth rates, volume, and level of capital investment among competitors can have on 
relative costs. The high rates of growth and levels of production achieved by the Japanese 
manufacturers resulted in their superior productivity. In terms of value added per employee, Honda 
outperformed Western competitors by as much as four times. Even the smaller Japanese competitors 
were able to outperform their Western counterparts by a factor of two or three. 
The BCG report also countered the common argument that the relatively inexpensive Japanese 
labor was the primary source of competitive advantage. The Japanese competitors in fact had higher 
labor costs than companies in the West. Their relative high growth and scale caused total costs to 
drop quickly enough to support regular pay increases and price decreases at the same time. 
Essentially the argument presented by BCG was that the Japanese emphasis on market share as 
the primary objective led to high production volume, improved productivity, low costs, and in the 
long term to higher profitability than their competitors. 
 
For the exclusive use of Y. Gu, 2023.
This document is authorized for use only by Yanshan Gu in Business 101    2023 Fall taught by GUO Yidi, Tsinghua University from Sep 2023 to Mar 2024.