I Abstract
This paper provides a survey of critical discourse analysis (CDA), a
recent school of discourse analysis that concerns itself with relations of power and
inequality in language. CDA explicitly intends to incorporate social-theoretical in-
sights into discourse analysis and advocates social commitment and interventionism
in research. The main programmatic features and domains of enquiry of CDA are
discussed, with emphasis on attempts toward theory formation by one of CDA’s most
prominent scholars, Norman Fairclough. Another section reviews the genesis and dis-
ciplinary growth of CDA, mentions some of the recent critical reactions to it, and
situates it within the wider picture of a new critical paradigm developing in a number
of language-oriented (sub) disciplines. In this critical paradigm, topics such as ideol-
ogy, inequality, and power ﬁgure prominently, and many scholars productively attempt
to incorporate social-theoretical insights into the study of language.
INTRODUCTION
Critical discourse analysis (CDA) emerged in the late 1980s as a programmatic
development in European discourse studies spearheaded by Norman Fairclough,
Ruth Wodak, Teun van Dijk, and others. Since then, it has become one of the
most inﬂuential and visible branches of discourse analysis (as can be seen in the
anthology by Jaworski & Coupland 1999). We provide an overview of the main
thrusts of this movement, discuss critically its main foci of attention, and situate
it in a wider panorama of developments in linguistics. In so doing, we hope to
show that the critical turn in studies of language is by no means restricted to any
single approach but represents a more general process of (partial) convergence in
theories and practices of research on language. CDA provided a crucial theoretical
and methodological impetus for this paradigm, but it could beneﬁt from a closer
integration with new developments.
0084-6570/00/1015-0447$14.00
447
Annu. Rev. Anthropol. 2000.29:447-466. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
 Access provided by Eastern Kentucky University - Crabbe Library on 01/25/19. For personal use only. 


448
BLOMMAERT ■BULCAEN
CRITICAL DISCOURSE ANALYSIS
The CDA Program
The purpose of CDA is to analyze “opaque as well as transparent structural re-
lationships of dominance, discrimination, power and control as manifested in
language” (Wodak 1995:204). More speciﬁcally, “[CDA] studies real, and often
extended, instances of social interaction which take (partially) linguistic form. The
critical approach is distinctive in its view of (a) the relationship between language
and society, and (b) the relationship between analysis and the practices analysed”
(Wodak 1997:173).
CDA states that discourse is socially constitutive as well as socially conditioned.
Furthermore, discourse is an opaque power object in modern societies and CDA
aims to make it more visible and transparent.
It is an important characteristic of the economic, social and cultural changes
of late modernity that they exist as discourses as well as processes that are
taking place outside discourse, and that the processes that are taking place
outside discourse are substantively shaped by these discourses.
Chouliaraki & Fairclough (1999:4)
The most elaborate and ambitious attempt toward theorizing the CDA program
is undoubtedly Fairclough’s Discourse and Social Change (1992a). Fairclough
constructs a social theory of discourse and provides a methodological blueprint
for critical discourse analysis in practice. [Other programmatic statements of CDA
can be found in Fairclough (1992b, 1995b), Chouliaraki & Fairclough (1999), van
Leeuwen (1993), van Dijk (1993a,c, 1997), and Wodak (1995, 1997).]
Fairclough (1992a) sketches a three-dimensional framework for conceiving of
and analyzing discourse. The ﬁrst dimension is discourse-as-text, i.e. the linguistic
features and organization of concrete instances of discourse. Choices and patterns
in vocabulary (e.g. wording, metaphor), grammar (e.g. transitivity, modality), co-
hesion (e.g. conjunction, schemata), and text structure (e.g. episoding, turn-taking
system) should be systematically analyzed (see below for CDA’s reliance on cer-
tain branches of linguistics). The use of passive verb forms in news reporting, for
instance, can have the effect of obscuring the agent of political processes. This
attention to concrete textual features distinguishes CDA from germane approaches
such as Michel Foucault’s, according to Fairclough (1992a).
The second dimension is discourse-as-discursive-practice, i.e. discourse as
somethingthatisproduced, circulated, distributed, consumedinsociety.Fairclough
sees these processes largely in terms of the circulation of concrete linguistic ob-
jects (speciﬁc texts or text-types that are produced, circulated, consumed, and so
forth), but keeping Foucault in mind, remarkably little time is spent on resources
and other “macro” conditions on the production and distribution of discourse.
Approaching discourse as discursive practice means that in analyzing vocabu-
lary, grammar, cohesion, and text structure, attention should be given to speech
Annu. Rev. Anthropol. 2000.29:447-466. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
 Access provided by Eastern Kentucky University - Crabbe Library on 01/25/19. For personal use only. 


CRITICAL DISCOURSE ANALYSIS
449
acts, coherence, and intertextuality—three aspects that link a text to its context.
Fairclough distinguishes between “manifest intertextuality” (i.e. overtly drawing
upon other texts) and “constitutive intertextuality” or “interdiscursivity” (i.e. texts
are made up of heterogeneous elements: generic conventions, discourse types,
register, style). One important aspect of the ﬁrst form is discourse representation:
how quoted utterances are selected, changed, contextualized (for recent contri-
butions to the study of discourse representation, see Baynham & Slembrouck
1999).
The third dimension is discourse-as-social-practice, i.e. the ideological effects
and hegemonic processes in which discourse is a feature (for CDA’s use of the
theories and concepts of Althusser and Gramsci, see below). Hegemony concerns
power that is achieved through constructing alliances and integrating classes and
groups through consent, so that “the articulation and rearticulation of orders of
discourse is correspondingly one stake in hegemonic struggle” (Fairclough 1992a:
93). It is from this third dimension that Fairclough constructs his approach to
change: Hegemonies change, and this can be witnessed in discursive change, when
the latter is viewed from the angle of intertextuality. The way in which discourse
is being represented, respoken, or rewritten sheds light on the emergence of new
orders of discourse, struggles over normativity, attempts at control, and resistance
against regimes of power.
Fairclough (1992a) is explicit with regard to his ambitions: The model of dis-
course he develops is framed in a theory of ideological processes in society, for
discourse is seen in terms of processes of hegemony and changes in hegemony.
Fairclough successfully identiﬁes large-scale hegemonic processes such as democ-
ratization, commodiﬁcation, and technologization on the basis of heteroglossic
constructions of text genres and styles (see example below). He also identiﬁes
the multiple ways in which individuals move through such institutionalized dis-
cursive regimes, constructing selves, social categories, and social realities. At the
same time, the general direction is one in which social theory is used to provide
a linguistic metadiscourse and in which the target is a reﬁned and more powerful
technique of text analysis.
CDA’s locus of critique is the nexus of language/discourse/speech and social
structure. It is in uncovering ways in which social structure impinges on dis-
course patterns, relations, and models (in the form of power relations, ideolog-
ical effects, and so forth), and in treating these relations as problematic, that
researchers in CDA situate the critical dimension of their work. It is not enough to
lay bare the social dimensions of language use. These dimensions are the object of
moral and political evaluation and analyzing them should have effects in society:
empowering the powerless, giving voices to the voiceless, exposing power abuse,
and mobilizing people to remedy social wrongs. CDA advocates interventionism in
the social practices it critically investigates. Toolan (1997) even opts for a prescrip-
tive stance: CDA should make proposals for change and suggest corrections to
particular discourses. CDA thus openly professes strong commitments to change,
empowerment, and practice-orientedness.
Annu. Rev. Anthropol. 2000.29:447-466. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
 Access provided by Eastern Kentucky University - Crabbe Library on 01/25/19. For personal use only. 


450
BLOMMAERT ■BULCAEN
Methodology
On a methodological level, CDA presents a diverse picture. For historical reasons
(see below), the use of systemic-functional linguistics is prominent, but categories
and concepts have also been borrowed from more mainstream discourse analy-
sis and text linguistics, stylistics, social semiotics, social cognition, rhetoric, and,
more recently, conversation analysis. Wodak and her associates have developed a
discourse-historical method intent on tracing the (intertextual) history of phrases
and arguments (see, for example, Wodak 1995, van Leeuwen & Wodak 1999).
The method starts with original documents (e.g. in their analysis of the Waldheim
affair, Wehrmacht documents on war activities in the Balkan), is augmented by
ethnographic research about the past (e.g. interviews with war veterans), and pro-
ceedstowide-rangingdatacollectionandanalysisofcontemporarynewsreporting,
political discourse, lay beliefs, and discourse.
Some practitioners of CDA welcome the diversity of methodology (Chouliaraki
& Fairclough 1999:17); others strive for a systematic and focused framework,
based, for instance, on concepts of genre and ﬁeld and on the sociosemantic
representation of social actors (van Leeuwen 1993, 1996).
Although such scholars as Kress (1997) and Kress & van Leeuwen (1996) (see
also Slembrouck 1995) emphasize the importance of incorporating visual images
into concepts of discourse and move toward broader multimodal conceptions of
semiosis, the general bias in CDA is toward linguistically deﬁned text-concepts,
and linguistic-discursive textual structures are attributed a crucial function in
the social production of inequality, power, ideology, authority, or manipulation
(van Dijk 1995).
Preferred Topics
CDA’s preference for work at the intersection of language and social structure
is manifest in the choice of topics and domains of analysis [panoramas can be
found, for example, in Sch¨
affner & Wenden (1995), Caldas-Coulthard & Coulthard
(1996), Blommaert & Bulcaen (1997)]. CDA practicioners tend to work on applied
and applicable topics and social domains such as the following.
1. Political discourse
See, for example, Wodak (1989), Chilton et al (1998),
Fairclough (1989, 1992a), and Fairclough & Mauranen (1997).
2. Ideology
Discourse is seen as a means through which (and in which)
ideologies are being reproduced. Ideology itself is a topic of considerable
importance in CDA. Hodge & Kress (1979) set the tone with their work.
More recently, van Dijk (1998) has produced a sociocognitive theory of
ideology.
3. Racism
Particular attention within this study is given to racism. Van Dijk
stands out as a proliﬁc author (1987, 1991, 1993b), but the topic has also
been covered by many others (for a survey, see Wodak & Reisigl 1999).
Related to the issue of racism is a recent interest in the discourse on
Annu. Rev. Anthropol. 2000.29:447-466. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
 Access provided by Eastern Kentucky University - Crabbe Library on 01/25/19. For personal use only. 


CRITICAL DISCOURSE ANALYSIS
451
immigration (e.g. Mart´
ın Rojo & van Dijk 1997, van Leeuwen & Wodak
1999).
3. Economic discourse
See, for example, Fairclough (1995b). The issue of
globalization has been formulated as an important preoccupation for CDA
(Slembrouck 1993, Chouliaraki & Fairclough 1999:94).
4. Advertisement and promotional culture
See, for example, Fairclough
(1989, 1995b), Slembrouck (1993), and Thornborrow (1998).
5. Media language
See, for example, Fairclough (1995a), van Dijk (1991),
Kress (1994), and Mart´
ın-Rojo (1995).
6. Gender
See especially the representation of women in the media (e.g.
Talbot 1992; Caldas-Coulthard 1993, 1996; Clark & Zyngier 1998; Walsh
1998; Thornborrow 1998).
7. Institutional discourse
Language plays a role in institutional practices
such as doctor-patient communication (e.g. Wodak 1997), social work
(e.g. Wodak 1996, Hall et al 1997), and bureaucracy (Sarangi &
Slembrouck 1996)
8. Education
See, for example, Kress (1997) and Chouliaraki (1998).
Education is seen as a major area for the reproduction of social relations,
including representation and identity formation, but also for possibilities of
change. Fairclough and associates have developed a critical language
awareness (CLA) approach that advocates the stimulation of critical
awareness with students of pedagogical discourses and didactic means (cf
Clark et al 1989, 1990; Fairclough 1992c, Ivanic 1998).
9. Literacy
CDA studies of literacy have linked up with those
anthropological and sociolinguistic analyses that view literacy as “situated
practices” (e.g. Heath 1983, Street 1995), e.g. in the context of local
communities (Barton & Hamilton 1998) or education (Baynham 1995,
New London Group 1996, Cope & Kalantzis 2000). Scholars working in
these “new literacy studies” have joined efforts in a new book series
(Barton et al 2000, Cope & Kalantzis 2000, Hawisher & Selfe 2000).
In all these domains, issues of power asymmetries, exploitation, manipulation,
and structural inequalities are highlighted.
Social Theory
CDA obviously conceives discourse as a social phenomenon and seeks, conse-
quently, to improve the social-theoretical foundations for practicing discourse
analysis as well as for situating discourse in society. A fundamental aspect of
CDA is that it claims to take its starting point in social theory. Two directions can
be distinguished. On the one hand, CDA displays a vivid interest in theories of
power and ideology. Most common in this respect are the use of Foucault’s (1971,
1977) formulations of “orders of discourse” and “power-knowledge,” Gramsci’s
Annu. Rev. Anthropol. 2000.29:447-466. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
 Access provided by Eastern Kentucky University - Crabbe Library on 01/25/19. For personal use only. 


452
BLOMMAERT ■BULCAEN
(1971) notion of “hegemony,” and Althusser’s (1971) concepts of “ideological
state apparatuses” and “interpellation.” Works in which connections between dis-
course and power processes are being spelled out are also widely cited, such as
Laclau & Mouffe (1985) and Thompson (1990). In Fairclough (1992a), for ex-
ample, these theories and concepts are given a linguistic translation and projected
onto discourse objects and communicative patterns in an attempt to account for
the relationship between linguistic practice and social structure, and to provide
linguistically grounded explanations for changes in these relationships.
The second direction that can be distinguished is an attempt to overcome struc-
turalist determinism. Inspiration here is usually found in Giddens’ (1984) theory
of structuration, where a dynamic model of the relationship between structure and
agency is proposed. Giddens serves as the theoretical background to CDA’s claim
that actual language products stand in dialectic relation to social structure, i.e. that
linguistic-communicative events can be formative for larger social processes and
structures. Obviously, when the relationship between linguistic-communicative
(or other semiotic) action and social processes is discussed, frequent reference is
also made to the work of Bourdieu (1991) and Habermas (1984, 1987). Bourdieu’s
work is also inﬂuential in studies on educational practices.
The use of these theories can be partly traced back to the inﬂuence of cultural
studies on CDA, in particular the seminal activities of the Centre for Contempo-
rary Cultural Studies of the University of Birmingham. CDA still holds pace with
cultural studies in that it continually, though critically, engages with new research
trends in, for example, postmodern, feminist, postcolonial, and globalization stud-
ies [for a “rethinking” of CDA that intends to ground it more ﬁrmly in social theory,
see Chouliaraki & Fairclough (1999)].
It is important to realize that despite the input from a variety of social-scientiﬁc
disciplines, CDA should primarily be positioned in a linguistic milieu, and its
successes should be measured primarily with the yardstick of linguistics and lin-
guistically oriented pragmatics and discourse analysis.
An Example: Conversationalization
To Fairclough, many ﬁelds of contemporary public life are characterized by “a
widespread appropriation of the discursive practices of ordinary life in public do-
mains” (Fairclough & Mauranen 1997:91). The new economic model of “ﬂexible
accumulation,” for instance, is implemented through practical changes in organi-
zations as well as through the production of abundant managerial discourse that
has become hegemonic. Flexible workforms also involve new uses of language,
such as “the routinised simulation of conversational spontaneity” (Chouliaraki &
Fairclough 1999:5), that have powerful and possibly damaging effects. Because of
the highly linguistic-discursive character of many changes in late modernity and
the increasing design and commodiﬁcation of language forms, a critical analysis of
discourse becomes all the more important in ﬁelds as diverse as marketing, social
welfare work, and political discourse.
Annu. Rev. Anthropol. 2000.29:447-466. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
 Access provided by Eastern Kentucky University - Crabbe Library on 01/25/19. For personal use only. 


CRITICAL DISCOURSE ANALYSIS
453
In the political ﬁeld for instance, Fairclough & Mauranen (1997) compare polit-
ical interviews over a time span of 35 years and identify a clear shift from a formal
and rigid interviewing style toward a mode of interaction that resembles ordinary
conversation. Recent political interviews are characterized by a casual manner, col-
loquial speech forms, reciprocal address forms, and repetitions. Furthermore, they
notehowMargaretThatcher’s1983speechstylecrossessocialclasslines: She“ap-
propriates and simulates various conversational voices,” whereas Harold Macmil-
lanin1958“projectsaconsistentclass-speciﬁcconversationalvoice”(Fairclough&
Mauranen 1997:117). Thus, Thatcher’s conversational style demonstrates how po-
litical discourse in the 1980s has “colonized” everyday speech genres in order to
achieve hegemony and increased legitimation for the voice of authority.
To Fairclough, this development in political discourse is indicative of a wider
change in orders of discourse in contemporary societies. These developments are
summarized in three large categories: democratization, commodiﬁcation, and
technologization (Fairclough 1992a: 200–24). In general, these developments all
touch on ways in which discourse genres from one sphere of life impinge on oth-
ers for functional purposes, and this against a background of changes in power
relationships in society. Thus, the language of advertizing has moved into the con-
versational domain in an attempt to allign its messages with the preoccupations of
individual customers (as illustrated, for instance, by the use of direct address, as in
“Did YOU get YOUR Barclay’s card?”). Similarly, government communciation
has adopted less formal and more conversational styles (e.g. allowing people to
directly respond to government messages), and other professions such as welfare
work have followed the same track. Although this may allow for more effective
communication, it blurs the boundaries between information and persuasion, and
it obscures “objective” power relationships by suggesting the equality of conver-
sational rapport in asymmetrical institutional interactions.
Inthistypeofresearch, empiricaldataanalysisisdirectlyfedintoalargerpicture
of what discourse and discourse modes do in society. The question remains, how-
ever, whether such large-scale transformations in societies can be demonstrated
on the basis of empirical data that are, in effect, restricted in scope, size, and time
range. It would be interesting, for example, to compare the “conversational style”
of Macmillan and Thatcher to that of John Major and Tony Blair.
SITUATING CDA
The History of CDA
In historical surveys such as Wodak’s (1995), reference is made to the “critical
linguists” of the University of East Anglia, who in the 1970s turned to such issues
as (a) the use of language in social institutions, (b) the relationships between lan-
guage, power, and ideology, and (c) who proclaimed a critical, left-wing agenda for
linguistics. The works of Hodge & Kress (1979) and Fowler et al (1979) are seminal
Annu. Rev. Anthropol. 2000.29:447-466. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
 Access provided by Eastern Kentucky University - Crabbe Library on 01/25/19. For personal use only. 


454
BLOMMAERT ■BULCAEN
in this respect (for surveys, see Fowler 1996, Birch 1998). Their work was based
on the systemic-functional and social-semiotic linguistics of Michael Halliday,
whose linguistic methodology is still hailed as crucial to CDA practices because
it offers clear and rigorous linguistic categories for analyzing the relationships
between discourse and social meaning (see, e.g. Chouliaraki & Fairclough 1999).
Next to Halliday’s three metafunctions (ideational, interpersonal, textual mean-
ing), systemic-functional analyses of transivity, agency, nominalization, mood,
information ﬂow, and register have been adopted by CDA. Martin (2000) reviews
the usefulness of systemic-functional linguistics for CDA, suggesting that CDA
should apply systemic-functional notions more systematically and consistently.
Fairclough’s Language and Power (1989) is commonly considered to be the
landmark publication for the “start” of CDA. In this book, Fairclough engaged in
an explicitly politicized analysis of “powerful” discourses in Britain [Thatcherite
political rhetoric and advertisement (see above)] and offered the synthesis of lin-
guistic method, objects of analysis, and political commitment that has become the
trademark of CDA.
Generally, there is a perception of a “core CDA” typically associated with the
work of Norman Fairclough, Ruth Wodak, and Teun van Dijk, and a number of
related approaches in CDA such as discursive social psychology (e.g. the work of
Michael Billig, Charles Antaki, Margaret Wetherell), social semiotics and work on
multimodality in discourse (e.g. Gunther Kress and Theo van Leeuwen), systemic-
functional linguistics (e.g. Jay Lemke), and political discourse analysis (e.g. Paul
Chilton).
Although the inﬂuence of Halliday’s social-semiotic and grammatical work
is acknowledged and veriﬁable, references to other discourse-analytic precursors
(such as Michel Pˆ
echeux) are post hoc and inspired more by a desire to establish
a coherent tradition than by a genuine historical network of inﬂuences. One can
also note that the universe of mobilized sources invoked to support the CDA pro-
gram is selective. References to work done in American linguistics and linguistic
anthropology are rare [with the exception of research on literacy (see above)], as
are references to some precursors who have had a manifest inﬂuence on many
“critical” approaches to language (e.g. Ferruccio Rossi-Landi, Louis-Jean Calvet)
and to critical work in other strands of language studies (e.g. in sociolinguistics).
The potential relevance of these largely overlooked traditions is discussed below.
Despite the presence of landmark publications and of some acknowledged lead-
ing ﬁgures, the boundaries of the CDA movement as well as the particularity of its
program seem to have emerged in an ad hoc fashion. Scholars identifying with the
label CDA seem to be united by the common domains and topics of investigation
discussed above, an explicit commitment to social action and to the political left
wing, a common aim of integrating linguistic analysis and social theory and—
though in more diffuse ways—by a preference for empirical analysis within a
set of paradigms, including Hallidayan systemic-functional linguistics, conversa-
tion analysis, Lakoff-inspired approaches to metaphor, argumentation theory, text
linguistics, and social psychology.
Annu. Rev. Anthropol. 2000.29:447-466. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
 Access provided by Eastern Kentucky University - Crabbe Library on 01/25/19. For personal use only. 


CRITICAL DISCOURSE ANALYSIS
455
ThereissometendencywithinCDAtoidentifyitselfasa“school,” andanumber
of writings are programmatically oriented toward the formation of a community
of scholars sharing the same perspective, and to some extent also sharing similar
methodologies and theoretical frameworks. Fairclough (1992a:12–36) surveys a
variety of discourse-analytic approaches, qualiﬁed as “noncritical,” in contrast to
his own critical approach. Such boundary-shaping practices are worded in such
resolute terms that they result in suggestive divisions within discourse analysis—
“critical” versus “noncritical”—that are hard to sustain in reality [a comment also
made by Widdowson (1998)].
CDA has known a remarkable success with students and scholars. CDA has a
major forum of publication in the journal Discourse & Society, started in 1990 and
edited by van Dijk (see e.g. van Dijk 1993c); in addition, a European interuniversity
exchange program devoted to CDA is now in place, and various Web sites and
electronic discussion forums offer contacts and information on CDA projects and
viewpoints. This active pursuit of institutionalization has an effect on what follows.
To some extent, the “school” characteristics of CDA create, to some, an impression
of closure and exclusiveness with respect to “critique” as a mode, ingredient, and
product of discourse analysis.
Critical Reception
Critical reactions to CDA center on issues of interpretation and context. In a series
of review articles, Widdowson (1995, 1996, 1998) has criticized CDA for its blur-
ring of important distinctions between concepts, disciplines, and methodologies
(for reactions, see Fairclough 1996, Chouliaraki & Fairclough 1999:67). First, he
notes the vagueness of many concepts (what is precisely meant by discourse, text,
structure, practice, and mode?) and models (how many functions and levels, and
how can these be proven?). This general fuzziness is not helped by the rhetorical
use of concepts from social theory. Second, Widdowson argues that, in its actual
analyses, and despite its theoretical claims to the opposite, CDA interprets dis-
course under the guise of critical analysis. CDA does not analyze how a text can
be read in many ways, or under what social circumstances it is produced and con-
sumed. The predominance of interpretation begs questions about representation
(can analysts speak for the average consumer of texts?), selectivity, partiality, and
prejudice (see also Stubbs 1997). The most fundamental problem to Widdowson is
that CDA collapses together signiﬁcation and signiﬁcance, and ultimately seman-
tics and pragmatics. Texts are found to have a certain ideological meaning that is
forced upon the reader. This rather deterministic view of human agency has also
been criticized by Pennycook (1994).
Another critical debate on CDA was initiated by Schegloff (1997) and con-
tinued by others (Wetherell 1998; Billig 1999a,b; Schegloff 1999a,b; see also
Chouliaraki & Fairclough 1999:7). In Schegloff’s opinion, there is a tendency
to assume the a priori relevance of aspects of context in CDA work: Analysts
project their own political biases and prejudices onto their data and analyze them
Annu. Rev. Anthropol. 2000.29:447-466. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
 Access provided by Eastern Kentucky University - Crabbe Library on 01/25/19. For personal use only. 


456
BLOMMAERT ■BULCAEN
accordingly. Stable patterns of power relations are sketchy, often based on little
more than social and political common sense, and then projected onto (and into)
discourse. Schegloff’s own proposals are those of orthodox conversation analysis:
Relevant context should be restricted to that context to which participants in a
conversation actively and consequentially orient [a position equally vulnerable to
critique (see, e.g. Duranti 1997:245–79)]. The problematic status of context in
CDA analyses was also observed by Blommaert (1997a), who qualiﬁed the use
of context in some CDA work as narrative and backgrounding and who noted the
“uncritical” acceptance of particular representations of history and social reality
as “background facts” in analyses.
A New Critical Paradigm
The premise that critique derives from investigating and problematizing the con-
nection between language and social structure is obviously not restricted to CDA.
Neither is the tendency to support this premise by means of insights from other
social-theoretical ﬁelds of inquiry, seeking a more sustainable social, cultural,
and /or historical foundation for linguistic analysis. In fact, one can say that both
elements characterize a new critical paradigm now observable in linguistic anthro-
pology, sociolinguistics, pragmatics, applied linguistics, and other ﬁelds. There
is now far more critical research than that developing under the heading of CDA
alone, and one of the surprising features in the CDA literature is the scarcity of
references to this plethora of work.
What follows is a brief and selective survey of this paradigm, organized on the
basis of three general features: ideology, inequality and power, and social theory.
The survey is not meant to imply an absolute contrast between CDA and other
critical developments in linguistics. CDA is an original contribution to this critical
paradigm, and some of the scholars we mention below (e.g. Cameron, Rampton)
can be said to have been inﬂuenced by CDA. Also, certain branches of CDA have
taken stock of critical developments in linguistic anthropology, notably the studies
of literacy mentioned above.
Ideology
One prominent feature is the development of ideology into a cru-
cial topic of investigation and theoretical elaboration. In linguistic anthropol-
ogy, Michael Silverstein’s work on linguistic ideologies has been seminal, and
it has given rise to a research tradition with considerable critical punch. Starting
from views of linguistic ideology as embedded in linguistic structure (Silverstein
1979), wider views of linguistic-ideological phenomena were developed (for sur-
veys, see Woolard & Schieffelin 1994, Woolard 1998) and were used to analyze
patterns of language use and interlanguage/intervariety relationships that carried
clear societal power or policy connotations (Silverstein 1996, Schieffelin & Doucet
1998, Errington 1998, Spitulnik 1998). New inquiries into aspects of mediation,
intertextuality, and representation (drawing extensively on such authors as Peirce,
Bakhtin, and Habermas) led to important insights into authority and hierarchies
Annu. Rev. Anthropol. 2000.29:447-466. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
 Access provided by Eastern Kentucky University - Crabbe Library on 01/25/19. For personal use only. 


CRITICAL DISCOURSE ANALYSIS
457
of genres and ways of speaking (Gal & Woolard 1995) and into the dynamics of
contextualization and the nature of text and textualization (Hanks 1989, Bauman &
Briggs 1990, Silverstein & Urban 1996). The renewed focus on ideology shaped
a new way of formulating language-society relationships and opened new av-
enues for analyzing language practice and reﬂexively discussing analytical prac-
tice. Scholarly traditions were reviewed in light of these reformulated questions
(Irvine 1995; Blommaert 1996, 1997b), and established views of language and
society were questioned (Silverstein 1998). Apart from a widespread acceptance
of the notion of “construction” in such research, an important stimulus for reﬂex-
ive research into analytical practices was provided by Goodwin’s (1994) work on
“professional vision,” which arrived at a deeply critical perspective on professional
authority and expert status in contemporary society, and which demonstrated in
great detail the anchoring of such status and authority in situated and contextual-
ized social practice. Similar results were yielded by Mertz (1992) in analyses of
the discursive teaching strategies of professors in an American law school.
Ideology has also become a crucial concern outside linguistic anthropology.
In sociolinguistic milieux in Europe and elsewhere, similar attention to the im-
plicit theories underlying established views of language and language practice
emerged in roughly the same period. Joseph & Taylor’s (1990) collection of es-
says broke ground in investigating the ideological foundations of the language
sciences, observing that “[l]inguistics is perhaps more of a problem than a solu-
tion” in the social sciences (Laurendeau 1990:206). Williams (1992) provided a
trenchant social-theoretical critique of mainstream sociolinguistics, demonstrating
its Parsonian structural-functionalist underpinnings (see also Figueroa 1994). In
the meantime, Milroy & Milroy (1985) had written a landmark study on linguistic
purism and prescriptivism, and Cameron had both identiﬁed a number of language-
ideological phenomena labeled verbal hygiene (Cameron 1995) and coauthored
an important collection of critical essays on the practice of sociolinguistic research
(Cameron et al 1992).
In the ﬁeld of pragmatics, ideology has become a major ﬁeld of inquiry
(Verschueren 1999). Reﬂexive awareness about the ideologies guiding scholarly
practices has been attested in the critical surveys of one of pragmatics’ most
prominent branches, politeness theory (Eelen 1999, Kienpointner 1999). Spurred
by work of Bourdieu and Latour, applied linguists have equally begun investigating
the underlying assumptions of analysis in education (e.g. Alexander et al 1991)
and in other domains of professional practice (Gunnarson et al 1997, Linell &
Sarangi 1998).
Inequality and Power
A second feature of the critical paradigm is the renewed
attention to inequality and power in relation to language in society. CDA is surely
not alone in its predilection for political and other “powerful” discourse as an ob-
ject of analysis. Linguistic anthropologists such as Bloch (1975) and Brenneis &
Myers (1984) broke ground with inﬂuential collections of studies on political dis-
course genres in non-Western societies, and this line of work has been continued
Annu. Rev. Anthropol. 2000.29:447-466. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
 Access provided by Eastern Kentucky University - Crabbe Library on 01/25/19. For personal use only. 


458
BLOMMAERT ■BULCAEN
with important theoretical results by other scholars (e.g. Duranti 1988). A precur-
sor to CDA was work by Mey (1985), which was presented as a contribution to the
theory of pragmatics. Wilson’s (1990) inﬂuential study of political discourse is
pragmatic in approach and objective, as are those of, for example, Diamond (1996),
Harris (1995), and Kuzar (1997). Studies such as those by Flowerdew (1998) are
based on rhetorical analysis. Similarly, professional settings in which power asym-
metries occur have been explored by a variety of discourse-analytical traditions
within pragmatics, notably conversation analysis (e.g. Firth 1995, Grossen & Orvig
1998).
An issue that has gained prominence in research is that of inequality and the
positioning of individuals and groups in contemporary social and political hierar-
chies. Hymes’ (1996) reedition of critical essays on education and narrative re-
opened debates on the allocation of speaking rights and linguistic-communicative
resources, offered an interesting reappraisal of Bernstein (as well as of Bourdieu
and Habermas), and argued forcefully for more attention to communicative in-
equalities in linguistic anthropology and sociolinguistics. The locus of such in-
equalities was found in differences between available narrative resources (e.g.
colloquial, dialect, anecdotal) and (often institutionally) required narrative re-
sources (e.g. standard, literate, logical) (cf also Ochs & Capps 1996). Similarly,
two recent volumes edited by Charles Briggs (1996, 1997b), following an earlier
one edited by Grimshaw (1990), placed conﬂict and its discursive resources high
on the agenda. In particular, Briggs showed how the construction of texts and
discourses across contexts—processes of entextualization—can result in power-
ful social effects, thus focusing on inequalities in the control over contexts (see
Barthes 1956) as well as over speciﬁc genres and ways of speaking. Power depends
not only on access to resources but also on access to contexts in which resources
can be used. The similarities between this research program and the intertextual
analysis proposed in Fairclough (1992a) are striking.
Detailed attention to narratives also provided a fertile ground for investigating
history and the historical power relationships that put people in their current socio-
geographical space. From different perspectives, both Collins (1998) and Fabian
(1990) demonstrated how narratives of group (or local geographical) history can
yield traces of past relationships between political, cognitive, and ideological hege-
monies and patterns of resistance. Similar concerns of language and social history
have yielded an innovative body of work in sociolinguistics, in which languages
and language varieties are described in terms of politicized (or politicizable) in-
dexicalities. We thus arrive at views of language in society that hinge on power
hierarchies, power semiotics, and power effects, often related to identity politics
and inﬂuenced by the work of identiﬁable political actors in society (Woolard 1989;
Heller 1994, 1999; Jaffe 1999). The inﬂuence of Bourdieu and Gramsci is clear in
this work, as is the tendency to frame the story of language in society in material-
ist terms and the tendency to blend large-scale political and societal observations
with detailed analyses of linguistic-communicative practices [thus arriving at what
Heller (1999) calls a “sociolinguistic ethnography”]. Of particular importance in
Annu. Rev. Anthropol. 2000.29:447-466. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
 Access provided by Eastern Kentucky University - Crabbe Library on 01/25/19. For personal use only. 


CRITICAL DISCOURSE ANALYSIS
459
this respect is Rampton’s (1995) work. Rampton addresses the ways in which local
subcultural identities are being formed and manipulated by means of a variety of
communicative styles among multi-ethnic adolescent groups in Britain. Drawing
on a wide range of social-theoretical sources (including, prominently, Giddens,
Gilroy, and Goffman), Rampton demonstrates the ﬂexible allocation practices of
communicative resources in identity work. Simple correlates between identity and
speech style/variety do not hold, and what becomes clear is that linear relation-
ships such as that between “native speaker,” “competence,” and a particular group
identity are less than satisfactory tools for grasping the intricate work of expertise
and afﬁliation detectable in the ﬁeld.
All the approaches discussed so far give pride of place to issues of linguistic-
communicative resources placed against a double background of large-scale soci-
etal processes on the one hand, and micro-level interaction events on the other. The
connection between language and social structure is not made a priori; rather, it is
sought in the practical interplay between concrete actions and group- or society-
level forces and patterns. In work such as that by Rampton and Briggs, the blending
of ethnography and sociolinguistics has led to very productive and nuanced treat-
ments of context as produced both on-line and situationally, yet tied to larger condi-
tions of production and circulation of semiotic resources in empirically veriﬁable
ways. This sort of work thus offers important corrections both to conversation-
analytical restrictions of context to the one-time, oriented–toward members’ con-
text (Briggs 1997a) and to the “narrative” and backgrounded context-by-deﬁnition
of CDA. Needless to say, this type of work also offers advantages over work
that focuses on differences without considering the ways in which differences are
socially ranked and made consequential (as in much work on intercultural commu-
nication), as well as over work that assumes relatively stable relationships between
linguistic varieties and sociopolitical functions (as in work in the “linguistic rights”
paradigm).
Social Theory
A third feature of the critical paradigm, already mentioned in
passing, is the common desire to ﬁnd social-theoretical support for analytical
treatments of language. Language is studied for what it tells one about society,
and linguistic method should be open to theoretical insights into the structure of
societies. There is a body of literature in which calls for improved incorporation of
social theory into linguistic analysis are being voiced, often advocating materialist
approaches to questions of linguistic resources and the social use of language, and
engaging in discussions of Marxist scholars, ranging from Gramsci and Bourdieu
to Rossi-Landi (Woolard 1985, Rickford 1986, Laurendeau 1990, Irvine 1989, Gal
1989). The reassessment of Bernstein’s work by Hymes (1996) has already been
mentioned. An incorporation of historical theory into the analysis of language
in society was attempted in Blommaert (1999). Goodwin (1994) compellingly
demonstrateshowprofessionalexpertise, seenintermsofsituatedsemioticpractice
involving discourse, bodily practice, and institutionalization, can be viewed as a
Foucaultian “power-knowledge.”
Annu. Rev. Anthropol. 2000.29:447-466. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
 Access provided by Eastern Kentucky University - Crabbe Library on 01/25/19. For personal use only. 


460
BLOMMAERT ■BULCAEN
The sources for new insights are inﬁnite, and so far little use has been made of
a great number of potentially useful developments in other disciplines. Historical
theory has so far hardly been used as a resource for critical studies of language,
despite the obviously relevant contributions of scholars such as, for example, Marc
Bloch, Fernand Braudel, Carlo Ginzburg, Peter Burke, Immanuel Wallerstein, and
Edward Thompson. Equally less noticed, in the opposite direction, is the poten-
tial effect of new reinterpretations, ethnographically established, of Benjamin Lee
Whorf (provided among others by Hymes and Silverstein) on social theory. The
idea of metacommunicative levels in social communicative behavior as well as
that of the functional relativity of languages, styles, and genres have a potential for
becoming important critical tools both for linguistics and for other social-scientiﬁc
disciplines in which language and communicative behavior feature—history, an-
thropology, psychology, and sociology immediately come to mind. The effect of
these insights on the ways in which texts, narratives, documentary evidence, and
so forth are treated as sources of “meaning” (or “information”) can contribute
signiﬁcantly to a greater awareness of small but highly relevant power features in
such materials.
ASSESSING CDA
The above selective survey is aimed at demonstrating that CDA, as an original
and stimulating research discipline, should be situated within a wider panorama
of common concerns, questions, and approaches developing among a much wider
scholarly community. At the same time, CDA may beneﬁt from the critical poten-
tial of these related developments in order to remedy some of its theoretical and
methodological weaknesses, notably those related to the treatments of context in
CDA. The latter is arguably the biggest methodological issue faced by CDA.
At the micro-level, concrete instances of talk or concrete features of text
could be analyzed more satisfactorily if a more dynamic concept of context—
contextualization—were used. The developments in linguistic anthropology, in
which processes of contextualization [de- and recontextualization, entextualiza-
tion (Bauman & Briggs 1990, Silverstein & Urban 1996)] could be a fertile source
of inspiration for developing a dynamic concept of context. In general, more at-
tention to ethnography as a resource for contextualizing data and as a theory for
the interpretation of data could remedy some of the current problems with context
and interpretation in CDA (for general discussions and arguments, see Duranti &
Goodwin 1992, Auer & diLuzio 1992).
At the macro-level, CDA seems to pay little attention to matters of distribu-
tion and resulting availability/accessibility patterns of linguistic-communicative
resources. Only the texts become objects of a political economy; the conditions
of production of texts and more speciﬁcally the way in which the resources that
go into text are being managed in societies are rarely discussed (e.g. with re-
spect to literacy, control over codes, etc). At this point, recent sociolinguistic and
linguistic-anthropological work, such as that of Hymes, Briggs, Woolard, Gal,
Annu. Rev. Anthropol. 2000.29:447-466. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
 Access provided by Eastern Kentucky University - Crabbe Library on 01/25/19. For personal use only. 


CRITICAL DISCOURSE ANALYSIS
461
Rampton, and Heller could considerably contribute toward a more reﬁned im-
age of languages, genres, and styles, as embedded in ﬂexible but highly sensitive
repertoires that have a history of sociopolitical distribution. Linguistic resources
are contexts in the sense that they are part of the conditions of production of any
utterance or text and thus determine what can and cannot be said by some people
in some situations.
The way in which CDA treats the historicity of text (largely reducible to assump-
tions about intertextual chains) could beneﬁt from genuinely historical theoretical
insights. On the one hand, stock could be taken of the “natural histories of dis-
course” perspective developed by Silverstein & Urban (1996); on the other hand,
the acknowledgment of an intrinsic and layered historicity of each social event
could contribute to more accurate assessments of what certain texts do in soci-
eties. The contextualization of discourse data would beneﬁt from a more attentive
stance toward the historical positioning of the events in which the discourse data
are set (as well as of the historical positioning of the moment of analysis: “Why
now?” is a relevant question in analysis).
CDA is still burdened by a very “linguistic” outlook, which prevents produc-
tive ways of incorporating linguistic and nonlinguistic dimensions of semiosis
(apparent, for instance, in the very partial interpretation of Foucault’s “discours”
in Fairclough’s work). Here as well, a more ethnographically informed stance, in
which linguistic practice is embedded in more general patterns of human meaning-
ful action, could be highly productive. Goodwin’s work could serve as an example
here.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We wish to thank Alessandro Duranti, Ben Rampton, and Stef Slembrouck for
valuable comments on a ﬁrst version of this paper.
Visit the Annual Reviews home page at www.AnnualReviews.org
LITERATURE CITED
Alexander PA, Schallert MD, Hare VC. 1991.
Coming to terms: how researchers in learn-
ing and literacy talk about knowledge. Rev.
Educ. Res. 61(3):315–43
Althusser L. 1971. Lenin and Philosophy and
Other Essays. London: New Left Books
Auer P, diLuzio A, eds. 1992. The Contextual-
izationofLanguage.Amsterdam: Benjamins
Barthes R. 1956. Mythologies. Paris: Le Seuil
Barton D, Hamilton M. 1998. Local Litera-
cies: Reading and Writing in One Commu-
nity. London: Routledge
Barton D, Hamilton M, Ivanic R, eds. 2000.
Situated Literacies: Reading and Writing in
Context. London: Routledge
Barton D, Ivanic R, eds. 1991. Writing in the
Community. London: Sage
Bauman R, Briggs C. 1990. Poetics and perfor-
mance as critical perspectives on language
and social life. Annu. Rev. Anthropol. 19:59–
88
Baynham M. 1995. Literacy Practices: Investi-
gating Literacy in Social Contexts. London:
Longman
Annu. Rev. Anthropol. 2000.29:447-466. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
 Access provided by Eastern Kentucky University - Crabbe Library on 01/25/19. For personal use only. 


462
BLOMMAERT ■BULCAEN
Baynham M, Slembrouck S, eds. 1999. Speech
Representation and Institutional Discourse.
Special Issue Text 19(4):459–592
Billig M. 1999a. Whose terms? Whose ordinar-
iness? Rhetoric and ideology in conversation
analysis. Discourse Soc. 10(4):543–58
Billig M. 1999b. Conversation analysis and the
claims of naivety. Discourse Soc. 10(4):572–
76
Birch D. 1998. Criticism, linguistic. In Con-
cise Encyclopedia of Pragmatics, ed. J Mey,
pp. 190–94. Oxford, UK: Pergamon/Elsevier
Bloch M, ed. 1975. Political Language and
Oratory in Traditional Societies. London:
Academic
Blommaert J. 1996. Language planning as
a discourse on language and society:
on
the linguistic ideology of a scholarly tradi-
tion. Lang. Probl. Lang. Plan. 20(3):199–
222
Blommaert J. 1997a. Whose background?
Comments on a discourse-analytic recon-
struction of the Warsaw Uprising. Pragmat-
ics 7(1):69–81
Blommaert J. 1997b. Workshopping:
notes
on professional vision in discourse analysis.
Antwerp Pap. Linguist., Vol. 91. Antwerp,
Belgium: Univ. Antwerp
Blommaert J, ed. 1999. Language Ideological
Debates. Berlin: De Gruyter
Blommaert J, Bulcaen C, eds. 1997. Political
Linguistics. Amsterdam: Benjamins
Bourdieu P. 1991. Language and Symbolic
Power. Cambridge, UK: Polity
Brenneis DL, Myers FR, eds. 1984. Dangerous
Words: Language and Politics in the Paciﬁc.
New York: NY Univ. Press
Briggs C, ed. 1996. Disorderly Discourse: Nar-
rative, Conﬂict and Inequality. New York:
Oxford Univ. Press
Briggs C. 1997a. Notes on a ‘confession’: the
construction of gender, sexuality and vi-
olence in an infanticide case. See Briggs
1997b, pp. 519–46
Briggs C, ed. 1997b. Conﬂict and Violence in
Pragmatic Research. Special issue Pragmat-
ics 7(4):451–633
Caldas-Coulthard CR. 1993. From discourse
analysis to critical discourse analysis: the
differential representation of women and
men speaking in written news. In Techniques
of Description:
Spoken and Written Dis-
course, ed. JM Sinclair, M Hoey, G Fox,
pp. 196–208. London: Routledge
Caldas-Coulthard CR. 1996. ‘Women who pay
for sex. And enjoy it’: transgression versus
morality in women’s magazines. See Caldas-
Coulthard & Coulthard 1996, pp. 250–70
Caldas-Coulthard CR, Coulthard M, eds. 1996.
Texts and Practices: Readings in Critical
Discourse Analysis. London: Routledge
Cameron D. 1995. Verbal Hygiene. London:
Routledge
Cameron D, Frazer E, Harvey P, Rampton B,
Richardson K. 1992. Researching Language:
Issues of Power and Method. London: Rout-
ledge
Chilton P, Mey J, Ilyin M, eds. 1998. Politi-
cal Discourse in Transition in Europe 1989–
1991. Amsterdam: Benjamins
Chouliaraki L. 1998. Regulation in ‘progres-
sivist’ pedagogic discourse: individualized
teacher-pupil talk. Discourse Soc. 9(1):5–32
Chouliaraki L, Fairclough N. 1999. Discourse
in Late Modernity:
Rethinking Critical
Discourse Analysis. Edinburgh: Edinburgh
Univ. Press
Clark R, Fairclough N, Ivanic R, Martin-Jones
M. 1989. Critical language awareness. Part 1:
A critical review of three current approaches.
Lang. Educ. 4(4):249–60
Clark R, Fairclough N, Ivanic R, Martin-Jones
M. 1990. Critical language awareness. Part
2: Towards critical alternatives. Lang. Educ.
5(1):41–54
Clark U, Zyngier S. 1998. Women beware
women: detective ﬁction and critical dis-
course analysis. Lang. Lit. 7(2):141–58
Collins
J.
1998.
Understanding
Tolowa
Histories: Western Hegemonies and Native
American Responses. New York: Routledge
Cope B, Kalantzis M, eds. 2000. Multilitera-
cies: Literacy Learning and the Design of
Social Futures. London: Routledge
Annu. Rev. Anthropol. 2000.29:447-466. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
 Access provided by Eastern Kentucky University - Crabbe Library on 01/25/19. For personal use only. 


CRITICAL DISCOURSE ANALYSIS
463
Diamond J. 1996. Status and Power in Ver-
bal Interaction:
A Study of Discourse in
a Close-Knit Social Network. Amsterdam:
Benjamins
Duranti A. 1988. Intentions, language and so-
cial action in a Samoan context. J. Pragmat.
12:13–33
Duranti A. 1997. Linguistic Anthropology.
Cambridge, UK: Cambridge Univ. Press
Duranti A, Goodwin C, eds. 1992 Rethinking
Context. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge Univ.
Press
Eelen G. 1999. Ideology in politeness: a crit-
ical analysis. PhD thesis. Univ. Antwerp,
Antwerp, Belgium. 353 pp.
Errington JJ. 1998. Indonesian(’s) develop-
ment: on the state of a language of state.
See Schieffelin et al 1998, pp. 271–84
Fabian J. 1986. Language and Colonial Power.
Cambridge, UK: Cambridge Univ. Press
Fabian J. 1990. History from Below. Amster-
dam: Benjamins
Fairclough N. 1989. Language and Power.
London: Longman
Fairclough N. 1992a. Discourse and Social
Change. Cambridge, UK: Polity
Fairclough N. 1992b. Linguistic and intertex-
tual analysis within discourse analysis. Dis-
course Soc. 3:193–217
Fairclough N, ed. 1992c. Critical Language
Awareness. London: Longman
Fairclough N. 1995a. Media Discourse. Lon-
don: Arnold
Fairclough N. 1995b. Critical Discourse Anal-
ysis. London: Longman
Fairclough N. 1996. A reply to Henry Widdow-
son’s ‘Discourse analysis: a critical view.’
Lang. Lit. 5(1):49–56
Fairclough N, Mauranen A. 1997. The conver-
sationalization of political discourse: a com-
parative view. See Blommaert & Bulcaen
1997, pp. 89–119
Figueroa E. 1994. Sociolinguistic Metatheory.
Oxford, UK: Pergamon
Firth A. 1995. The Discourse of Negotiation:
Studies of Language in the Workplace. New
York: Pergamon
Flowerdew J. 1998. The Final Years of British
HongKong: TheDiscourseofColonialWith-
drawal. Hong Kong: Macmillan
Foucault M. 1971. L’Ordre du Discours. Paris:
Gallimard
Foucault M. 1977. Discipline and Punish. Lon-
don: Lane
Fowler R. 1996. On Critical Linguistics.
See Caldas-Coulthard & Coulthard 1996,
pp. 3–14
Fowler R, Hodge R, Kress G, Trew T. 1979.
Language and Control. London: Routledge,
Kegan Paul
Gal S. 1989. Language and political economy.
Annu. Rev. Anthropol. 18:345–67
Gal S, Woolard K, ed. 1995. Constructing Lan-
guages and Publics. Special Issue Pragmat-
ics 5(2):129–282
Giddens A. 1984. The Constitution of Soci-
ety. Outline of the Theory of Structuration.
Cambridge, UK: Polity
Goodwin C. 1994. Professional vision. Am.
Anthropol. 96(3):606–33
Gramsci A. 1971. Selections from the Prison
Notebooks. London: Lawrence, Wishart
Grimshaw AD, ed. 1990. Conﬂict Talk: So-
ciolinguistic Investigations of Arguments in
Conversation. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge
Univ. Press
Grossen M, Orvig AS, eds. 1998. Clinical In-
terviews as Verbal Interactions: A Multidis-
ciplinary Outlook. Special Issue Pragmatics
8(2):149–297
Gunnarsson BL, Linell P, Nordberg B, eds.
1997. The Construction of Professional Dis-
course. London: Longman
Habermas J. 1984. The Theory of Communica-
tive Action. Vol. 1. Reason and the Rational-
ization of Society. London: Heinemann
Habermas J. 1987. The Theory of Communica-
tive Action. Vol. 2. Lifeworld and System: A
Critique of Functionalist Reason. London:
Heinemann
Hall C, Sarangi S, Slembrouck S. 1997.
Moral construction in social work dis-
course. See Gunnarson et al 1997, pp. 265–
91
Annu. Rev. Anthropol. 2000.29:447-466. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
 Access provided by Eastern Kentucky University - Crabbe Library on 01/25/19. For personal use only. 


464
BLOMMAERT ■BULCAEN
Hanks W. 1989. Text and textuality. Annu. Rev.
Anthropol. 18:95–127
Harris S. 1995. Pragmatics and power. J. Prag-
mat. 23:117–35
Hawisher GE, Selfe CL, eds. 2000. Global Lit-
eracies and the World-Wide Web. London:
Routledge
Heath SB. 1983. Ways with Words: Language,
Life and Work in Communities and Class-
rooms. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge Univ.
Press
Heller M. 1994. Crosswords: Language, Ed-
ucation and Ethnicity in French Ontario.
Berlin: De Gruyter
Heller M. 1999. Linguistic Minorities and
Modernity: A Sociolinguistic Ethnography.
London: Longman
Hodge R, KressG. 1979. Language as Ideology.
London: Routledge, Kegan Paul
Hodge R, KressG. 1993. Language as Ideology.
London: Routledge. 2nd ed.
Hymes DH. 1996. Ethnography, Linguistics,
Narrative Inequality:
Toward an Under-
standing of Voice. London: Taylor, Francis
Irvine J. 1989. When talk isn’t cheap: lan-
guage and political economy. Am. Ethnol.
16(2):248–67
Irvine J. 1995. The family romance of colonial
linguistics: gender and family in nineteenth-
century representations of African lan-
guages. See Gal & Wolard 1995, pp. 139–53.
Ivanic R. 1998. Writing and Identity: The Dis-
coursal Construction of Identity in Academic
Writing. Amsterdam: Benjamins
Jaffe A. 1999. Ideologies in Action: Language
Politics on Corsica. Berlin: De Gruyter
Jaworski A, Coupland N, eds. 1999. The Dis-
course Reader. London: Routledge
Joseph JE, Taylor TJ, eds. 1990. Ideologies of
Language. London: Routledge
Kienpointner M, ed. 1999. Ideologies of Polite-
ness. Special Issue Pragmatics 9(1):1–176
Kress G. 1994. Text and grammar as explana-
tion. In Text, Discourse and Context: Rep-
resentations of Poverty in Britain, ed. UH
Meinhof, K Richardson, pp. 24–46. London:
Longman
Kress G. 1997. Before Writing. Rethinking the
Paths to Literacy. London: Routledge
Kress G, van Leeuwen T. 1996. Reading Im-
ages: The Grammar of Visual Design. Lon-
don: Routledge
Kuzar R. 1997. Split word, split subject, split
society. Pragmatics 7(1):21–54
Laclau E, Mouffe C. 1985. Hegemony and So-
cialist Strategy. London: Verso
Laurendeau P. 1990. Theory of emergence:
towards a historical-materialistic approach
to the history of linguistics. See Joseph &
Taylor 1990, pp. 206–20
Linell P, Sarangi S, eds. 1998. Discourse Across
Professional Boundaries. Special Issue Text
18(2):143–318
Martin JR. 2000. Close reading: functional lin-
guistics as a tool for critical discourse anal-
ysis. In Researching Language in Schools
and Communities:
Functional Linguistic
Perspectives, ed. L Unsworth, pp. 275–302.
London: Cassell
Mart´
ın Rojo L. 1995. Division and rejection:
from the personiﬁcation of the Gulf conﬂict
to the demonization of Saddam Hussein. Dis-
course Soc. 6:49–80
Mart´
ın Rojo L, van Dijk T. 1997. “There was
a problem, and it was solved!”: legitimating
the expulsion of ‘illegal’ migrants in Span-
ish parliamentary discourse. Discourse Soc.
8(4):523–66
Mertz E. 1992. Linguistic ideology and praxis
in U.S. law school classrooms. Pragmatics
2/3:325–34
Mey J. 1985. Whose Language?
A Study
in
Linguistic
Pragmatics.
Amsterdam:
Benjamins
Milroy J, Milroy L. 1985. Authority in Lan-
guage: Investigating Language Prescription
and Standardisation. London:
Routledge,
Kegan Paul
Milroy J, Milroy L. 1999. Authority in Lan-
guage:
Investigating Standard English.
London: Routledge. 3rd ed.
New London Group. 1996. A pedagogy of mul-
tiliteracies: designing social futures. Harv.
Educ. Rev. 66:60–92
Annu. Rev. Anthropol. 2000.29:447-466. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
 Access provided by Eastern Kentucky University - Crabbe Library on 01/25/19. For personal use only. 


CRITICAL DISCOURSE ANALYSIS
465
Ochs E, Capps L. 1996. Narrating the self.
Annu. Rev. Anthropol. 25:19–43
Pennycook A. 1994. Incommensurable dis-
courses? Appl. Linguist. 15(2):115–38
Rampton
B.
1995.
Crossing:
Language
and Ethnicity Among Adolescents. London:
Longman
Rickford J. 1986. The need for new approaches
to social class analysis in sociolinguistics.
Lang. Commun. 6(3):215–21
Sarangi S, Slembrouck S. 1996. Language,
Bureaucracy and Social Control. London:
Longman
Sch¨
affner C, Wenden A, eds. 1995. Language
and Peace. Aldershot, UK: Dartmouth
Schegloff EA. 1997. Whose text? Whose con-
text? Discourse Soc. 8(2):165–87
Schegloff EA. 1998. Reply to Wetherell. Dis-
course Soc. 9(3):413–16
Schegloff EA. 1999a. ‘Schegloff’s texts’ as
‘Billig’s data’: a critical reply. Discourse
Soc. 10(4):558–72
Schegloff EA. 1999b. Naivete vs sophistication
or discipline vs self-indulgence. A rejoinder
to Billig. Discourse Soc. 10(4):577–82
Schieffelin BB, Doucet RC. 1998. The ‘real’
Haitian Creole:
ideology, metalinguistics,
and orthographic choice. See Schieffelin et al
1998, pp. 285–316
Schieffelin BB, Woolard KA, Kroskrity PV,
eds. 1998. Language Ideologies: Practice
and Theory. New York: Oxford Univ. Press
Silverstein M. 1979. Language structure and
linguistic ideology. In The Elements:
A
Parasession on Linguistic Units and Levels,
ed. PR Clyne, WF Hanks, CL Hofbauer,
pp. 193–247. Chicago: Chicago Linguist.
Soc.
Silverstein M. 1996. Monoglot ‘standard’ in
America: standardization and metaphors of
linguistic hegemony. In The Matrix of Lan-
guage: Contemporary Linguistic Anthropol-
ogy, ed. D. Brenneis, RS Macaulay, pp. 284–
306. Boulder, CO: Westview
SilversteinM.1998.Contemporarytransforma-
tions of local linguistic communities. Annu.
Rev. Anthropol. 27:401–26
Silverstein M, Urban G, eds. 1996. Natural His-
tories of Discourse. Chicago: Univ. Chicago
Press
Slembrouck S. 1993. Globalising ﬂows: pro-
motional discourses of government in West-
ern European ‘orders of discourse.’ Soc.
Semiot. 3(2):265–92
Slembrouck S. 1995. Channel. See Verschueren
et al 1995, pp. 1–20.
Spitulnik D. 1998. Mediating unity and diver-
sity: the production of language ideologies in
Zambian broadcasting. See Schieffelin et al
1998, pp. 163–88
Street B. 1995. Social Literacies:
Critical
Approaches to Literacy in Development,
Ethnography and Education. London: Long-
man
Stubbs M. 1997. Whorf’s children:
critical
comments on CDA. In Evolving Models of
Language, ed. A Ryan, A Wray, pp. 100–16.
Milton Keynes, UK: Multilingual Matters
Talbot M. 1992. The construction of gender in
a teenage magazine. See Fairclough 1992a,
pp. 174–99
Thompson JB. 1990. Ideology and Modern Cul-
ture. Cambridge, UK: Polity
Thornborrow J. 1998. Playing hard to get:
metaphor and representation in the discourse
of car advertisements. Lang. Lit. 7(3):254–
72
Toolan M. 1997. What is critical discourse anal-
ysis and why are people saying such terrible
things about it? Lang. Lit. 6(2):83–103
van Dijk T. 1987. Communicating Racism: Eth-
nic Prejudice in Thought and Talk. Newbury
Park, CA: Sage
van Dijk T. 1991. Racism and the Press.
London: Routledge
van Dijk T. 1993a. Critical and descriptive goals
in discourse analysis. J. Pragmat. 9:739–63
van Dijk T. 1993b. Elite Discourse and Racism.
Newbury Park, CA: Sage
van Dijk T. 1993c. Principles of critical dis-
course analysis. Discourse Soc. 4:249–83
van Dijk T. 1995. Discourse analysis as ideol-
ogy analysis. See Sch¨
affner & Wenden 1995,
pp. 17–33
Annu. Rev. Anthropol. 2000.29:447-466. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
 Access provided by Eastern Kentucky University - Crabbe Library on 01/25/19. For personal use only. 


466
BLOMMAERT ■BULCAEN
van Dijk T. 1997. What is political discourse
analysis? See Blommaert & Bulcaen 1997,
pp. 11–52
van Dijk T. 1998. Ideology: A Multidisciplinary
Approach. London: Sage
van Leeuwen T. 1993. Genre and ﬁeld in criti-
cal discourse analysis: a synopsis. Discourse
Soc. 4(2):193–223
van Leeuwen T. 1996. The representation
of social actors. See Caldas-Coulthard &
Coulthard 1996, pp. 32–70
van Leeuwen T, Wodak R. 1999. Legitimizing
immigration control:
discourse-historical
analysis. Discourse Stud. 1(1):83–118
Verschueren J, ed. 1999. Language and Ide-
ology. Selected Pap. 6th Int. Pragmat. Conf.
Antwerp, Belgium: Int. Pragmat. Assoc.
Verschueren J, ¨
Ostman JO, Blommaert J, eds.
1995. Handbook of Pragmatics 1995. Ams-
terdam: Benjamins
Walsh C. 1998. Gender and mediatized political
discourse: a case study of press coverage of
Margaret Beckett’s campaign for the Labour
leadership in 1994. Lang. Lit. 7(3):199–
214
Wetherell M. 1998. Positioning and interpreta-
tive repertoires: CA and post-structuralism
in dialogue. Discourse Soc. 9(3):387–412
Widdowson H. 1995.
Discourse analysis: a
critical view. Lang. Lit. 4(3):157–72
Widdowson H. 1996. Reply to Fairclough. Dis-
course and interpretation: conjectures and
refutations. Lang. Lit. 5(1):57–69
Widdowson H. 1998. The theory and practice
of critical discourse analysis. Appl. Linguist.
19(1):136–51
Williams G. 1992. Sociolinguistics: A Socio-
logical Critique. London: Routledge
Wilson J. 1990. Politically Speaking. The
Pragmatic Analysis of Political Language.
London: Blackwell
Wodak R, ed. 1989. Language, Power and Ide-
ology. Studies in Political Discourse. Ams-
terdam: Benjamins
Wodak R. 1995. Critical linguistics and criti-
cal discourse analysis. See Verschueren et al
1995, pp. 204–10
Wodak R. 1996. Disorders of Discourse.
London: Longman
Wodak R. 1997. Critical discourse analysis and
the study of doctor-patient interaction. See
Gunnarsson et al 1997, pp. 173–200
Wodak R, Reisigl M. 1999. Discourse and
racism: European perspectives. Annu. Rev.
Anthropol. 28:175–99
WoolardKA.1985.Languagevariationandcul-
tural hegemony: toward an integration of so-
ciolinguistics and social theory. Am. Ethnol.
2(4):738–48
Woolard K. 1989. Double Talk: Bilingualism
and the Politics of Ethnicity in Catalonia.
Stanford: Stanford Univ. Press
Woolard KA. 1998. Language ideology as a
ﬁeld of inquiry. See Schieffelin et al 1998,
pp. 3–47
Woolard KA, Schieffelin BB. 1994. Language
ideology. Annu. Rev. Anthropol. 23:55–
82
Annu. Rev. Anthropol. 2000.29:447-466. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
 Access provided by Eastern Kentucky University - Crabbe Library on 01/25/19. For personal use only. 


Annu. Rev. Anthropol. 2000.29:447-466. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
 Access provided by Eastern Kentucky University - Crabbe Library on 01/25/19. For personal use only. 


Annu. Rev. Anthropol. 2000.29:447-466. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
 Access provided by Eastern Kentucky University - Crabbe Library on 01/25/19. For personal use only. 




Critical Discourse Analysis


This page intentionally left blank


Critical Discourse
Analysis
The Critical Study 
of Language
Second edition
NORMAN FAIRCLOUGH


Second edition published 2010
The right of Norman Fairclough to be identiﬁed as 
author of this work has been asserted by him in 
accordance with the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988.
British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data
A CIP catalogue record for this book can be obtained from the British Library
Library of Congress Cataloging in Publication Data
A CIP catalog record for this book can be obtained from the Library of Congress
Set by 35 in 11/13pt Bulmer MT
First published 1995 by Pearson Education Limited
Published 2013 by Routledge 
2 Park Square, Milton Park, Abingdon, Oxon OX14 4RN
711 Third Avenue, New York, NY 10017, USA
 
Routledge is an imprint of the Taylor & Francis Group, an informa business 
Copyright © 1995, 2010, Taylor & Francis.
All rights reserved. No part oI this book may be reprinted or reproduced or utilised in any Iorm or
by any electronic, mechanical, or other means, now known or hereaIter invented, including
photocopying and recording, or in any inIormation storage or retrieval system, without permission
in writing Irom the publishers.
 
Notices
.nowledge and best practice in this Iield are constantly changing. As new research and experience
broaden our understanding, changes in research methods, proIessional practices, or medical
treatment may become necessary.
 
Practitioners and researchers must always rely on their own experience and knowledge in
evaluating and using any inIormation, methods, compounds, or experiments described herein. ,n
using such inIormation or methods they should be mindIul oI their own saIety and the saIety oI
others, including parties Ior whom they have a proIessional responsibility.
 
To the Iullest extent oI the law, neither the Publisher nor the authors, contributors, or editors,
assume any liability Ior any inMury andor damage to persons or property as a matter oI products
liability, negligence or otherwise, or Irom any use or operation oI any methods, products,
instructions, or ideas contained in the material herein. 
,S%N 13 9714055229 pbk


Contents
Series editor’s preface
vii
Acknowledgements
xii
General introduction
1
Section A Language, ideology and power
23
Introduction
25
1
Critical and descriptive goals in discourse analysis
30
2
Language and ideology
56
3
Semiosis, ideology and mediation. A dialectical view
69
Section B Discourse and sociocultural change
85
Introduction
87
4
Critical discourse analysis and the marketisation of public 
discourse: the universities
91
5
Discourse, change and hegemony
126
6
Ideology and identity change in political television
146
Section C Dialectics of discourse: theoretical 
developments
161
Introduction
163
7
Discourse, social theory, and social research: the discourse of 
welfare reform
167
8
Critical realism and semiosis (with Bob Jessop and 
Andrew Sayer)
202


Section D Methodology in CDA research
223
Introduction
225
9
A dialectical–relational approach to critical discourse analysis 
in social research
230
10
Understanding the new management ideology. 
A transdisciplinary contribution from critical discourse analysis 
and the new sociology of capitalism (with Eve Chiapello)
255
11
Critical discourse analysis in researching language in the 
new capitalism: overdetermination, transdisciplinarity and 
textual analysis
281
12
Marx as a critical discourse analyst: the genesis of a critical 
method and its relevance to the critique of global capital 
(with Phil Graham)
301
13
Critical discourse analysis, organisational discourse and 
organisational change
347
Section E Political discourse
375
Introduction
377
14
New Labour: a language perspective
380
15
Democracy and the public sphere in critical research on 
discourse
392
16
Critical discourse analysis and citizenship (with Simon Pardoe 
and Bronislaw Szerszynski)
412
17
‘Political correctness’: the politics of culture and language
437
Section F Globalisation and ‘transition’
449
Introduction
451
18
Language and globalisation
454
19
Global capitalism, terrorism and war: a discourse-analytical 
perspective
478
20
Discourse and ‘transition’ in Central and Eastern Europe
503
Section G Language and education
527
Introduction
529
21
Critical language awareness and self-identity in education
531
22
Global capitalism and critical awareness of language
544
Bibliography and references
558
Index
582
vi
Contents


Series editor’s preface
C
ritical Discourse Analysis, in its ﬁrst edition in 1995, along with its pre-
decessor Language in Power, created in the world of applied linguistics
and discourse analysis a way and a means of systematically approaching the
relationships between language and social structure which has now not only
extended across those worlds but also had its impact across social science
more generally. It would be no exaggeration to say that those two books, along
with Norman Fairclough’s other key texts, notably Discourse and Social
Change, and his numerous papers and edited collections, changed the face of
the social analysis of language.
Critical Discourse Analysis in its ﬁrst edition offered a range of students of
linguistics, applied linguistics and language study, as well as communication
research in professions and organisations more generally, a framework and a
means of exploring the imbrications between language and social-institutional
practices, and beyond these, the intimate links between language as discourse
and broader social and political structures. A key innovation at that time was
to critique some of the premises and the constructs underpinning mainstream
studies in sociolinguistics, conversation analysis and pragmatics to demon-
strate the need of these disciplines to engage with issues of power and hege-
mony in a dynamic and historically informed manner, while at the same time
insisting on the dynamic and polysystemic description of language variation.
Indeed, the focus on the dynamics of discourse has proved especially produc-
tive for students of professional discourses such as those of law, politics, social
work, healthcare, language and literacy education. This is very much a conse-
quence of his viewing critical discourse analysis as relational research. Indeed,
making interrelations matter (whether among, and within, institutions of the
social order and between them, or the social formation more generally) links


serendipitously with applied linguistic calls in recent years for just such con-
nections. Indeed, Norman Fairclough has offered those practitioners whose
work is most obviously discoursed and languaged a means whereby they, now
often in collaboration with critical discourse analysts, can describe, interpret
and proffer explanations how their practices are discursively accomplished,
suggesting a way of clarifying the ideologically informed bases of the purposes
and methods of the professions themselves. At  the same time, his focus on the
dialecticsof discourse does not just provide a motivation for intellectual debate,
but also directly engages the understanding of interdiscursivityand its relation
to those semiotic modalities within and through which interdiscursivity is
realised, highlighting what he calls the two-way ‘ﬂow’ of discourse to and from
sociological/political constructs such as hegemony and power. Here again, his
formulations speak directly to applied linguists engaged in understanding the
focal themes of contemporary social institutions. His discussion in this new
edition of how participants, in his terms, construe their worlds, and how they
reﬂexively seek to change aspects of such worlds, to reconstruct them, offers
considerable backing to those researchers and participants intent on pursuing
a reﬂexive and critical agenda. Workers in the ﬁelds of communication in
healthcare, social work, language and literacy education, restorative justice,
political agency, have come to rely on his formulations and theorising almost
as a manifesto for action. I use the word ‘manifesto’ in its true sense; as a state-
ment of commitment to principle but also as a blueprint for practical action.
This is important if we are not to regard critical discourse analysis, as Norman
Fairclough manifestly does not, as merely a politically inspired approach to
analysing language, as it were, reading and seeking to change society ‘off 
the page’. Nothing could be further from the truth as this new edition, greatly
expanded with more recent papers and new sections, makes abundantly clear.
The papers in this collection represent a formidable treatise on critical dis-
course analysis from perhaps its leading exponent. To strike a personal note,
they go back to the early days of the formulation of such ideas when we were
colleagues at Lancaster; but now greatly enhanced both in terms of their scope,
their theoretical base, and also their inﬂuence. They provide the basis for
understanding the theoretical underpinnings of critical discourse analysis but
also the substance and warrant of its immense inﬂuence on research practice.
What are the key elements of this new edition for applied linguists engaged
with the critical exploration of discourse? Readers will discover many. For 
me, ﬁrstly, it is the insistence throughout on what Norman refers to as  trans-
disciplinary research. This is not merely to be seen, however, as forging links
between discourse study and sociology, politics, anthropology, inter alia, 
central though that is to his theme, it is also trans-professional in enabling 
discourse workers to collaborate with workers in other ﬁelds and disciplines
viii
General editor’s preface


in a programme of exploring praxis. There are now rather many examples of 
just such transdisciplinary work. Secondly, it is the engagement of structure
with strategy – again not necessarily at all focused on the macro contexts of the
social formation, though clearly Norman’s work speaks to that directly, but also
in the exploration of the micro interactional order, addressing how strategic
actions always are imbued with the inﬂuences of the institutional structural
order, however naturalised. Here Norman Fairclough comes closest to the
work of Bourdieu and of Cicourel, though with a distinctive engagement: one
might venture to say this is the key trio underpinning current work in applied
linguistics. Readers of the ﬁrst edition of Critical Discourse Analysis will have
found expression there, as they will do now even more substantially in this
much expanded new edition, of his abiding concern for the relevance of 
critical discourse analytical research as an contributive agent for social change;
in education, in the media, in the political order, and in respect of the eco-
nomic drivers of contemporary society. It is this which has both raised hopes
and stimulated action; it is also, we must acknowledge, a central focus of con-
tention within the linguistic and applied linguistic community. Here we can
emphasise a shift over time, from negative to positively motivated critique.
That also derives from a broader understanding of ‘critical’ than has often
been advanced in discussions of his work. Critical after all is not just even 
primarily, criticism, neither is it only a matter of focusing on critical moments
in interaction (although that for many is a mainspring of engaging with dis-
course analysis at all); it is primarily, for me at least, a seeking of the means of
explaining data in the context of social and political and institutional analysis,
and in terms of critiquing ideologically invested modes of explaining and
interpreting, but always with the sights set on positively motivated change. In
this way, text analysis (however multimodal), interaction analysis (however
framed), ethnographic study (however voiced) have always to be seen as each
interpenetrating the other in the context of a historically and politically
engaged understanding of the social order.
Such a picturing of critical discourse analysis is not as it were sui generis; 
it has its intellectual antecedents as Norman Fairclough amply displays in 
this new edition. More than that, however, it provides a foundation for, and a
practically motivated reasoning for, the aspirations of a socially committed
applied linguistics across a range of domains, sites and focal themes.
Christopher N. Candlin
Program in Communication in Professions and Organisations
Department of Linguistics
Macquarie University, Sydney
Australia
General editor’s preface
ix


Acknowledgements
W
e are grateful to the following for permission to reproduce copyright
material:
Tables
Table 11.1 from Our Competitive Future: Building a Knowledge Based Eco-
nomy, HMSO (Department of Trade and Industry 1998), Crown Copyright
material is reproduced with permission under the terms of the Click-Use
License.
Text
Example 4, Sample 2 from ‘Advertisement for Lectureship in Department of
English’, University of Newcastle upon Tyne, reprinted by permission of
Newcastle University; Appendix 7.1 from the DWP press release; Appendix
7.2 from New Ambitions for Our Country: A New Contract for Welfare (Green
Paper on Welfare Reform), The Stationery Office (Department of Social
Security 1998), Crown Copyright material is reproduced with permission
under the terms of the Click-Use License; Chapter 8, p. 217, extract from 
Our Competitive Future: Building the Knowledge Driven Economy, HMSO
(Department of Trade and Industry 1998), Crown Copyright material is
reproduced with permission under the terms of the Click-Use License;
Appendix 9.1 from Our Competitive Future: Building the Knowledge Driven
Economy, HMSO (Department of Trade and Industry 1998) Foreword,
Crown Copyright material is reproduced with permission under the terms 
of the Click-Use License; Chapter 14, p. 387, paragraph from New Ambitions


for Our Country: A New Contract for Welfare (Green Paper on Welfare
Reform); Chapter 18, pp. 469–70, extract from article ‘Police prepare to make
thousands of arrests at G8’, Daily Telegraph, 12 June 2005; Chapter 18, 
p. 472 and Chapter 22, pp. 546–7, extracts from MacDonald, R. (1994)
‘Fiddly jobs, undeclared working and something for nothing society’, Work,
Employment and Society, 8(4); Appendix 20.1 from A Strategic Goal for the
Next Decade, Lisbon Declaration (European Councils), reproduced with 
permission from the European Communities.
In some instances we have been unable to trace the owners of copyright 
material, and we would appreciate any information that would enable us to 
do so.
Norman Fairclough would also like to warmly thank the co-authors of papers
included in this book (Eve Chiapello, Phil Graham, Bob Jessop, Simon
Pardoe, Andrew Sayer, Bron Szerszynski) for the contribution which these
various collaborations have made to the development of his thinking about
critical discourse analysis.
Acknowledgements
xi


This page intentionally left blank


General introduction
T
his book is a collection of twenty-three papers in critical discourse 
analysis (CDA) which I have written, or in the case of four of them co-
authored, over a period of 25 years, between 1983 and 2008. It is a substan-
tial revision of the much shorter ﬁrst edition of Critical Discourse Analysis
which was published in 1995 and contained just ten papers. I have retained
six of these, and added seventeen new ones. I have grouped the papers in
seven sections of which three (Language, Ideology and Power; Discourse and
Social Change; Language and Education) correspond to sections in the ﬁrst
edition, while the other four (Dialectics of Discourse: Theoretical Develop-
ments; Methodology; Political Discourse; Globalisation and ‘Transition’)
reﬂect ways in which my work has developed since 1995. Although these 
sections do I think give a reasonable sense of main elements and emphases,
there are inevitably some thematic overlaps between them.
My original formulation of the broad objective of my work in CDA still
holds: to develop ways of analysing language which address its involvement 
in the workings of contemporary capitalist societies. The focus on capitalist
societies is not only because capitalism is the dominant economic system
internationally as well in Britain (where I have spent most of life), but also
because the character of the economic system affects all aspects of social life. 
I am not suggesting a mechanical ‘economic determinism’, but the main areas
of social life are interdependent and have effects on each other, and because of
the dominance of the economy in contemporary societies its effects are par-
ticularly strong and pervasive. For instance, the ‘neo-liberal’ version of capital-
ism which has been dominant for the past thirty years is widely recognised to
have entailed major changes in politics, in the nature of work, education and
healthcare, in social and moral values, in lifestyles, and so forth.


I am working within a tradition of critical social research which is focused
on better understanding of how and why contemporary capitalism prevents 
or limits, as well as in certain respects facilitating, human well-being and 
ﬂourishing. Such understanding may, in favourable circumstances, contri-
bute to overcoming or at least mitigating these obstacles and limits. This 
possibility follows from a property of the social world which differentiates it
from the natural world: the meanings and concepts through which people
interpret it and the knowledge they have of it are part of the social world and
can contribute to transforming the rest of it (Bhaskar 1979).
My objective in publishing this book also remains the same as for the ﬁrst
edition: to bring together in a single place papers which have appeared in
diverse and sometimes rather inaccessible locations in order to show continu-
ities, developments and changes in one line of work within CDA. Other books
I have published are also part of this picture, and I shall indicate some of the
relationships between them and the papers in this volume in separate intro-
ductions to each of the sections, which summarise the papers and identify
salient themes. I have kept the title Critical Discourse Analysis despite being
conscious that it might seem misleading (and even more so in 2009 than in
1995) to use the name of what has become a substantial and diverse inter-
national ﬁeld of teaching and research as the title for a collection of papers 
representing one line of work and tendency within this greater whole – though
I think it is true to say that it has been an inﬂuential one. So let me stress that
this is no more than my own particular view, changing over the years, of the
ﬁeld of CDA. But of course, in choosing to take this view rather than others 
I am suggesting that it is preferable in certain respects to others, so it is also 
no less than my own view of what CDA should be!
Colleagues in and beyond the ﬁeld of CDA have contributed a great deal 
to the development of my views. Some of them are present in the book as 
co-authors (Eve Chiapello, Phil Graham, Bob Jessop, Simon Pardoe, Andrew
Sayer, Bron Szerszynski), the many others include, within the ﬁeld of CDA,
Lilie Chouliaraki, Romy Clark, Isabela Ieocu-Fairclough, Roz Ivanim, Jay
Lemke, Gunther Kress, Ron Scollon, Teun van Dijk, Theo van Leeuwen and
Ruth Wodak, as well as my former research students and members of the
Lancaster ‘Language, Ideology and Power’ research group over a period of
some twenty years, and more recently the Bucharest ‘Re-scaling Romania’
research group. My considerable debts to past and present researchers in
CDA and other areas of study that I have not worked with so directly are par-
tially indicated in the references at the end of the book.
I shall begin by giving my views on discourse and on what critical discourse
analysis should be analysis of, on what should count as analysis, and what 
2
General introduction


critical analysis should be. In doing so I shall be taking a position not only on
CDA but also in CDA: in suggesting what discourse, analysis and critique are
I will also be suggesting what they are not, and differentiating my position
from that of others. I also suggest certain general measures to determine what
research and analysis counts as CDA or does not count as CDA. I then discuss
how CDA including my own work has contributed to critical social research
on the ‘neo-liberal’ form of capitalism which has been internationally dominant
over the past thirty years or so. This will lead to a ‘manifesto’ for CDA in the
changing circumstances at the time of writing: a ﬁnancial and economic crisis
which promises to be severe in its effects and serious in its consequences. I
shall discuss what role CDA can have, what it should be trying to achieve, and
in particular how it might contribute to responses to the crisis which seek to
tackle the difﬁculties and dangers that face us and enhance human well-being.
1 Discourse, analysis, critique
In my view CDA has these three basic properties: it is relational, it is dialect-
ical, and it is transdisciplinary. It is a relational form of research in the sense
that its primary focus in not on entities or individuals (in which I include both
things and persons) but on social relations (see further Paper 12, pages 301–40).
Social relations are very complex, and they are also ‘layered’ in the sense that
they include ‘relations between relations’. For example, ‘discourse’ might be
seen as some sort of entity or ‘object’, but it is itself a complex set of relations
including relations of communication between people who talk, write and 
in other ways communicate with each other, but also, for example, describe
relations between concrete communicative events (conversations, newspaper
articles etc.) and more abstract and enduring complex discursive ‘objects’
(with their own complex relations) like languages, discourses and genres. But
there are also relations between discourse and other such complex ‘objects’
including objects in the physical world, persons, power relations and institu-
tions, which are interconnected elements in social activity or praxis. The main
point for present purposes is that we cannot answer the question ‘what is 
discourse’ except in terms of both its ‘internal’ relations and its ‘external’ rela-
tions with such other ‘objects’. Discourse is not simply an entity we can deﬁne
independently: we can only arrive at an understanding of it by analysing sets of
relations. Having said that, we can say what it is in particular that discourse
brings into the complex relations which constitute social life: meaning, and
making meaning.
These relations are in my view dialectical, and it is the dialectical character
of these relations that really makes it clear why simply deﬁning ‘discourse’ as a
General introduction
3


separate ‘object’ is not possible. Dialectical relations are relations between
objects which are different from one another but not what I shall call ‘discrete’,
not fully separate in the sense that one excludes the other. This sounds para-
doxical, and indeed in a certain sense it is. Let us consider ‘external’ relations
between discourse and other ‘objects’. Think of power and discourse. The
power of, for instance, the people who control a modern state (the relation 
of power between them and the rest of the people) is partly discursive in char-
acter. For example, it depends on sustaining the ‘legitimacy’ of the state and 
its representatives, which is largely achieved in discourse. Yet state power 
also includes the capacity to use physical force and violence. So power is not
simply discourse, it is not reducible to discourse; ‘power’ and ‘discourse’ are
different elements in the social process (or in a dialectical terminology, differ-
ent ‘moments’). Yet power is partly discourse, and discourse is partly power –
they are different but not discrete, they ‘ﬂow into’ each other; discourse can be
‘internalised’ in power and vice-versa; the complex realities of power relations
are ‘condensed’ and simpliﬁed in discourses (Harvey 1996). Social activity or
praxis consists in complex articulations of these and other objects as its ele-
ments or moments; its analysis is analysis of dialectical relations between
them, and no one object or element (such as discourse) can be analysed other
than in terms of its dialectical relations with others.
What then is CDA analysis of ? It is notanalysis of discourse ‘in itself’ as one
might take it to be, but analysis of dialectical relations between discourse and
other objects, elements or moments, as well as analysis of the ‘internal rela-
tions’ of discourse. And since analysis of such relations cuts across conven-
tional boundaries between disciplines (linguistics, politics, sociology and so
forth), CDA is an interdisciplinary form of analysis, or as I shall prefer to call it
a transdisciplinaryform. What this term entails is that the ‘dialogues’ between
disciplines, theories and frameworks which take place in doing analysis and
research are a source of theoretical and methodological developments within
the particular disciplines, theories and frameworks in dialogue – including
CDA itself (see Section D, Methodology in CDA research).
Note that this is a realist approach which claims that there is a real world,
including the social world, which exists irrespective of whether or how well we
know and understand it. More speciﬁcally it is a ‘critical realist’ approach (see
Papers 8 and 13), which means among other things a recognition that the 
natural and social worlds differ in that the latter but not the former depends
upon human action for its existence and is ‘socially constructed’. The socially
constructive effects of discourse are thus a central concern, but a distinction 
is drawn between construal and construction: the world is discursively con-
strued (or represented) in many and various ways, but which construals come
4
General introduction


to have socially constructive effects depends upon a range of conditions which
include for instance power relations but also properties of whatever parts or
aspects of the world are being construed. We cannot transform the world in
any old way we happen to construe it; the world is such that some transforma-
tions are possible and others are not. So CDA is a ‘moderate’ or ‘contingent’
form of social constructivism.
So much for ‘discourse’ and what CDA is analysis of. Let me come to 
‘analysis’. Given that CDA should be transdisciplinary analysis, it should 
have a transdisciplinary methodology (see Section D and especially Paper 9).
I use ‘methodology’ rather than ‘method’, because I see analysis as not just 
the selection and application of pre-established methods (including methods
of textual analysis), but a theory-driven process of constructing objects of
research (Bourdieu and Wacquant 1992) for research topics, i.e., for research
themes as they initially present themselves to us (for instance, the current
ﬁnancial and economic crisis). Constructing an object of research for a
research topic is converting it into a ‘researchable object’: cogent, coherent
and researchable research questions. For instance, faced with the topic of the
current ﬁnancial and economic crisis which I discuss further below, we have to
ask: what are the best, or the right, or the primary research questions to try to
answer? Objects of research are constructed in a transdisciplinary way on the
basis of theorising research topics in terms of the categories and relations 
of not only a theory of discourse (such as that of the version of CDA I work
with) but also other relevant theories. These may be, depending on the topic,
political, sociological, political–economic, educational, media and/or other
theories.
Objects of research constructed in this transdisciplinary way allow for 
various ‘points of entry’ for the discourse analyst, the sociologist, the political
economist and so forth, which focus upon different elements or aspects of the
object of research. For instance the discourse analyst will focus on discourse,
but never in isolation, always in its relations with other elements, and always in
ways which accord with the formulation of the common object of research. For
example, one object of research for the topic of ‘the crisis’ could be the emer-
gence of different and competing strategies for overcoming the crisis, and the
processes through which and the conditions under which certain strategies
can be implemented and can transform existing systems and structures. This
formulation is based upon a theory of crisis which among other things sees
crises as events which arise from the character of structures, and sees strategies
and structures as in a relationship such that the effects of structures give rise to
strategies oriented to changing structures. If it also sees strategies as having a
partly discursive character, one ‘point of entry’ for research could be focused
General introduction
5


on discursive features of strategies and how they may contribute to their 
success or failure. This might include for instance analysis of explanations 
of the crisis and attributions of blame, justiﬁcations for and legitimations of
particular lines of action and policy, and value claims and assumptions in
explanations, justiﬁcations and legitimations.
Bringing diverse theories or frameworks together to co-construct trans-
disciplinary objects of research gives rise to issues of ‘translation’ between 
the concepts, categories and relations of CDA and of other theories or frame-
works. Let’s take the case of theories of and frameworks for analysing relations
of power. Since research will be concerned with dialectical relations between
discourse and power, the challenge is to ﬁnd ways of coherently connecting
categories and relations such as ‘discourse’, ‘genre’, ‘recontextualisation’ and
‘argumentation’ (from discourse theory) with categories and relations such as
‘power’, ‘hegemony’, ‘ideology’ and ‘legitimacy’ (from political theory). Given
a particular theory of power, how can we coherently articulate its categories
and relations with those of a theory of discourse so as to analyse ways in which
discourse is internalised in power and power is internalised in discourse, 
that is, so as to be able to analyse dialectical relations between discourse 
and power for the particular topic and object of research? It is not a matter of
substituting discourse-analytical categories and relations for political ones, 
or vice-versa. It is a matter of recognising the need for them to be separate
(power is not just discourse, discourse is not just power) yet avoiding inco-
herent eclecticism. It is a matter of the translatability or commensurability
(Jessop and Sum 2006) of concepts, categories and relations: a concern in
transdisciplinary research is to both assess how good the match is between
concepts, categories and relations from different theories and frameworks,
and move towards increasing it. (An example is the category of ‘recontextual-
isation’ which was developed in sociology (Bernstein 1990) but interpreted 
in terms of CDA categories (including ‘genre’) in a way that increased the 
commensurability between the two (Chouliaraki and Fairclough 1999. 
See further below.) In doing so we are achieving an aim of transdisciplinary
research which I mentioned above – using the dialogue between different 
disciplines or theories as the source of the theoretical or methodological
development of each.
For CDA, analysis of course includes analysis of texts. Many methods of
textual analysis have been developed in linguistics (phonetics, phonology,
grammar, semantics, lexicology), pragmatics, stylistics, sociolinguistics, argu-
mentation analysis, literary criticism, anthropology, conversation analysis and
so forth. In principle any such methods might be recontextualised within
CDA, though note that this implies that they may need to be adapted to ﬁt in
6
General introduction


with CDA’s principles and purposes. The particular selection of methods for
a particular research project depends upon the object of research which is
constructed for the research topic. But the version of CDA I work with has a
general method: textual analysis has a dual character. It is ﬁrstly interdiscur-
sive analysis, analysis of which discourses, genres and styles are drawn upon in
a text and how they are articulated together. This mode of analysis is based on
the view that texts can and generally do draw upon and articulate together
multiple discourses, multiple genres, and multiple styles. And it is secondly
linguistic analysis or, for many texts, multimodal analysis of the different 
semiotic ‘modes’ (including language, visual images, body language, music
and sound effects) and their articulation. The level of interdiscursive analysis
is a mediating ‘interlevel’: on the one hand, discourses, genres and styles are
realised in the more concrete form of linguistic and multimodal features of
texts; on the other hand, discourses, genres and styles are categories not 
only of textual analysis but also of analysis of orders of discourse, which are the
discoursal element or moment of social practices, social organisations and
social institutions. Analysis in terms of these categories therefore helps to link
‘micro-analysis’ of texts to various forms of social (sociological, political and
so forth) analysis of practices, organisations and institutions.
Let me turn to the third question, what is critique, what is criticaldiscourse
analysis? Critique brings a normative element into analysis (on normative
social research, see Sayer 2005). It focuses on what is wrong with a society 
(an institution, an organisation etc.), and how ‘wrongs’ might be ‘righted’ or
mitigated, from a particular normative standpoint. Critique is grounded in
values, in particular views of the ‘good society’ and of human well-being and
ﬂourishing, on the basis of which it evaluates existing societies and possible
ways of changing them. For instance, many people (though not all) would
agree that societies ought to be just or fair, ought to ensure certain freedoms,
and ought to provide for certain basic needs of their members (for food, 
shelter, healthcare etc.). The devil of course is in the detail: people have very
different ideas of justice, freedom and need, and critical social research is 
necessarily involved in debates over the meaning of these and other value-
related concepts. The crucial point, however, is that critique assesses what
exists, what might exist and what should exist on the basis of a coherent set of
values. At least to some extent this is a matter of highlighting gaps between
what particular societies claim to be (‘fair’, ‘democratic’, ‘caring’ etc.) and
what they are. We can distinguish between negative critique, which is analysis
of how societies produce and perpetuate social wrongs, and positive critique,
which is analysis of how people seek to remedy or mitigate them, and iden-
tiﬁcation of further possibilities for righting or mitigating them.
General introduction
7


A primary focus of CDA is on the effect of power relations and inequalities
in producing social wrongs, and in particular on discursive aspects of power
relations and inequalities: on dialectical relations between discourse and
power, and their effects on other relations within the social process and their
elements. This includes questions of ideology, understanding ideologies to be
‘meaning in the service of power’ (Thompson 1984): ways of representing
aspects of the world, which may be operationalised in ways of acting and inter-
acting and in ‘ways of being’ or identities, that contribute to establishing or
sustaining unequal relations of power (see Section A). This focuses on the
function of ideologies (in serving power), but ideologies are also open to 
critique on the grounds that they represent or explain aspects of the world
inadequately. This leads to another way of answering the question ‘what is 
critique?’ with radical implications for CDA: it identiﬁes critique of discourse
as an inherent part of any application of critical method in social research.
Critical analysis aims to produce interpretations and explanations of areas
of social life which both identify the causes of social wrongs and produce
knowledge which could (in the right conditions) contribute to righting or 
mitigating them. But interpretations and explanations already exist – inevitably,
because a necessary part of living and acting in particular social circumstances
is interpreting and explaining them. So along with and as part of the areas 
of social life which critical researchers research, they ﬁnd interpretations 
and explanations of them. These interpretations and explanations moreover
include not only those of the people who live and act in particular circum-
stances, but also of those who seek to govern or regulate the ways in which they
do so, including politicians and managers. And critical researchers will almost
certainly ﬁnd not only these interpretations and explanations but also prior
interpretations and explanations of social researchers, historians, philo-
sophers etc. Furthermore, it is a feature of the social world that interpretations
and explanations of it can have effects upon it, can transform it in various ways.
A critique of some area of social life must therefore be in part a critique of 
interpretations and explanations of social life. And since interpretations and
explanations are discourse, it must be in part a critique of discourse.
But the critical analyst, in producing different interpretations and explana-
tions of that area of social life, is also producing discourse. On what grounds
can we say that this critical discourse is superior to the discourse which its 
critique is partly a critique of? The only basis for claiming superiority is provid-
ing explanations which have greater explanatory power. The explanatory
power of a discourse (or a theory, which is a special sort of discourse) is its 
ability to provide justiﬁed explanations of as many features of the area of social
life in focus as possible. So we can say that it is a matter of both quantity (the
8
General introduction


number or range of features) and quality ( justiﬁcation). One aspect of the mat-
ter of quantity is the extent to which existing lay and non-lay interpretations
and explanations are themselves explained, as well as their effects on social
life, in terms of what it is or was about this area of social life that lead to these
interpretations and explanations emerging, becoming dominant and being
implemented. This is where ideology comes into the picture: interpretations
and explanations can be said to be ideological if they can be shown to be not
just inadequate but also necessary – necessary to establish and keep in place
particular relations of power. On the matter of quality ( justiﬁcation), explana-
tions are better than others if they are more consistent with whatever evidence
exists, including what events take place or have taken place, how people act 
or have acted, what the effects of their actions are, and so forth. The relative
explanatory power of different explanations, discourses and theories is of
course an issue which is constantly in contention. A ﬁnal point is that the
explanatory power of a theory and an analysis informed by it contributes to its
capacity to transform aspects of social life, which brings us back to dialectical
relations between discourse and other social elements with respect to the aims
of critique to not merely interpret the world but contribute to changing it.
This is a complex argument, but I think it is a strong one for CDA. Let me
sum up its strengths. First, it repeats from a somewhat different vantage point
my emphasis earlier on dialectical relations between discourse and other ele-
ments as a necessary part of social life. Second, it claims that critical analysis 
of discourse is a necessary part of any critical social analysis. Third, it provides
a basis for determining which discourses (interpretations, explanations) are
ideological. Fourth, it presents critical analysis as itself discourse which is
dialectically related to other elements of social life. On this view of critique see
Paper 12, and also Bhaskar (1979) and Marsden (1999).
The approach I have summarised in this section is based on a transforma-
tional model of social activity which is essentially Aristotelian in nature, ‘in
which the paradigm is that of the sculptor at work, fashioning a product out 
of the material and with the tools available’ (Bhaskar 1979). Social activity is 
a form of production or work which both depends upon and transforms the
material and tools available. Or to put it in different terms: in which society 
is both a condition for and an outcome of social activity, and social activity is
both the production (which is transformative, effects changes) and the repro-
duction of the conditions of production (i.e., society). Moreover as I have 
suggested above social activity understood in this way consists in dialectical
relations between different elements or moments including discourse. The
view of discourse above conforms with the transformational model in that it
fashions products (texts) out of available material and tools (languages, orders
General introduction
9


of discourse, discourses, genres, styles etc.) which are its condition of pos-
sibility and which it both transforms and reproduces. What we might call 
texturing, producing text out of available material and tools, is one moment 
of social activity as work or production. But what must be emphasised is its
dialectical interconnection with other moments in a process of production
whose character we might sum up as material-semiotic. Analysis must seek to
elucidate the complex interpenetration of material and semiotic (discoursal)
moments, and resist treating text and texturing as having an existence inde-
pendently of these dialectical relations.
2 What is CDA, and what is not CDA
Interest in CDA has increased quite remarkably since the publication of 
the ﬁrst edition of Critical Discourse Analysis. It has spread to new areas of 
the world, and to a great many disciplines and areas of study (Fairclough,
Graham, Lemke and Wodak 2001). The proliferation of researchers who are
using CDA is very pleasing and very welcome. CDA has also become more
institutionalised, in the sense that there are many more academic posts and
programmes of study and research, and it has become more mainstream, and
certainly more ‘respectable’ than it was in the early days.
I have the impression that, perhaps as a consequence of these develop-
ments, work is sometimes identiﬁed as ‘CDA’ which is arguably not CDA. If
CDA becomes too ill-deﬁned, or the answer to the question ‘what is CDA?’
becomes too vague, its value in social research and its appeal to researchers
may be weakened. So I think it is important to discuss the question of what
counts as CDA and what doesn’t. My purpose in doing so is emphatically 
not to advocate conformity. On the contrary, the vitality of the ﬁeld depends
upon people taking CDA in different and new directions, and indeed the view
of transdisciplinary research as a source of theoretical and methodological
development amounts to advocating a continuing process of change. But I
think it is possible to draw from the discussion above of discourse, analysis
and critique a few general characteristics which can differentiate CDA from
other forms of research and analysis. I suggest that research and analysis
counts as CDA in so far as it has all of the following characteristics.
1. It is not just analysis of discourse (or more concretely texts), it is part of
some form of systematic transdisciplinary analysis of relations between
discourse and other elements of the social process.
2. It is not just general commentary on discourse, it includes some form of
systematic analysis of texts.
10
General introduction


3. It is not just descriptive, it is also normative. It addresses social wrongs in
their discursive aspects and possible ways of righting or mitigating them.
I have tried to make these measures for determining what is and what is not
CDA tight enough to work as measures, but loose enough to encompass and
allow for many different existing and new versions of CDA. They are, and 
are designed to be, open to various interpretations. They are not ‘rules’: 
they should not be seen or used as regulative devices; they are designed to be
helpful in drawing important distinctions. I hope others will take them up as
suggestions which are, of course, open to modiﬁcation. They do not exclude
the possibility of making use of certain CDA categories and relations (e.g.,
interdiscursive analysis) in work which does not itself count as CDA – on the
contrary, the transdisciplinary approach to research which I have suggested
entails a way of developing theory and methodology through recontextualis-
ing categories and relations from other theories and frameworks. For example,
recontextualisation itself is a relation which originates in Bernstein’s ‘social of
pedagogy’ (Bernstein 1990) but has been ‘translated’ into a relation within
CDA by incorporating it into the system of categories and relations of the 
theory of CDA (see Chouliaraki and Fairclough (1999) for details).
3 CDA and neo-liberal capitalism
I have presented CDA above as a form of critical research which seeks to
understand how contemporary capitalism in some respects enables but in
other respects prevents or limits human well-being and ﬂourishing, with a
view to overcoming or mitigating these obstacles and limits. Much recent
research has centred upon the ‘new capitalism’ (now not so new – indeed some
commentators are beginning to call it ‘old’) which has been internationally
dominant for the past thirty years or so, a restructuring of capitalism which
emerged in response to the crisis in ‘Fordist’ economies and ‘welfare states’ 
in the 1970s. The capitalism of what we can call the ‘neo-liberal’ era has been
characterised by, among other things, ‘free markets’ (the freeing of markets
from state intervention and regulation), and attempts at reducing the state’s
responsibility for providing social welfare. It has involved a restructuring of
relations between the economic, political, and social domains, including the
extension of markets into social domains such as education, and focusing the
role of the state and government on strengthening markets and competitive-
ness. It has also involved the re-scaling of relations between different scales 
of social life – the global, the regional (e.g., European Union), the national,
and the local – which has facilitated the emergence of global markets.
General introduction
11


Governments formed by mainstream parties of both left and right have
embraced ‘neo-liberalism’, a political project (and ideology) for facilitating
the restructuring and re-scaling of social relations in accord with the 
demands of an unrestrained global capitalism (Bourdieu 1998a). It has led to
radical attacks on social welfare provision and the reduction of the protec-
tions that ‘welfare states’ provided for people against the effects of markets. 
It has also led to an increasing gap in income and wealth between rich and
poor, increasing economic insecurity and stress, and an intensiﬁcation of the
exploitation of labour. The unrestrained emphasis on ‘growth’ also poses
major threats to the environment. It has also produced a new imperialism in
which international agencies under the tutelage of the US and its rich allies
have imposed restructuring (‘the Washington Consensus’), and which has
more recently taken an increasingly military form (notably the invasion of
Iraq). But there have been positive achievements in this period: for instance,
there is truth in the claim of apologists for neo-liberalism that millions of 
people have been pulled out of absolute poverty during the neo-liberal era,
though to what extent that is due to the speciﬁcally neo-liberal features of the
era is open to question.
The lifespan of CDA (though not of critical analysis of discourse per se,
which has a much longer history – see, for instance, Paper 12) matches quite
closely the lifespan of this new form of capitalism, and it has made quite a sub-
stantial contribution to critical research on neo-liberal capitalism. A number
of the papers in this book are part of this contribution, as are publications by
many other CDA researchers (e.g., Graham 2000, 2001, 2002, forthcoming,
Lemke 1995, Language in New Capitalism website, http://www.cddc.vt.edu/
host/inc/). What has been the role of and the justiﬁcation for a signiﬁcant focus
on discourse and language in this research? I have answered the question of
justiﬁcation in general terms above: because the relations which constitute the
social process of neo-liberal capitalism include dialectical relations between
its discursive and ‘extra-discursive’ elements – no account of it (or any of its
elements and relations) which neglects discourse can be adequate. This is self-
evidently so given the argument above, but it would also be self-evidently so
for any social analysis, and it is the most general case for a discourse-analytical
dimension of (or a ‘discourse turn’ in) social research. But there are certain
more particular features of the neo-liberal era which make the case for a focus
on discourse especially clear.
One irony of neo-liberalism is that at the time when most of the ‘doctrinaire’
socialist societies were imploding and the ‘end of ideology’ was being con-
ﬁdently predicted, a restructuring of capitalism clearly driven by explicit 
pre-constructed doctrine – which means driven by discourse – was taking
12
General introduction


place. There was manifestly an ‘imaginary’ for neo-liberalism, a discourse 
of neo-liberalism, before strategies to operationalise and implement this 
imaginary and discourse in practice started to be effective. A liberal ‘counter-
revolution’ against broadly social-democratic and ‘statist’ forms of capitalism
had long been imagined and prepared by Friedrich Hayek, Milton Friedman
and their followers. Moreover, this imaginary, discourse and ideology of 
neo-liberalism has continued to be crucial in justifying and legitimising neo-
liberalism in its moments of crisis (such as the East Asian crisis of the late
1990s and its spread to other regions) and in its mission to internationalise
and ‘globalise’ this form of capitalism (to extend and in principle universalise
the ‘Washington Consensus’ – which it has not succeeded in doing). And, 
to anticipate the discussion of the current crisis, now that neo-liberal capital-
ism has come into what may be a terminal crisis, the crisis is clearly in part a 
crisis of its discourse. Furthermore, the imaginary for and partial reality of a
‘knowledge-based economy’ which came to be closely interwoven with the
imaginary and partial reality of the ‘global economy’ in the neo-liberal era
implies a more generally heightened signiﬁcance for discourse in the dialect-
ical relations of that form of capitalism. Much is ‘discourse-driven’. For
instance, the proliferation of ever new theories, models, imaginaries and dis-
courses in the management of not only private organisations but also public
organisations, not only in the economy but in many other spheres of social life
(government, education, healthcare, social welfare, the arts), which are selec-
tively and more or less effectively operationalised and implemented in new
practices, identities and material forms (e.g., the design of built space).
Various aspects of the dialectical relations between discursive and non-
discursive elements of neo-liberal capitalism and of its ‘discourse-driven’
character are addressed in papers in this book. A number of papers deal with
New Labour in Britain, treating the politics of New Labour as a form of neo-
liberalism and its discourse as a form of neo-liberal discourse (Papers 7, 9, 
11 and 14). The focus is not only on the political discourse and ideology of 
the ‘Third Way’ but also political identities and styles, and on new forms of
governance which accord with shifts in the role of the state in the neo-liberal
era and whose discursive moment involves changes in the genres and ‘genre
chains’ of governing. Papers 18 and 19 deal with what has become the inter-
nationally most powerful strategy for steering globalisation and the ‘global
economy’, which I call ‘globalism’, and speciﬁcally its discourse. At the core
of globalism is the strategic objective of spreading neo-liberal capitalism and
neo-liberal discourse to all areas of the world, including, for instance, the 
formerly socialist ‘transitional’ countries of central and eastern Europe (the
focus of Paper 20), a project which is widely identiﬁed with the ‘Washington
General introduction
13


Consensus’ and the activities of the International Monetary Fund and the
World Bank. Paper 19 focuses on the increasingly military character of the
strategy of globalism and its connection to the ‘war on terror’. Paper 4 deals
with the imposition of markets in Higher Education in Britain, focusing again
on its discourse moment and the marketisation of discourses, genres and
styles, which is an illustration of the wider tendency for neo-liberal capitalism
to incorporate more and more areas of social life into the market economy.
Paper 10 is a transdisciplinary study of the new management ideology asso-
ciated with neo-liberal capitalism, bringing together CDA and the ‘New
Sociology of Capitalism’ developed in France. Paper 12 is also oriented
towards CDA research on the new form of capitalism. It suggests that Marx’s
analytical method includes an element of critical discourse analysis avant la
lettre, and considers what CDA research on neo-liberal capitalism might learn
from it. Finally, Paper 22 discusses the development of ‘critical language
awareness’ in education in relation to the ‘global economy’.
4 Manifesto for CDA in a time of crisis
I come now to a ‘manifesto’ for CDA in the time of crisis which it appears 
(in December 2008) that we shall be living in for some time to come. I shall
give an assessment of the role, purpose and possible contribution of CDA in
the ﬁnancial and economic crisis and ask: what should CDA be trying to
achieve; what contribution can it make? A manifesto is generally understood
to be a public declaration of purposes, principles and objectives and the
means for achieving them, and it is usually political in character. So: why a
‘manifesto’ for CDA? My argument below will be that in this time of crisis the
priority for critical research including CDA should shift from critique of struc-
tures to critique of strategies – of attempts, in the context of the failure of exist-
ing structures, to transform them in particular directions. But the business of
critical research is not just descriptive analysis of these emerging and compet-
ing strategies but also normative evaluation of them, and another relative shift
of priority in the present context is from negative critique of existing structures
to positive critique which seeks possibilities for transformations which can
overcome or mitigate limits on human well-being. So I use ‘manifesto’ to high-
light the contribution that CDA might make to the political struggle for a way
out of the crisis which can transform social forms and social life in ways which
advance human well-being. But this will bring us back again to the question
‘what is critique?’ and particularly to this issue: if critical research is ‘knowledge-
for-action’, how does the purpose of advancing knowledge connect with the
purpose of supporting action for a better world?
14
General introduction


I am writing a few months into an acute phase of a crisis which became
apparent to many in the summer of 2007, and to a few earlier than that, but
took a dramatic turn in the autumn of 2008 with a series of calamities (e.g., the
bankruptcy of the US investment bank Lehman Brothers) which brought 
the banking and credit system close to collapse. Nobody can say with cer-
tainty how the crisis will develop, how long it will go on, or where it will take
us. But many economists and other commentators are predicting that it is
going to be severe, and far-reaching in its effects, and the crisis may well be the
primary determinant of ‘the state we are in’, and the primary factor shaping 
the agenda for CDA for some time to come. Of course, that agenda is now 
very diverse, and includes adopting a discourse perspective on issues as 
different as racism, war, European identity and organisational change, but I
suspect that there are few areas of it which will not be affected or coloured by
the crisis.
What does it mean to say that this is a ‘crisis’? It means that the institutional
structures and mechanisms which allowed the ﬁnancial and economic systems
to continue doing what they were designed and claimed to do – to provide
credit for businesses and households, to produce ‘growth’, dividends and
proﬁts, to keep people in employment, to maintain certain levels of prosperity
and consumption, to provide certain levels of social support and welfare, and
so forth – are manifestly no longer capable of doing so. There is general recogni-
tion that the these structures and mechanisms need to be either repaired or
replaced, that it will take enormous efforts and resources to do so, and that the
chances of success are at present uncertain. It is also generally expected that
meanwhile people in many positions and circumstances all over the world will
suffer in various ways – losing their jobs, losing their savings and having to face
smaller pensions than they expected, having a lower standard of living, in
some cases suffering more severe effects of poverty and other forms of social
deprivation, and so forth. There is general agreement that three features
together differentiate this from other crises since the 1970s: it is a crisis cen-
tred in the richest and most powerful capitalist countries, especially the USA,
rather than in the periphery; it is a global crisis which affects virtually all coun-
tries; and it is more severe. It began as a crisis of a ﬁnancial system built upon
public and private debt on a stupendous scale running into many trillions of
dollars; nobody is sure at this stage how many trillions, or where much of the
debt is hidden (who owes what to whom); there is a general and proliferating
indeterminacy of asset values, aversion to extending credit, and contraction of
expenditure and demand. The crisis in ﬁnance has extended into a general
economic crisis which is accentuated by pre-existing structural weaknesses 
in economies which the crisis exposes (including a growing problem of 
General introduction
15


overproduction e.g., in the car industry, and major international imbalances 
in balance of payments, lending and borrowing etc.).
What is in crisis? Optimists tend to view it as a crisis in the particular form
of the neo-liberal form of capitalism discussed above, suggesting or implying
that we can get ‘back to normal’ after an indeterminate period of pain. At the
other extreme is the view that it is a crisis of capitalism itself. The view I take,
like many others, is that it seems to be a crisis not in neo-liberal capitalism but
of neo-liberal capitalism – ‘seems to be’ because much is uncertain, and we are
condemned to act and react (as we usually are) under conditions of uncer-
tainty. But if this interpretation is right, as many analysts and commentators
think, it means that we cannot expect to ‘get back to normal’, that some new
form of capitalism must be sought for, some restructuring of capitalism, with
the proviso that although capitalism has historically shown a remarkable
capacity to remake itself out of the most extreme circumstances, there is noth-
ing that guarantees that it will be able to this time. So alternatives to capitalism
may come back onto the agenda, but at present it is not clear what these 
might be.
There is a great deal of public anger in the heartland of this form of capital-
ism, the USA, and in Britain and other countries, which is variously directed
at speculators, bankers, politicians or others, and amounts to a sense of having
been badly misled, mismanaged and let down. People were promised the earth
– increasing prosperity without limits, an ever-expanding wealth of choice,
possibility and opportunity, security and comfort in old age, and so forth – but
the promises have proved to be largely hollow. Some people say we are all 
to blame, that we should not have believed the promises. Many realise now
what was rarely publicly acknowledged: that the whole ediﬁce was built 
upon bubbles (the dot.com bubble, the housing bubble etc.) that now appear
ﬁnally to have burst, i.e., the possibility of simply moving on to the next 
bubble is now in serious doubt, as is the credibility of that ‘solution’ even if it
were possible. There is nothing new about this sort of disillusion and outrage.
Histories of the Great Depression and earlier crises (see, for instance,
Galbraith 1955) show that the cycle of false hopes and promises followed by
catastrophic failure and recriminations is part of the rhythm of capitalism,
despite the hubristic claims of politicians and others in the neo-liberal age to
have ended the cycle of ‘boom and bust’.
We should be cautious about predicting the future consequences of the
present crisis, but we can say with some conﬁdence that it entails a range of
risks which could extend far beyond the economy as such. There are political
risks: a feature of the neo-liberal age has been consensus between the main
political parties and governments of different hues in many countries over the
16
General introduction


main directions of economic policy, which means that mainstream politicians
with few exceptions are complicit in the false promises and failures, and may
in the absence of a coherent progressive alternative in many countries offer
openings to a resurgent extreme right. There are self-evidently social risks
associated with and arising from people losing their homes, their jobs, their
pensions, and for young people their prospects, but also risks that the already
fragile relations between different cultural and religious groups in many coun-
tries may deteriorate further and lead to conﬂicts. There are risks too that the
actions essential to avoid ecological disasters which have been to a large extent
evaded in times of relative plenty will be further delayed in the face of sup-
posedly more urgent problems.
I want to suggest a change in priorities for critical research generally includ-
ing CDA: a partial shift in focus from structures to strategies (on structures 
and strategies, see Jessop 2002). While neo-liberal capitalism was relatively
securely in place, the priority was a critique of established, institutionalised
and partly naturalised and normalised systems, structures, logics and dis-
courses. This is not to say that strategies were irrelevant: it was a dynamic 
system seeking to extend itself, and it had to face a number of lesser but still
serious crises, both of which entailed the proliferation of strategies to achieve
particular changes and trajectories. Nevertheless, for a time the priority for
critical research and CDA was to gain greater knowledge and understanding
of it as a system. To an extent that agenda is being overtaken by events. Aspects
of the character, ﬂaws, fallacies, contradictions etc. of neo-liberalism which
had largely been ignored except by its critics have come to be widely recog-
nised, and even conceded by former apologists for ‘free markets’, and this
applies too to its discourse. For instance, the British Prime Minister Gordon
Brown said in a New Year speech that 2008 would be remembered as the year
in which ‘the old era of unbridled free market dogma was ﬁnally ushered out’
(Guardian, 1 January 2009), just over a year after a speech at the Mansion
House in the City of London (June 2007) which was unstinting in its praise for
‘free markets’ and for ‘the talents, innovations and achievements’ of the City 
of London. Those ‘innovations’ are now acknowledged to have been at the
origin of the ﬁnancial crisis. The turn-about among such formerly ardent 
free-marketeers in the last months of 2008 has been remarkably rapid. But
shifting the priority to strategies does not mean we can ignore the structures of
neo-liberal capitalism: they will not disappear overnight, and they may prove
to be more resilient than seems likely at present.
Two main sorts of strategy are emerging at present: strategies to deal with
and try to mitigate the more immediate effects and consequences of the crisis,
and strategies for the longer term repair and modiﬁcation of neo-liberal 
General introduction
17


capitalism or its replacement with a different form of capitalism. Strategies for
achieving changes of a particular sort are pursued in a more or less systematic
and organised ways by groups of social agents in different positions, with dif-
ferent interests, or with different objectives. Crises lead to a proliferation of
strategies which may be in competitive as well as in complementary relation-
ships, leading to processes of strategic struggle. One set of questions is: what
strategies are emerging, what are their origins, and what groups of social
agents are promoting them? A second is: which strategies are emerging as
‘winners’ from strategic struggles; which strategies are coming to be ‘selected’
at the expense of others, becoming dominant, or hegemonic? A third is: which
strategies get to be implemented and actually shape social transformations
and, potentially, changes in structures and systems? But there is also a fourth
question of a normative character: which strategies are, or are not, likely to
lead to a progressive way out of the crisis which can bring real improvements
in human well-being, and tackle major obstacles to human well-being in 
neo-liberal capitalism, including huge and growing inequalities of wealth and
income, reduction of stability and security for many millions of people, eco-
logically unsustainable levels and forms of growth, and so forth?
CDA has an important role in critical research focused on strategies be-
cause strategies have a strongly discursive character: they include imaginaries
for change and for new practices and systems, and they include discourses,
narratives and arguments which interpret, explain and justify the area of social
life they are focused upon – its past, its present, and its possible future. These
discursive features of strategies are crucial in assessing and establishing both
their practical adequacy to the state we are in and the world as it is and their
feasibility, and their desirability with respect of particular ideas of human 
well-being.
In thinking about a role and agenda for CDA, we can draw upon the critical
method I described at the end of the section Discourse, analysis, critique,
pages 9–10 above, though we need to reformulate it to some extent because
my initial formulation was oriented to critique of systems rather than critique
of strategies. Critical analysis seeks to provide explanations of the causes and
development of the crisis, identify possible ways of mitigating its effects and to
transform capitalism in less crisis-prone, more sustainable and more socially
just directions. The analysis is partly analysis of discourse, of dialectical rela-
tions between discourse and other elements: of lay and non-lay interpretations
and explanations of the causes and character of the crisis and possible 
remedies and their association with diverse strategies, of how they construe 
and potentially contribute to constructing political-economic realities. It also
seeks to develop theories and analytical frameworks which allow it to explain
18
General introduction


why it is that a particular range of strategies and discourses are emerging, why
particular ones tend to become dominant, what effects they are having on the
way the crisis develops, and how they may further contribute to social trans-
formations. Its concerns here are partly normative: how adequate are particular
strategies as responses to the crisis given its nature as established through
analysis? can particular discourses be seen as not only inadequate in this sense
but also ‘necessary’ to establish and sustain power relations, and therefore 
ideological? and, above all, which strategies and discourses are, or are not,
likely to lead to a path out of crisis which advances human well-being?
CDA can contribute a speciﬁcally discursive or semiotic ‘point of entry’ to
such critical analysis, maintaining a relational focus on dialectical relations
between discourse and other social elements, but highlighting properties and
features of discourse. It can particularly bring such a speciﬁcally semiotic
focus to analysis of the proliferation of strategies, strategic struggle, the domin-
ance of certain strategies, and their implementation in social transformations.
We might formulate an agenda in broad terms as follows:
• Emergence of discourses. Identify the range of discourses that emerge and
their link to emerging strategies. Show how the range of discourses changes
over time as the crisis develops. Identify differences and commonalities
between discourses in terms of a range of features such as: how they repres-
ent events and actions and the social agents, objects, institutions etc. that
they involve; how they narrate past and present events and action and 
link these narratives to imaginaries for future practices, institutions and sys-
tems; how they explain events and actions; how they justify actions and 
policy proposals and legitimise imagined changed practices and systems.
Show the origins of discourses: for instance, how they are formed through
articulating together (features of) existing discourses. Such analysis needs
to be coloured by and integrated into transdisciplinary critical analysis 
oriented to an object of research constructed in a transdisciplinary way, 
and particularly the explanation of why and how particular strategies and
discourses emerge in particular social circumstances.
• Relations of dialogue, contestation and dominance between discourses. Show
how different discourses are brought into dialogue and contestation within
processes of strategic struggle, for instance in the manoeuvring for posi-
tion that goes on between political parties. Show how particular discourses
gain prominence or become marginalised over time, and how particular
discourses emerge as dominant or hegemonic. CDA can provide particular
insights into the struggle between different strategies for transforming 
society in different directions through rhetorically oriented analysis of 
General introduction
19


how strategic differences are fought out in dialogue, debate, polemic etc.
But again such analysis must be informed by and integrated within trans-
disciplinary critique which seeks to explain the success of certain strategies
and the failure of others, and is also ‘positive’ critique which seeks to iden-
tify strategies which are, as we might put it, both desirable (in that they may
advance human well-being) and feasible.
• Recontextualisation of discourses. Show, as part of the analysis of how 
particular discourses become dominant or hegemonic, their dissemination
across structural boundaries (between different social ﬁelds, such as educa-
tion and politics) and across scalar boundaries (e.g., between local and
national scales), and their recontextualisation within different ﬁelds and at
different scales.
• Operationalisation of discourses. Show how and subject to what conditions
discourses are operationalised as strategies and implemented: enacted in
changed ways (practices) of acting and interacting; inculcated in changed
ways of being (identities); materialised in changes in material reality.
Operationalisation is partly a process within discourse or semiosis: dis-
courses are enacted as changed genres, and inculcated as changed styles.
But again while there is clearly a discourse-analytical dimension to analys-
ing these ways in which discourse contributes to social transformation, 
the concern is largely with relations between discourse and other social 
elements (as well as partly relations within discourse/semiosis) and there-
fore a matter for transdisciplinary critical analysis. Moreover, the opera-
tionalisation of discourses is always subject to conditions which are partly
extra-discursive. So we are always pushed back towards articulating
together different forms of critical social analysis (of which CDA is one) 
to analyse relations between discourse and other elements.
Critique as I have presented it is committed to producing and deepening 
certain forms of knowledge and understanding: to producing theories and
analyses with the explanatory power to cogently interpret and explain, in this
case, the crisis in, and as I have suggested more likely of, the neo-liberal form
of capitalism, as well as the process of restructuring capitalism that it seems
likely to give rise to. This includes explanation of lay and non-lay interpreta-
tions and explanations of the crisis, strategies for social transformation, and
the discourses associated with them. This form of knowledge production is
value-driven: it is based upon certain conceptions of human well-being, and
aims to explain why and how particular social forms like those of neo-liberal
capitalism on the one hand enhance well-being but on the other hand place
systemic limits on it, and to identify possible and feasible changes in social
20
General introduction


forms which can overcome or mitigate those limits. While it is not in itself a
political praxis and strategy for achieving such social changes, it can be a part
of and contribute to such a praxis and strategy in that praxis requires theory,
knowledge and understanding to achieve its strategic goals. What is currently
underdeveloped but needs to be developed in this time of crisis is a political
strategy and movement to ensure that the social transformations which will
result from it address the fundamental problems and dangers facing us which
neo-liberal capitalism has either failed adequately to address or contributed 
to exacerbating: poverty, gross inequality, injustice, insecurity, ecological 
hazard. CDA can contribute.
General introduction
21


This page intentionally left blank


S e c t i o n  A
Language, ideology 
and power


This page intentionally left blank


Introduction
T
he ﬁrst two papers in this section, written 1983–87 and published in
1985 and 1989, come from my earliest work in CDA when I was develop-
ing a framework for studying connections between language and power. This
work culminated in the publication of my ﬁrst book Language and Power
(Longman 1989, second edition 2001).
Ideologywas a central concept and category in this early work on CDA, and
although its salience in my later work has varied as new themes and categories
have been brought in, it has been and continues to be a major concern
throughout. Yet during these past twenty-ﬁve years, ideology has become
much less of an issue in social research, and the number of social researchers
who work with the category or indeed treat it as a necessary category has
declined. This is clearly associated with the simultaneous decline in salience
of social class as a theme and a category, for ideology as a theoretical category
has developed within theories of capitalist societies as class societies, domin-
ated by a ruling class and characterised by struggle between classes. And 
these changes in academic theory and analysis are just as clearly linked to 
radical social and political changes affecting social classes and social class 
relations: changes in economic production, the relative decline of traditional
manufacturing industries and the industrial working class as part of the work-
force, the decrease in trade union membership and the weakening of trade
unions, the weakening link between political parties and social classes, and 
so forth. Largely in response to these changes, many social researchers now
question whether either social class or ideology are signiﬁcant or useful cat-
egories (Sayer 2005).
My view is that capitalist societies like Britain are still class societies,
although their class structure and class relations have changed substantially


since the 1970s, and that analysis of power and class relations requires the 
category of ideology because ideologies are a signiﬁcant element of processes
through which relations of power are established, maintained, enacted and
transformed. Of course, power relations in societies like Britain are not just
class relations, they are also relations between ethnically and culturally differ-
ent groups, between women and men, between adults and young people, 
people of working age and retired people, managers and other workers, and so
forth. Power differences and inequalities arise from all of these relations and
others, and from complex combinations of these relations, and ideologies are
signiﬁcant for these various power relations, not just for social class relations.
Given that analysis of ideology requires analysis of discourse, as I argue in the
papers of this section, ideology therefore continues to be a signiﬁcant theme
and category for CDA. For instance, in the General Introduction I discussed
what CDA can contribute to critical analysis of the ﬁnancial and economic 
crisis which is unfolding as I write, and I suggested approaching this through
a form of critique which includes a way of assessing whether discourses 
circulating in this time of crisis have an ideological character.
Paper 1, ‘Critical and descriptive goals in discourse analysis’ distinguishes
critical discourse analysis from the dominant non-critical, descriptive trend
within discourse analysis which was establishing itself within Linguistics
departments at the time. The latter is criticised for its lack of concern with
explanation – with how discursive practices are socially shaped, or their social
effects. I also criticise the concept of ‘background knowledge’ as an obfusca-
tion of ideological processes in discourse, the preoccupation with ‘goals’ as
based upon an untenable theory of the subject, and the neglect of relations of
power manifested for instance in the elevation of conversation between equals
to the status of an idealised archetype for linguistic interaction in general.
The critical alternative claims that naturalised implicit propositions of an
ideological character are pervasive in discourse, contributing to the position-
ing of people as social subjects. These include not only aspects of ideational
meaning (e.g., implicit propositions needed to infer coherent links between
sentences) but also for instance assumptions about social relations underlying
interactional practices (e.g., turn-taking systems, or pragmatic politeness con-
ventions). Such assumptions are quite generally naturalised, and people are
generally unaware of them and of how they are subjected by/to them. The
emphasis in this paper is upon discourse within the social reproduction of
relations of domination. The paper suggests a view of critique as embedded
within oppositional practice. Opposition and struggle are built into the view
of the ‘orders of discourse’ of social institutions as ‘pluralistic’, each involving
a conﬁguration of potentially antagonistic ‘ideological-discursive formations’
26
Language, ideology and power


(IDFs), which are ordered in dominance. The dominance of one IDF over
others within an order of discourse results in the naturalisation of its (ideo-
logical) meanings and practices. Resistance is most likely to come from 
subjects whose positioning within other institutions and orders of discourse
provides them with the resources to resist.
The paper does take a dialectical view of the relationship between structure
and action. But the emphasis, under the inﬂuence of Althusser and French
discourse analysis (Althusser 1971, Pêcheux 1982), is upon the determina-
tion of action by structures, social reproduction, and the ideological posi-
tioning of subjects. Later papers have increasingly emphasised agency and
change. The concept of IDF did not survive this paper; it gave an overly 
monolithic view of ideological diversity and struggle – well-deﬁned forces in
clear relations of opposition. Another characteristic of this early work is the
centrality of social class in its view of power.
I would highlight three themes of the paper as particularly signiﬁcant for
later work. First, the claim that ideologies are primarily located in the ‘unsaid’
(implicit propositions). I later draw upon French discourse analysis for 
an intertextual account of presuppositions as the ‘already-said’ or ‘precon-
structed’ (Pêcheux 1982, Fairclough 1989a). The second theme is that norms
of interaction involving aspects of the interpersonal meaning and forms 
(e.g., turn-taking systems) may be ideological, in addition to the more widely 
discussed case of ideational meanings and forms – the ‘content’ of texts. The
third theme is the theorisation of power as in part ‘ideological/discoursal’, the
power to shape orders of discourse, to order discursive practices in dominance.
Even casual conversation has its conditions of possibility within relations of
ideological/discoursal power.
Paper 2 ‘Language and ideology’ suggests that the language–ideology rela-
tion should be conceptualised within the framework of research on discoursal
and sociocultural change. Following Gramsci (Forgacs 1988), the conception
of ideology here focuses upon the effects of ideologies rather than questions 
of truth, and features of texts are seen as ideological in so far as they affect 
(sustain, undermine) power relations. Ideology is seen as ‘located’ in both
structures (discourse conventions) and events. On the one hand, the conven-
tions drawn upon in actual discursive events, which are structured together
within ‘orders of discourse’ associated with institutions, are ideologically
invested in particular ways. On the other hand, ideologies are generated and
transformed in actual discursive events – the example I refer to is of ideological
creativity in a Margaret Thatcher radio interview. An order of discourse may
incorporate in Gramscian terms an ‘ideological complex’, a conﬁguration of
ideologies, and both the ideological complex and the order of discourse may
Introduction
27


be reconstructed in the course of discursive events. These possible discursive
restructurings arise from contradictions in social practice which generate
dilemmas for people, which they try to resolve through mixing available dis-
course conventions in new ways the mixtures being realised in heterogeneities
of form and meaning in texts. Orders of discourse are viewed as domains of
hegemony and hegemonic (ideological) struggle, within institutions such 
as education as well as within the wider social formation. In this process the
ideological investments of particular discursive practices may change – for
instance, the genre of counselling may operate, now counter-hegemonically
within resistance to impersonal institutions, now hegemonically as a person-
alising stratagem within such institutions. The paper concludes by identifying
a role for ideological analysis and critique of discourse within social struggles.
Certain features of the discussion of ideology are worth noting: the idea
that discourse may be ideologically creative and productive, the concept of
ideological complex, the question of whether discursive practices may be
reinvested ideologically, and the broad sweep of features of texts that are seen
as potentially ideological.
Paper 3 (‘Semiosis, ideology and mediation. A dialectical view’), published
in 2006, is a more recent return to the question of ideology which focuses
upon CDA as a resource in researching the imbrications of media and media-
tion in ideological processes. Ideologies are initially deﬁned as representa-
tions which contribute to constituting, reproducing and transforming social
relations of power and domination, a view of ideology which is identiﬁed as
critical in contrast with descriptive views of ideology, and is associated with
power as hegemony rather than as force or violence. Mediation is understood
in Silverstone’s (1999) sense as the movement and transformation of meaning,
and is associated with the CDA category of recontextualisation. Processes of
recontextualisation and mediation may be ideological, and the paper follows
Bernstein (1990) in emphasising the importance of recontextualisation in 
ideological representation. It also interprets ideology in terms of the dialectics
of discourse (see Papers 7, 8 and 9). That is to say, ideologies are ﬁrst repres-
entations and discourses within relations of power, but dialectical processes 
of enacting such discourses as ways of (inter)acting, inculcating them as ways
of being (or identities), and materialising them in the physical world entail
that actions and their social relations including genres, persons (or subjects)
including styles, and aspects of the material world can also have an ideological
character. Moreover, ideology is ﬁrst a relation between texts and power, but
also a relation between orders of discourse and power and between languages
and power, because meanings of texts can achieve relative stability and dur-
ability in social practices and social structures. What therefore distinguishes
28
Language, ideology and power


this paper from my earlier treatments of ideology is that it incorporates 
ideology into the dialectical view of relations between discourse and non-
discursive elements of social processes (and of relations between discourses,
genres and styles within discourse in its most general sense) which I have
developed in my more recent work. This view of ideology and its relation to
mediation as a form of recontextualisation is used in the paper to analyse 
processes of re-scaling, changing relations between the national scale and
international scales, in the ‘transition’ of formerly socialist countries in
Central and Eastern Europe towards being market economies and western-
style democracies. The particular examples analysed are Romanian.
Introduction
29


1.
Critical and descriptive goals 
in discourse analysis
Abstract
I view social institutions as containing diverse ‘ideological-discursive forma-
tions’ (IDFs) associated with different groups within the institution. There 
is usually one IDF which is clearly dominant. Each IDF is a sort of ‘speech
community’ with its own discourse norms but also, embedded within and
symbolised by the latter, its own ‘ideological norms’. Institutional subjects 
are constructed, in accordance with the norms of an IDF, in subject positions
whose ideological underpinnings they may be unaware of. A characteristic of
a dominant IDF is the capacity to ‘naturalise’ ideologies, i.e., to win accept-
ance for them as non-ideological ‘common sense’.
It is argued that the orderliness of interactions depends in part upon 
such naturalised ideologies. To ‘denaturalise’ them is the objective of a dis-
course analysis which adopts ‘critical’ goals. I suggest that denaturalisation
involves showing how social structures determine properties of discourse,
and how discourse in turn determines social structures. This requires a
‘global’ (macro/micro) explanatory framework which contrasts with the non-
explanatory or only ‘locally’ explanatory frameworks of ‘descriptive’ work in
discourse analysis. I include a critique of features of such work which follow
from its limited explanatory goals (its concept of ‘background knowledge’,
‘speaker-goal’ explanatory models, and its neglect of power), and discuss 
the social conditions under which critical discourse analysis might be an effec-
tive practice of intervention, and a signiﬁcant element in mother-tongue 
education.


1 Introduction: orderliness and naturalisation
I
n this section of the paper I shall distinguish in a preliminary way between
‘critical’ and ‘descriptive’ goals in discourse analysis. Data extracts are 
used to show (i) how the orderliness of interactions depends upon taken-
for-granted ‘background knowledge’ (BGK for short), and (ii) how BGK 
subsumes ‘naturalised’ ideological representations, i.e., ideological repres-
entations which come to be seen as non-ideological ‘common sense’. Adopt-
ing critical goals means aiming to elucidate such naturalisations, and more
generally to make clear social determinations and effects of discourse which
are characteristically opaque to participants. These concerns are absent in
currently predominant ‘descriptive’ work on discourse. The critical approach
has its theoretical underpinnings in views of the relationship between ‘micro’
events (including verbal events) and ‘macro’ structures which see the latter as
both the conditions for and the products of the former, and which therefore
reject rigid barriers between the study of the ‘micro’ (of which the study of dis-
course is a part) and the study of the ‘macro’. I shall discuss these theoretical
issues at the end of this section of the paper.
When I refer to the ‘orderliness’ of an interaction, I mean the feeling of 
participants in it (which may be more or less successfully elicited, or inferred
from their interactive behaviour) that things are as they should be, i.e., as 
one would normally expect them to be. This may be a matter of coherence 
of an interaction, in the sense that individual speaker turns ﬁt meaningfully
together, or a matter of the taking of turns at talking in the expected or appro-
priate way, or the use of the expected markers of deference or politeness, or 
of the appropriate lexicon. (I am of course using the terms ‘appropriate’ and
‘expected’ here from the perspective of the participant, not analytically.)
Text 1 gives an example of ‘orderliness’ in the particular sense of coherence
within and between turns, and its dependence on naturalised ideologies. It is
an extract from an interview between two male police ofﬁcers (B and C), and a
woman (A) who has come to the police station to make a complaint of rape.1
Text 1
1. C: you do realise that when we have you medically examined . . . and
2. B: they’ll come up with nothing
3. C: the swabs are taken . . . it’ll show . . . if you’ve had sexual intercourse
with three men this afternoon . . .
it’ll G show
4. A:
I it’ll  show each one
Critical and descriptive goals in discourse analysis
31


5. C: it’ll G show each one . . .
B:
I hmm
6. A: yeah I G know
7. C:
I alright . . . so . . .
8. A: so it would show G (indist.)
9. C:
I it’ll conﬁrm that you’ve had
G sex . . . or
B: I hm
C: not with three men alright . . . so we can conﬁrm it’s happened . . .
that you’ve had sex with three men . . . if it does conﬁrm it . . . then 
I would go so far as to say . . . that you went to that house willingly
. . . there’s no struggle . . . you could have run away quite easily . . .
when you got out of the car . . . to go to the house . . . you could have
got away quite easily . . . you’re well known . . . in Reading . . . to
the uniformed . . . lads for being a nuisance in the streets shouting
and bawling . . . couple of times you’ve been arrested . . . for under
the Mental Health Act . . . for shouting and screaming in the street . . .
haven’t you . . .
10. A: when I was ill yeah
11. C: yeah . . . right . . . so . . . what’s to stop you . . . shouting and
screaming in the street . . . when you think you’re going to get raped
. . . you’re not frightened at all . . . you walk in there . . . quite blasé
you’re not frightened at all . . .
12. A: I was frightened
13. C: you weren’t . . . you’re showing no signs of emotion every now and
again you have a little tear . . .
14. B: (indist.) if you were frightened . . . and you came at me I think I
would dive . . . I wouldn’t take you on
G you frighten me
15. C: I (indist.)
16. A: why would I frighten G you (indist.) only a little (indist.)
I you you just
it doesn’t
17. B: matter . . . you’re female and you’ve probably got a hell of a temper
. . . if you were to G go
I I haven’t got a temper
18. A: (indist.) a hell of G a temper
I oh I don’t know . . .
19. C:
20. B: I think if things if if things were up against a a wall . . . I think you’d
ﬁght and ﬁght very hard . . .
32
Language, ideology and power


I imagine that for most readers the most striking instance of ideologically-
based coherence in this text is in 17 (you’re female and you’ve probably got 
a hell of a temper), with the implicit proposition ‘women tend to have bad 
tempers’ which, with a further implicit proposition (‘people in bad tempers
are frightening to others’) and certain principles of inference, allows 16 and 17
to be heard as a coherent question–answer and complaint–rejection pair.
There are other, perhaps rather less obvious instances, including the follow-
ing (I have taken the example in 17 as ‘case’ (1)).
(2) It is taken as given (as mutually assumed background knowledge) that fear
or its absence, and perhaps affective states in general, can be ‘read off ’
from behavioural ‘symptoms’ or their absence. The orderliness of C’s talk
in 9 (from there’s no struggle) and 11, i.e., its coherence as the drawing of
a conclusion ( you’re not frightened at all) from pieces of evidence (there’s
no struggle, A could have got away but didn’t, A has a proven capacity for
creating public scenes but did not do so in this case), depends upon this
implicit proposition. Similar comments apply to 13.
(3) It is taken as given that persons have, or do not have, capacities for particu-
lar types of behaviour irrespective of changes in time, place, or conditions.
This is a version of the doctrine of the ‘uniﬁed and consistent subject’
(Coward and Ellis 1977: 7). Thus, again in 9 and 11, evidence of A’s
capacity for creating a public scene in the past, and when she was suffer-
ing from some form of mental illness, is taken, despite 10, as evidence for
her capacity to do so in this instance. As in the case of (2), the coherence
of C’s line of argument depends upon the taken-as-given proposition.
(4) It is taken as given that if a woman willingly places herself in a situation
where sexual intercourse ‘might be expected to occur’ (whatever that
means), that is tantamount to being a willing partner, and rules out rape.
C’s apparent objective in this extract is to establish that Awent willingly to
the house where the rape is alleged to have occurred. But this extract is
coherently connected with the rest of the interview only on the assump-
tion that what is really at issue is A’s willingness to have sexual intercourse.
To make this connection, we need the above implicit proposition.
The four implicit propositions which I have identiﬁed represent BGK of a
rather particular sort, which is distinct from, say, the assumed BGK that there
is some identiﬁable door which is closed when some speaker asks some
addressee to ‘open the door’. I argue below (Section 3.1) that the tendency in the
literature to conﬂate all of the ‘taken-for-granted’ under the rubric of ‘know-
ledge’ is an unacceptable reduction. For present purposes, I propose to refer to
Critical and descriptive goals in discourse analysis
33


these four propositions as ‘ideological’, by which I mean that each is a particular
representation of some aspect of the world (natural or social; what is, what can
be, what ought to be) which might be (and may be) alternatively represented,
and where any given representation can be associated with some particular
‘social base’ (I am aware that this is a rather crude gloss on a complex and con-
troversial concept. On ideology, see Althusser (1971) and Therborn (1980)).
These propositions differ in terms of the degree to which they are ‘natur-
alised’ (Hall 1982: 75). I shall assume a scale of naturalisation, whose ‘most
naturalised’ (theoretical) terminal point would be represented by a proposi-
tion which was taken as commonsensically given by all members of some 
community, and seen as vouched for by some generally accepted rationalisa-
tion (which referred it, for instance, to ‘human nature’).
Cases (1) and (4) involve only limited naturalisation. The proposition
‘women tend to have bad tempers’ could, one imagines, be taken as given only
within increasingly narrow and embattled social circles – one achievement 
of the women’s movement has been precisely the denaturalisation of many 
formerly highly naturalised sexist ideologies. Case (4) corresponds to tradi-
tional judicial views (in English law) of rape as well as having something of a
base outside the law, but it is also under pressure from feminists.
The degree of naturalisation in cases (2) and (3) is by contrast rather high,
and they are correspondingly more difﬁcult to recognise as ideological repres-
entations rather than ‘just common sense’. Such ideological propositions are
both open to lay rationalisation in terms of ‘what everyone knows’ about
human behaviour and ‘human nature’, and traceable in social scientiﬁc 
theories of human behaviour and the human subject.
Texts 2–4 illustrate other ways in which orderliness may depend upon ideo-
logical BGK. My aim here is merely to indicate some of the range of phenomena
involved, so my comments on these texts will be brief and schematic.
Text 2
1. T: Now, let’s just have a look at these things here. Can you tell me, ﬁrst of
all, what’s this?
2. P: Paper.
3. T: Piece of paper, yes. And, hands up, what cutter will cut this?
4. P: The pair of scissors.
5. T: The pair of scissors, yes. Here we are, the pair of scissors. And, as you
can see, it’s going to cut the paper. Tell me what’s this?
6. P: Cigarette box.
7. T: Yes. What’s it made from?
(Sinclair and Coulthard 1975: 96)
34
Language, ideology and power


The orderliness in this instance is a matter of conformity on the part of both
teacher and pupils to a framework of discoursal and pragmatic rights and obli-
gations, involving the taking of turns, the control of topic, rights to question
and obligations to answer, rights over metacommunicative acts and so forth
(see Sinclair and Coulthard (1975) and Stubbs (1983: 40–46) for a detailed
discussion of these properties of classroom discourse). The implicit ideolo-
gical propositions identiﬁed in text 1 appertain to language in its ‘ideational’
function, whereas the discoursal and pragmatic norms of text 2 appertain to
the ‘interpersonal’ function of language (Halliday 1978: 45–46). Moreover,
while in text 1 ideologies are formulated in (implicit) propositions, in text 2
ideological representations of social relationships are symbolised in norms of
interaction. Michael Halliday’s claim that the linguistic system functions as a
‘metaphor’ for social processes as well as an ‘expression’ of them, which he
formulated in the context of a discussion of the symbolisation of social rela-
tionships in dialectal and registerial variants (Halliday 1978: 3) also applies
here. In these respects, text 3 is similar to text 2:
Text 3
1. X: oh hellD Mrs Norton
2. Y: oh hellD Súsan
3. X: yès erm wèll I’m afraid I’ve got ˆ afraid I’ve got a bit of a pròblem
4. Y: you mean about tomorrow nìght
5. X: yès ˆ erm you [knów I
6. Y: oh dèar]
7. X: knòw that that you said
8. Y: yéah
9. X: er you wànted me tomorrow night
10. Y: uhúh yéah
11. X: well I just thought erm (clears throat) I’ve got something else on
which I just didn’t think about when I arranged it with you you know
and er
12. Y: (sighs) yés
13. X: I’m just wondering if I could possibly back dòwn on tomorrow
(Edmondson 1981: 119–120)2
Again, this is a matter of orderliness arising from conformity with interac-
tive norms, though in this case pragmatic norms of politeness and mitigation:
X uses a range of politeness markers, including a title + surname mode of
address (in 1), ‘hedges’ (e.g., a bit of ain 3), and indirect speech acts (as in 13).
These markers are ‘appropriate’ given the status asymmetry between X and 
Critical and descriptive goals in discourse analysis
35


Y (Y is X’s employer, and no doubt older than X), and given the ‘face-
threatening’ act which X is engaged in (Brown and Levinson 1978: 81).
The interactive norms exempliﬁed in texts 2 and 3 can be seen in terms of
degrees of naturalisation like the implicit propositions of text 1, though in this
case it is a matter of the naturalisation of practices which symbolise particular
ideological representations of social relationships, i.e., relationships between
teachers and pupils, and between babysitters and their employers. The more
dominant some particular representation of a social relationship, the greater
the degree of naturalisation of its associated practices. I will use the expression
‘ideological practices’ to refer to such practices.
Texts 1–3 are partial exempliﬁcations of the substantial range of BGK
which participants may draw upon in interactions. We can very roughly 
differentiate four dimensions of participants’ ‘knowledge base’, elaborating
Winograd (1982: 14) who distinguishes only the ﬁrst, third and fourth:
knowledge of language codes,
knowledge of principles and norms of language use,
knowledge of situation, and
knowledge of the world.
I wish to suggest that all four dimensions of the ‘knowledge base’ include ideo-
logical elements. I will assume without further discussion that the examples 
I have given so far illustrate this for all except the ﬁrst of these dimensions,
‘knowledge of language code’. Text 4 shows that this dimension is no excep-
tion. It is a summary by Benson and Hughes (1983: 10–11) of one of the case
studies of Aaron Cicourel from his work on the constitution and interpretation
of written records which are generated in the juvenile judicial process
(Cicourel 1976).
Text 4
The probation ofﬁcer was aware of a number of incidents at school in which
Robert was considered to be ‘incorrigible’. The probation ﬁle contained 
mention of 15 incidents at school prior to his court appearance, ranging from
‘smoking’ to ‘continued deﬁance’. The probation ofﬁcer’s assessment and
recommendation for Robert contained a fairly detailed citation of a number 
of factors explaining Robert’s ‘complete lack of responsibility toward society’
with the recommendation that he be placed in a school or state hospital.
Among the factors mentioned were his mother’s ‘severe depression’, divorced
parents, unstable marriage, and his inability to comprehend his environment:
36
Language, ideology and power


the kind of factors, we should note, assembled in conventional sociological
reasoning explaining the causes of delinquency.
Cicourel is concerned to show ‘how “delinquents get that way” as a process
managed and negotiated through the socially organised activities that con-
stitute “dealing with crime” ’ (Benson and Hughes 1983: 11). What I want to
highlight is the role which the lexicon itself plays in this process. Let us focus
on just four items among the many of interest in the text: incorrigible, deﬁance,
lack of responsibility, deliquency. These belong to a particular lexicalisation of
‘youth’, or more speciﬁcally of young people who do not ‘ﬁt’ in their families,
their schools, or their neighbourhoods. The ‘conditions of use’ of this lexicon
as we may call them, are focused upon by Cicourel – the unwritten and 
unspoken conventions for the use of a particular word or expression in con-
nection with particular events or behaviours, which are operative and taken 
for granted in the production and interpretation of written records. But the
lexicon itself, as code, is only one among indeﬁnitely many possible lexicalisa-
tions; one can easily create an ‘anti-language’ (Halliday 1978: 164–182)
equivalent of this part of the lexicon – irrepressible for incorrigible, debunking
for deﬁance, refusal to be sucked in by society for lack of responsibility toward
society, and perhaps spirit for delinquency. Alternative lexicalisations are 
generated from divergent ideological positions. And lexicalisations, like the
implicit propositions and pragmatic discoursal practices of the earlier texts,
may be more or less naturalised: a lexicalisation becomes naturalised to the
extent that ‘its’ IDF achieves dominance, and hence the capacity to win accept-
ance for it as ‘the lexicon’, the neutral code.
It may be helpful for me to sum up what I have said so far before moving to
a ﬁrst formulation of ‘critical’ goals in discourse analysis. I am suggesting (a)
that ideologies and ideological practices may become dissociated to a greater
or lesser extent from the particular social base, and the particular interests,
which generated them – that is, they may become to a greater or lesser extent
‘naturalised’, and hence be seen to be commonsensical and based in the nature
of things or people, rather than in the interests of classes or other groupings;
(b) that such naturalised ideologies and practices thereby become part of the
‘knowledge base’ which is activated in interaction, and hence the ‘orderliness’
of interaction may depend upon them, and (c) that in this way the orderliness
of interactions as ‘local’, ‘micro’ events comes to be dependent upon a higher
‘orderliness’, i.e., an achieved consensus in respect of ideological positions
and practices.
This brings me to certain theoretical assumptions which underpin the 
proposed adoption of critical goals in discourse analysis. Firstly, that verbal
Critical and descriptive goals in discourse analysis
37


interaction is a mode of social action, and that like other modes of social 
action it presupposes a range of what I shall loosely call ‘structures’ – which 
are reﬂected in the ‘knowledge base’ – including social structures, situational
types, language codes, norms of language use. Secondly, and crucially, that
these structures are not only presupposed by, and necessary conditions for,
action, but are also the productsof action; or, in a different terminology, actions
reproduce structures. Giddens (1981) develops this view from a sociological
perspective in terms of the notion of ‘duality of structure’.
The signiﬁcance of the second assumption is that ‘micro’ actions or events,
including verbal interaction, can in no sense be regarded as of merely ‘local’
signiﬁcance to the situations in which they occur, for any and every action 
contributes to the reproduction of ‘macro’ structures. Notice that one dimen-
sion of what I am suggesting is that language codes are reproduced in speech,
a view which is in accordance with one formulation in Saussure’s Cours:
‘Language and speaking are thus interdependent; the former is both the
instrument and the product of the latter’ (1966: 19). My concern here, how-
ever, is with the reproduction of social structures in discourse, a concern
which is evident in Halliday’s more recent work:
By their everyday acts of meaning, people act out the social structure,
afﬁrming their own statuses and roles, and establishing and transmitting 
the shared systems of value and of knowledge. (Halliday 1978: 2)
But if this is the case, then it makes little sense to study verbal interactions
as ifthey were unconnected with social structures: ‘there can be no theoretical
defence for supposing that the personal encounters of day-to-day life can be
conceptually separated from the long-term institutional development of society’
(Giddens 1981: 173). Yet that seems to be precisely how verbal interactions
have in fact been studied for the most part in the currently predominant
‘descriptive’ work on discourse. Thus the adoption of critical goals means,
ﬁrst and foremost, investigating verbal interactions with an eye to their deter-
mination by, and their effects on, social structures. However, as I have suggested
in discussing the texts, neither determinations nor effects are necessarily
apparent to participants; opacity is the other side of the coin of naturalisation.
The goals of critical discourse analysis are also therefore ‘denaturalising’. 
I shall elaborate on this preliminary formulation in the following sections.
My use of the term ‘critical’ (and the associated term ‘critique’) is linked on
the one hand to a commitment to a dialectical theory and method ‘which
grasps things . . . essentially in their interconnection, in their concatenation,
their motion, their coming into and passing out of existence’ (Engels 1976:
38
Language, ideology and power


27), and on the other hand to the view that, in human matters, interconnec-
tions and chains of cause and effect may be distorted out of vision. Hence 
‘critique’ is essentially making visible the interconnectedness of things; for a
review of senses of ‘critique’, see Connerton (1976: 11–39). In using the term
‘critical’, I am also signalling a connection (though by no means an identity of
views) between my objectives in this paper and the ‘critical linguistics’ of a
group of linguists and sociologists associated with Roger Fowler (Fowler 
et al. 1979, Kress and Hodge 1979).
2 Social institutions and critical analysis
The above sketch of what I mean by ‘critical goals’ in discourse analysis gives
rise to many questions. For instance: how can it be that people are standardly
unaware of how their ways of speaking are socially determined, and of what
social effects they may cumulatively lead to? What conception of the social
subject does such a lack of awareness imply? How does the naturalisation of
ideologies come about? How is it sustained? What determines the degree of
naturalisation in a particular instance? How may this change?
I cannot claim to provide answers to these questions in this paper. What I
suggest, however, is that we can begin to formulate answers to these and other
questions, and to develop a theoretical framework which will facilitate
researching them, by focusing attention upon the ‘social institution’ and upon
discourses which are clearly associable with particular institutions, rather
than on casual conversation, as has been the fashion (see further Section 3.3
below). My reasoning is in essence simply that (a) such questions can only be
broached within a framework which integrates ‘micro’ and ‘macro’ research,
and (b) we are most likely to be able to arrive at such an integration if we focus
upon the institution as a ‘pivot’ between the highest level of social structuring,
that of the ‘social formation’,3and the most concrete level, that of the particular
social event or action. The argument is rather similar to Fishman’s case for 
the ‘domain’ (Fishman 1972): the social institution is an intermediate level 
of social structuring, which faces Janus-like ‘upwards’ to the social formation,
and ‘downwards’ to social actions.
Social actions tend very much to cluster in terms of institutions; when 
we witness a social event (e.g., a verbal interaction), we normally have no
difﬁculty identifying it in institutional terms, i.e., as appertaining to the family,
the school, the workplace, church, the courts, some department of govern-
ment, or some other institution. And from a developmental point of view,
institutions are no less salient: the socialisation of the child (in which process
discourse is both medium and target) can be described in terms of the child’s
Critical and descriptive goals in discourse analysis
39


progressive exposure to institutions of primary socialisation (family, peer
group, school, etc.). Given that institutions play such a prominent role, it is
not surprising that, despite the concentration on casual conversation in recent
discourse analysis referred to above, a signiﬁcant amount of work is on types
of discourse which are institutionally identiﬁed, such as classroom discourse
(e.g., Sinclair and Coulthard 1975); courtroom discourse (e.g., Atkinson and
Drew 1979, O’Barr 1982), or psychotherapeutic discourse (e.g., Labov and
Fanshel 1977). However, most of this work suffers from the inadequacies
characteristic of descriptive discourse analysis, which I detail in Section 3 of
this paper.
One can envisage the relationship between the three levels of social phenom-
ena I have indicated – the social formation, the social institution, and social
action – as one of determination from ‘top’ to ‘bottom’: social institutions are
determined by the social formation, and social action is determined by social
institutions. While I would accept that this direction of determination is the
fundamental one, this formulation is inadequate in that it is mechanistic (or
undialectical): that is, it does not allow that determination may also be
‘upwards’. Let us take education as an example. I would want to argue that 
features of the school as an institution (e.g., the ways in which schools deﬁne
relationship between teachers and pupils) are ultimately determined at the
level of the social formation (e.g., by such factors as the relationship between
the schools and the economic system and between the schools and the state),
and that the actions and events that take place in the schools are in turn deter-
mined by institutional factors. However, I would also wish to insist that the
mode of determination is not mechanical determination, and that changes
may occur at the level of concrete action which may reshape the institution
itself, and changes may occur in the institution which may contribute to the
transformation of the social formation. Thus the process of determination
works dialectically.
A social institution is (among other things) an apparatus of verbal interac-
tion, or an ‘order of discourse’. (I suggest later in this section that this property
only appears to belong to the institution itself.) In this perspective, we may
regard an institution as a sort of ‘speech community’, with its own particular
repertoire of speech events, describable in terms of the sorts of ‘components’
which ethnograhic work on speaking has differentiated – settings, participants
(their identities and relationships), goals, topics, and so forth (Hymes 1972).
Each institution has its own set of speech events, its own differentiated settings
and scenes, its cast of participants, and its own norms for their combination –
for which members of the cast may participate in which speech events, playing
which parts, in which settings, in the pursuit of which topics or goals, for
40
Language, ideology and power


which institutionally recognised purposes. It is, I suggest, necessary to see the
institution as simultaneously facilitating and constraining the social action
(here, speciﬁcally, verbal interaction) of its members: it provides them with a
frame for action, without which they could not act, but it thereby constrains
them to act within that frame.4 Moreover, every such institutional frame
includes formulations and symbolisations of a particular set of ideological 
representations: particular ways of talking are based upon particular ‘ways of
seeing’ (see further below in this section).
I shall use the terms ‘subject’, ‘client’, and ‘(member of) public’ for the par-
ties to verbal interaction, rather than the more familiar term ‘participant’. I use
‘subject’ for ‘members’ of an institution – those who have institutional roles
and identities acquired in a deﬁned acquisition period and maintained as
long-term attributes. The ‘client’ is an outsider rather than a member, who
nevertheless takes part in certain institutional interactions in accordance with
norms laid down by the institution, but without a deﬁned acquisition period
or long-term maintenance of attributes (though attribute-maintenance is no
doubt a matter of degree). Examples would be a patient in a medical examin-
ation, or a lay witness in a court hearing. Finally, some institutions have a 
‘public’ to whom messages are addressed, whose members are sometimes
assumed to interpret these messages according to norms laid down by the
institution, but who do not interact with institutional subjects directly. The
primary concept is ‘subject’: ‘client’ and ‘public’ might be deﬁned as special
and relatively peripheral types of subject.
The term ‘subject’ is used in preference to ‘participant’ (or ‘member’)
because it has the double sense of agent (‘the subjects of history’) and affected
(‘the Queen’s subjects’); this captures the concept of the subject as qualiﬁed 
to act through being constrained – ‘subjected’ – to an institutional frame (see
above). I shall refer to ‘social subjects’ as well as ‘institutional subjects’: the
social subject is the whole social person, and social subjects occupy subject
positions in a variety of institutions. The choice of terms here is not a trivial
matter: I suspect the term ‘participant’ tends to imply an essential, integral
‘individual’ who ‘participates’ in various institutionally deﬁned types of inter-
action without that individuality being in any way shaped or modiﬁed thereby.
In preferring ‘subject’, I am emphasising that discourse makes people, as well
as people make discourse.
We may usefully distinguish various facets of the subject (either ‘institu-
tional’ or ‘social’), and talk of ‘economic’, ‘political’, ‘ideological’ and ‘dis-
coursal’ subjects. What I have been suggesting above can be summed up by
saying that institutions construct their ideological and discoursal subjects;
they construct them in the sense that they impose ideological and discoursal
Critical and descriptive goals in discourse analysis
41


constraints upon them as a condition for qualifying them to act as subjects. For
instance, to become a teacher, one must master the discursive and ideological
norms which the school attaches to that subject position – one must learn to
talk like a teacher and ‘see things’ (i.e., things such as learning and teaching)
like a teacher. (Though, as I shall show in Section 1.4, these are not mechan-
ically deterministic processes.) And, as I have suggested above, these ways 
of talking and ways of seeing are inseparably intertwined in that the latter 
constitute a part of the taken-for-granted ‘knowledge base’ upon which the
orderliness of the former depends. This means that in the process of acquiring
the ways of talking which are normatively associated with a subject position,
one necessarily acquires also its ways of seeing, or ideological norms. And just
as one is typically unaware of one’s ways of talking unless for some reason they
are subjected to conscious scrutiny, so also is one typically unaware of what
ways of seeing, what ideological representations, underlie one’s talk. This is a
crucial assumption which I return to below.
However, social institutions are not as monolithic as the account so far will
have suggested: as ideological and discursive orders, they are pluralistic rather
than monistic, i.e., they provide alternative sets of discoursal and ideological
norms. More accurately, they are pluralistic to an extent which varies in time
and place, and from one institution to another in a given social formation, in
accordance with factors including the balance of power between social classes
at the level of the social formation, and the degree to which institutions in the
social formation are integrated or, conversely, autonomous.5 The signiﬁcance
of the ﬁrst of these factors is that pluralism is likely to ﬂourish when non-
dominant classes are relatively powerful; the signiﬁcance of the second is that
a relatively autonomous institution may be relatively pluralistic even when
non-dominant classes are relatively powerless.
I shall say that, as regards the ideological facet of pluralism, a given institution
may house two or more distinguishable ‘ideological formations’ (Althusser
1971), i.e., distinct ideological positions which will tend to be associated with
different forces within the institution. This diversity of ideological formations
is a consequence of, and a condition for, struggles between different forces
within the institution: that is, conﬂict between forces results in ideological 
barriers between them, and ideological struggle is part of that conﬂict. These
institutional struggles are connected to class struggle, though the relationship
is not necessarily a direct or transparent one; and ideological and discoursal
control of institutions is itself a stake in the struggle between classes (see below
on ‘ideological and discoursal power’).
I propose to use for talking about institutional pluralism Pêcheux’s term
‘discursive formation’ as well as Althusser’s ‘ideological formation’. Pêcheux
42
Language, ideology and power


deﬁnes a discursive formation as ‘that which in a given ideological forma-
tion, i.e., from a particular position in a given conjuncture determined by 
the state of the class struggle, determines “what can and should be said”’
(Pêcheux 1982: 111). I shall refer to ‘ideologicaldiscursive formations’ (IDFs
for short), in accordance with what I have said above about the inseparab-
ility of ‘ways of talking’ and ‘ways of seeing’. In so doing, I shall make the 
simplifying assumption, which further work may well challenge, that there is 
a one-to-one relationship between ideological formations and discursive 
formations.
I have referred above to the social institution itself as a sort of speech 
community and (to extend the image) ideological community; and I have
claimed that institutions construct subjects ideologically and discoursally.
Institutions do indeed give the appearance of having these properties – but
only in cases where one IDF is unambiguously dominant (see below). I sug-
gest that these properties are properly attributed to the IDF, not the social
institution: it is the IDF that positions subjects in relation to its own sets of
speech events, participants, settings, topics, goals and, simultaneously, ideo-
logical representations.
As I have just indicated, IDFs are ordered in dominance: it is generally 
possible to identify a ‘dominant’ IDF and one or more ‘dominated’ IDFs in a
social institution. The struggle between forces within the institution which I
have referred to above can be seen as centring upon maintaining a dominant
IDF in dominance (from the perspective of those in power) or undermining a
dominant IDF in order to replace it. It is when the dominance of an IDF is
unchallenged to all intents and purposes (i.e., when whatever challenges there
are do not constitute any threat), that the norms of the IDF will become most
naturalised, and most opaque (see Section 1), and may come to be seen as the
norms of the institution itself. The interests of the dominant class at the level
of the social formation require the maintenance in dominance in each social
institution of an IDF compatible with their continued power. But this is never
given – it must be constantly fought for, and is constantly at risk through a shift
in relations of power between forces at the level of the social formation and in
the institutions. I shall refer to the capacity to maintain an IDF in dominance
(or, at the level of the social formation, a network of IDFs) as ‘ideological/
discoursal power’, which exists alongside economic and political power, and
can normally be expected to be held in conjunction with them. I shall use
‘power’ in this sense in contrast with ‘status’: the latter relates to the relation-
ship between subjects in interactions, and their status is registered in terms of 
(symmetrical or asymmetrical) interactional rights and obligations, which are
manifested in a range of linguistic, pragmatic and discoursal features. The
Critical and descriptive goals in discourse analysis
43


group which has ideological and discoursal power in an institution may or
may not be clearly status-marked.
We are now in a position to develop what has been said so far about the 
naturalisation of ideologies, and what I described at the end of Section 1 as ‘the
other side of the coin of naturalisation’, their opacity to participants in inter-
actions; since the case for a discourse analysis with critical goals (which it is the
primary objection of this paper to argue) rests upon the assumption that the
naturalisation and opacity of ideologies is a signiﬁcant property of discourse,
it is important to be as clear as possible about these effects and their origins.
Naturalisation gives to particular ideological representations the status 
of common sense, and thereby makes them opaque, i.e., no longer visible as
ideologies. These effects can be explained given (a) the process of subject-
construction referred to above, and (b) the notion of a dominant IDF. I have
argued that in the construction of the subject, the acquisition of normative
‘ways of talking’ associated with a given subject position must simultaneously
be the acquisition of the associated ‘ways of seeing’ (ideological norms); that
is, since any set of discursive norms entails a certain knowledge base, and since
any knowledge base includes an ideological component, in acquiring the dis-
cursive norms one simultaneously acquires the associated ideological norms.
If, moreover, the process of acquisition takes place under conditions of the
clear dominance of a given IDF in an institution, such that other IDFs are
unlikely to be evident (at least to the outsider or novice), there is no basis inter-
nal to the institution for the relativisation of the norms of the given IDF. In
such cases, these norms will tend to be perceived ﬁrst as norms of the institu-
tion itself, and second as merely skills or techniques which must be mastered
in order for the status of competent institutional subjects to be achieved.
These are the origins of naturalisation and opacity.
If it is also the case (as it typically is) that those who undergo the process of
subjection are unaware of the functioning of the institution concerned in the
social formation as a whole, then the institution will tend to be seen in isolation
and there will be no basis external to the institution, either, for the relativisa-
tion and rationalisation of the norms of the given IDF.
Subjects, then, are typically unaware of the ideological dimensions of the
subject positions they occupy. This means of course that they are in no reason-
able sense ‘committed’ to them, and it underlines the point that ideologies 
are not to be equated with views or beliefs. It is quite possible for a social 
subject to occupy institutional subject positions which are ideologically
incompatible, or to occupy a subject position incompatible with his or her
overt political or social beliefs and afﬁliations, without being aware of any 
contradiction.6
44
Language, ideology and power


3 Critical and descriptive goals
I am using the term ‘descriptive’ primarily to characterise approaches to dis-
course analysis whose goals are either non-explanatory, or explanatory within
‘local’ limits, in contrast to the ‘global’ explanatory goals of critical discourse
analysis outlined above. Where goals are non-explanatory, the objective is to
describe without explaining: if for instance a speaker in some interaction uses
consistently indirect forms of request, one points this out without looking for
causes. Where goals are explanatory but ‘local’, causes are looked for in the
immediate situation (e.g., in the ‘goals’ of the speaker – see below), but not
beyond it: that is, not at the higher levels of the social institution and the social
formation, which would ﬁgure in critical explanation. Moreover, although
‘locally’ explanatory descriptive work may seek to identify at least local deter-
minants of features of particular discourses, descriptive work generally has
been little concerned with the effectsof discourse. And it has certainly not con-
cerned itself with effects which go beyond the immediate situation. For critical
discourse analysis, on the other hand, the question of how discourse cumula-
tively contributes to the reproduction of macro structures is at the heart of the
explanatory endeavour.
Descriptive work in discourse analysis tends to share other characteristics
which can be seen as following from its at best limited explanatory goals.
These include a reliance upon the concept of ‘background knowledge’, adop-
tion of a ‘goal-driven’ local explanatory model, and neglect of power in dis-
course and, to an extent, status; all of these are discussed below. I shall refer for
convenience to ‘a descriptive approach’ which has these characteristics in
addition to descriptive goals in the above sense, but this is to be understood as
a generalised characterisation of a tendency within discourse analysis and not
as a characterisation of the work of any particular discourse analyst. Thus I
would regard all of the following as basically descriptive in approach, diverse
though they are in other respects: Sinclair and Coulthard (1975), Labov and
Fanshel (1977), Atkinson and Drew (1979), Brown and Yule (1983), Stubbs
(1983). But this does not mean that I am attributing to each of them all the
descriptive (or, indeed, none of the critical) characteristics.
3.1 Background knowledge7
My primary contention in this sub-section is that the undifferentiated concept
of BGK which has such wide currency in descriptive discourse analysis places
discourse analysis in the position of (‘uncritically’) reproducing certain ideo-
logical effects.
Critical and descriptive goals in discourse analysis
45


The concept of BGK reduces diverse aspects of the ‘backgrounded mat-
erial’ which is drawn upon in interaction – beliefs, values, ideologies, as well as
knowledge properly so called – to ‘knowledge’. ‘Knowledge’ implies facts to
be known, facts coded in propositions which are straightforwardly and trans-
parently related to them. But ‘ideology’, as I have argued above, involves the
representation of ‘the world’ from the perspective of a particular interest, so
that the relationship between proposition and fact is not transparent, but
mediated by representational activity. So ideology cannot be reduced to
‘knowledge’ without distortion.8
I suggested in Section 2 that where an IDF has undisputed dominance in 
an institution, its norms tend to be seen as highly naturalised, and as norms of
the institution itself. In such instances, a particular ideological representation
of some reality may come to appear as merely a transparent reﬂection of some
‘reality’ which is given in the same way to all. In this way, ideology creates ‘real-
ity’ as an effect (see Hall 1982: 75). The undifferentiated concept of BGK 
mirrors, complements and reproduces this ideological effect: it treats such
‘realities’ as objects of knowledge, like any other reality.
It also contributes to the reproduction of another ideological effect, the ‘auto-
nomous subject’ effect. The autonomous subject effect is a particular manifesta-
tion of the general tendency towards opacity which I have taken to be inherent
to ideology: ideology produces subjects which appear not to have been ‘sub-
jected’ or produced, but to be ‘free, homogeneous and responsible for (their)
actions’ (Coward and Ellis 1977: 77). That is, metaphorically speaking, ideo-
logy endeavours to cover its own traces. The autonomous subject effect is at
the bottom of theories of the ‘individual’ of the sort I referred to in Section 2.
Seeing all background material as ‘knowledge’ is tantamount to attributing
it to each participating person in each interaction as a set of attributes of 
that person (‘what that person knows’). Interactions can then be seen as the
coming-together of so many constituted, autonomous persons, ‘of their own
free will’, whose ‘knowledge bases’ are mobilised in managing and making
sense of discourse. This conception is cognitive and psychological at the
expense of being asociological; the sociological is reduced to the cognitive
through the ‘competence’ metaphor, so that social factors do not themselves
ﬁgure, only the ‘social competence’ of persons. The ‘competent’ subject of
cognitive conceptions of interaction is the autonomous subject of ideology.
I am not of course suggesting that descriptive discourse analysts are con-
sciously conspiring to give social scientiﬁc credence to ideological effects.
The point is rather that unless the analyst differentiates ideology from know-
ledge, i.e., unless s/he is aware of the ideological dimensions of discourse, the
chances are that s/he will be unconsciously implicated in the reproduction of
46
Language, ideology and power


ideologies, much as the lay subject is. To put the point more positively and
more contentiously, the concept of ideology is essential for a scientiﬁc under-
standing of discourse, as opposed to a mode of understanding which emulates
that of the partially unsighted discourse subject. But the concept of ideology is
incompatible with the limited explanatory goals of the descriptive approach,
for it necessarily requires reference outside the immediate situation to the
social institution and the social formation in that ideologies are by deﬁnition
representations generated by social forces at these levels.
3.2 Goals9
‘Goal-driven’ explanatory models of interaction tend, I suggest, to exaggerate
the extent to which actions are under the conscious control of subjects. In
referring to goal-driven models, I mainly have in mind ‘speaker goal’ models
which set out to explain the strategies adopted by speakers, and the particular
linguistic, pragmatic and discoursal choices made, in terms of speakers’ goals
(e.g., Winograd 1982: 13–20, Leech 1983: 35–44). But I shall also comment
on what one might call an ‘activity-goal’ model, which claims that features of
the ‘activity type’ are explicable by reference to its ‘goal’, i.e., ‘the function or
functions that members of the society see the activity as having’ (Levinson
1979: 369). I include activity-goals because Levinson also suggests that there
might be a connection between them and speaker-goals: in essence, the former
determine the latter. Atkinson and Drew (1979) attribute analogous explana-
tory value to activity-goals.
My objection to the ‘activity-goal’ model is that it regards properties of a
particular type of interaction as determined by the perceivedsocial functions of
that type of interaction (its ‘goal’), thus representing the relationship between
discourse and its determinants as transparent to those taking part. The prop-
erties which Levinson sees as so determined broadly correspond to what I
have called ‘ideological practices’ (see Section 1), i.e., discoursal practices
which vary between IDFs, and which are explicable immediately in terms of
the ideological facets of IDFs and indirectly in terms of the social determinants
of these ideologies. An example of ideological practices is the unequal dis-
tribution of discoursal and pragmatic rights and obligations in classroom 
discourse, illustrated in text 2. A distinction needs to be made between the
ideologies which underlie such practices, and rationalisations of such prac-
tices which institutional subjects may generate; rationalisations may radically
distort the ideological bases of such practices. Yet the activity type model 
portrays such rationalisations – the function(s) which these practices are seen
(Levinson’s term) as having – as determinants of these practices.
Critical and descriptive goals in discourse analysis
47


The objection to ‘speaker-goal’ models is similar: they imply that what
speakers do in interaction is under their conscious control, and are at odds
with the claim that naturalisation and opacity of determinants and effects are
basic features of discourse. I have no doubt that this will be a contentious view
of speaker-goal models; it will be objected that I am using ‘goal’ in its ordinary
language sense of ‘conscious objectives’ (‘goal 1’) rather than in the technical
sense (‘goal 2’) of ‘a state which regulates the behaviour of an individual’
(Leech 1983: 40), which misrepresents speaker-goal models. However, I
would argue that such an objection underestimates the power of a metaphor:
goal 2 includes goal 1; there is no obvious reason why one should accept this
conﬂation of conscious goals and unconscious ‘goals’; but given this
conﬂation, it is inevitable that the sense of goal 1 will predominate, and hence
that interactions will be essentially seen as the pursuit of conscious goals. 
Such a view is in harmony with the local explanatory goals of the descriptive
approach, for it seems to offer an explanation without needing to refer to institu-
tions or the social formation.
3.3 Power and status
Either the descriptive approach offers pseudo-explanations of norms of inter-
action such as that of the activity-goal model, or it regards norms of interaction
as requiring descriptions but not explanation. I shall be suggesting here that in
either case, given that the capacity to maintain an IDF in dominance is the most
salient effect of power in discourse, the absence of a serious concern with ex-
plaining norms results in a neglect of power; that, furthermore, there has been
such an emphasis on cooperative conversation between equals that even matters
of status have been relatively neglected (see Section 2 for ‘power’ and ‘status’).
The descriptive approach has virtually elevated cooperative conversation
between equals into an archetype of verbal interaction in general. As a result,
even where attention has been given to ‘unequal encounters’ (the term is used
in the Lancaster work referred to in note 1 for interactions with status asym-
metries), the asymmetrical distribution of discoursal and pragmatic rights and
obligations according to status (see below) has not been the focal concern.
The archetype has developed under inﬂuences which prominently include
two which I shall comment upon: the ‘Cooperative Principle’ of Grice (1975),
and ethnomethodological work on turn-taking.
I think it is clear that Grice primarily had in mind, when formulating the
‘Cooperative Principle’ and the maxims in the 1975 paper, interaction
between persons capable of contributing (more or less) equally; this is the
implication of his focus on ‘the exchange of information’ (my emphasis, see
48
Language, ideology and power


below). But for persons to be able to contribute equally, they must have equal
status. Having equal status will presumably mean having equal discoursal and
pragmatic rights and obligations – for instance, the same turn-taking rights
and the same obligations to avoid silences and interruptions, the same rights
to utter ‘obligating’ illocutionary acts (such as requests and questions), and
the same obligations to respond to them. I take it that having equal status 
also means having equal control over the determination of the concepts pre-
supposed by Grice’s maxims: over what for interactional purposes counts 
as ‘truth’, ‘relevance’, adequate information, etc. (see Pratt 1981: 13).
Of course, there do occur interactions which at least approximate to these
conditions, but they are by no means typical of interactions in general. Grice
himself pointed out that the maxims were stated as if the purpose which ‘talk
is adapted to serve and primarily employed to serve’ were ‘a maximally effec-
tive exchange of information’, and noted that ‘the scheme needs to be general-
ized to allow for such general purposes as inﬂuencing or directing the actions
of others’ (1975: 47). This proviso seems to have been often overlooked.
The impact of ethnomethodological work on turn-taking on the archetype
must surely involve an inﬂuential paper by Sacks, Schegloff and Jefferson
(1978), which proposes a simple but powerful set of rules to account for 
properties of conversational turn-taking, where ‘conversation’ is again very
much cooperative interaction between equals. These rules tend to be taken as
generally relevant for turn-taking, even though they are explicitly formulated
for conversation. The paper itself argues that the ‘exchange system’ for 
conversation which it characterises ‘should be considered the basic form 
of speech-exchange system, with other systems . . . representing a variety of
transformations on conversation’s turn-taking system’ (Sacks et al. (1978:
47)). Levinson has suggested an analogous primacy for Grice’s maxims,
which we might view as ‘speciﬁcations of some basic unmarked communica-
tive context, deviations from which however common are seen as special or
marked’ (1979: 376). Any such assignment of primacy or ‘unmarked’ status to
conversation strengthens the archetype I have referred to.
The neglect of ‘unequal encounters’ and questions of status which has
resulted from the appeal of the archetype is not unconnected with the neglect
of power I referred to above. For if one focuses upon ‘unequal encounters’, 
or the comparison of ‘equal’ and ‘unequal’ interactions, the variability and 
relativity of norms of interaction is likely to be highlighted, giving rise to ques-
tions about their origins and rationales which may in turn lead to questions
about ideological and discursive power; whereas if one concentrates heavily
upon data where the distribution of rights and obligations is more or less 
symmetrical, there seems to be nothing to explain. Though from a critical 
Critical and descriptive goals in discourse analysis
49


perspective, of course, there is: the possibility of, and constraints upon, co-
operative conversation between equals, which are themselves effects of power.
Such conversation does not occur freely irrespective of institution, sub-
jects, settings, and so forth. A reasonable hypothesis perhaps is that the most
favourable conditions for its occurrence would be in an institution whose
dominant IDF represented (certain) subjects as diversely contributing to a
cooperative venture of equals; and that those with power would be most likely
to endeavour to maintain such an IDF in dominance where the conditions
existed for them (or required of them) to maintain their power through actively
involving the ‘powerless’ in the organisation and control of the institution. In
contemporary Britain, academic communities approximate rather closely to
these conditions.
From the critical perspective, a statement of the conditions under which
interactions of a particular type may occur is a necessary element of an account
of such interactions, and I have suggested that such a statement cannot be
made without reference to the distribution and exercise of power in the institu-
tion and, ultimately, in the social formation. Given the limited explanatory
goals of the descriptive approach, however, the concept of power lies outside
its scope.
3.4 Conclusion: research objectives
I have suggested that from the at best ‘locally’ explanatory goals of the descrip-
tive approach there follow certain other characteristics – its conception of
BGK and its ‘complicity’ in certain ideological effects, its interest in goal-
driven models and its image of subjects in conscious control of interactions,
the absence of serious explanatory work on norms and the neglect of power
and status.
I referred in Section 3.1 to the ‘cognitive’ conception of interaction which
is implicit in the concept of BGK. Interest in cognitive theories of language
and discourse is on the increase, at least in part because of their ‘computer-
friendliness’; Winograd (1982) presents a ‘computational paradigm’ as a new
synthesis of the work of linguists, psychologists, students of artiﬁcial intel-
ligence and others, around a computer-friendly cognitive theory of language.
Winograd’s proposals have much in common with what I have called the
‘descriptive approach’, including a speaker-goal model, and local goals. I sus-
pect that the current computational explosion might make this an increasingly
attractive direction for discourse analysis, which will no doubt produce 
signiﬁcant advances in certain directions, much as tranformational-generative
grammar did, and at much the same cost in terms of the desocialisation of 
language and discourse.
50
Language, ideology and power


Any such development must, however, come to terms with what I would
see as a major problem for non-critical discourse analysis, that of what I 
shall call the rationality of its research programme. I take a ‘rational’ research 
programme to be one which makes possible a systematic development in
knowledge and understanding of the relevant domain, in this case discourse.
Given the in principle inﬁnite amount of possible data, a principled basis 
for sampling is necessary for such a programme. No such principled basis is
possible so long as discourse analysts treat their samples as objets trouvés
(Haberland and Mey 1977: 8), i.e., so long as bits of discourse are analysed
with little or no attention to their places in their institutional matrices.
A principled basis for sampling requires minimally (a) a sociological
account of the institution under study, its relationship to other institutions in
the social formation, and relationship between forces within it; (b) an account
of the ‘order of discourse’ of the institution, of its IDFs and the dominance
relationships among them, with links between (a) and (b); (c) an ethnographic
account of each IDF. Given this information, one could identify for collec-
tion and analysis interactions which are representative of the range of IDFs 
and speech events, interactional ‘cruxes’ which are particularly signiﬁcant in
terms of tensions between IDFs or between subjects, and so forth. In this way
a systematic understanding of the functioning of discourse in institutions and
institutional change could become a feasible target.
The same is true for ‘comparative’ research on discourse across institutions.
The descriptive approach to such research may show interesting similarities
or differences in discourse structure and organisation, as does work in the
Birmingham discourse analysis model (Sinclair and Coulthard 1975: 115–18,
Coulthard and Montgomery 1981). But such comparison requires a principled
basis for selecting cases, given which it can contribute to the investigation of
substantive social issues such as: the degree to which social institutions are
integrated or autonomous in a given social formation, and centralising or
decentralising tendencies; or the positions of social institutions on a hierarchy
of relative importance to the function of the social formation, and how this
relates to inﬂuences from one institution to another on various levels, includ-
ing the ideological and discoursal. The work of Foucault (1979) is a suggestive
starting point for such research.
4 Concluding remarks: resistance
The following piece of data is, like text 1, an extract from a police interview,
though in this case the interviewee is a youth suspected of involvement in an
incident during which a bus window was broken. Ais the youth, Bis the police
interviewer, and the conventions are the same as for text 1.
Critical and descriptive goals in discourse analysis
51


Text 5
1. B: so why did G you get the other fellows to come up with
2. A:
I some went up ﬁrst
3. B: you as well
4. A: I’m not getting on a bus with a bus load of coons me sitting there jack
the lad d’you know what I mean . . .
5. B: why’s G that
6. A:
I get laid into what do you mean why’s that . . .
7. B: well they weren’t attacking any other white people on the bus were
they
8. A: no . . . that’s coz there was no other skinhead on the bus that’s why
. . . if there was a skinhead on the bus that was it they would lay into
him
9. B: so there’s a feud is there
10. A: yeah . . .
11. B: between skinheads and blacks
12. A: yeah . . .
13. B: so when you went on the upstairs on the bus because let’s face it if
there was none of them downstairs was there
14. A: no
15. B: so why did you go upstairs
16. A: like I say there was no room downstairs anyway I don’t sit on the 
bottom of the bus that’s where all the grannies sit . . . I can’t sit down
there10
In contrast to the orderliness of the texts discussed in Section 1.1 of this
paper, text 5 manifests a certain ‘disorderliness’, in the sense that the inter-
viewee is in a number of respects not constraining his contributions to the
interaction in accordance with institutional norms for the subject position he
is in. This is a case where we have a ‘client’ rather than an institutional subject;
as I indicated earlier, clients can normally be expected to comply with institu-
tional norms. The client here is non-compliant in the following ways:
(a) A interrupts B (2,5)
(b) A challenges B’s questions rather than answering them (3,5)
(c) A questions B (5)
(d) A questions B’s sincerity. In 9 and 11, A signals prosodically as well as
non-vocally that B is already in possession of information he purports to
be asking for (and therefore not to have).
52
Language, ideology and power


(e) A maintains a different ‘orientation’ (Sinclair and Coulthard 1975:
130–32) from B’s. This is marked by his use of the lexis of his peer group
rather than that of police interviews (coon, jack the lad, grannies).
One might add that there are indications that A gets B to adapt to his orienta-
tion, whereas one would expect the reverse, i.e., one would expect the client
to adapt to the orientation of the subject (and of the institution). For instance,
in 6 Banaphorically refers to (a bus load of ) coons, rather than using a different
lexicalisation as one might expect him to if he were ‘asserting’ his orientation
(and as he does in 10, with blacks).
Text 5 will no doubt correct any impression that may have been given in this
paper that norms are necessarily faithfully mirrored in practices (see note 4).
One factor determining how likely it is that a client will comply with the norms
which an institution attaches to a subject position is the particular conﬁgura-
tion of processes of subjection in other institutions which have contributed to
the social formation of that client. In this instance one might wish to look into
the subject positions associated with the client’s peer-group, i.e., the relevant
‘youth culture’. One dimension of institutional subject construction which I
have not referred to in the paper so far is that the institution also constructs the
subject’s stance towards ‘outsiders’, including subjects in other institutions.
In this case, it could be that the client is constructed into an oppositional
stance towards the police and perhaps other public authorities.
The critique of institutional discourse, as part of the critique of social 
institutions and the social formation, does not take place in glorious academic
isolation from the practices of institutional subjects, clients and publics. On
the contrary, it is continuous with such practices, and it is only in so far as such
practices include signiﬁcant elements of resistance to dominant IDFs – be it
through clients rejecting subject positions as in text 5, or, analogously, readers
rejecting the ‘preferred reader’ positions which writers ‘write into’ their texts
– or through challenges to the dominance of an IDF from other IDFs, that 
the critique of institutional discourse can develop into a ‘material force’ with
the capacity to contribute to the transformation of institutions and social 
formations.
Given the existence of such conditions across social institutions, which
may occur in a period when the struggle between social forces at the level of 
the social formation is sharp, it may be possible to introduce forms of critical
discourse analysis in the schools, as part of the development of ‘language
awareness’, in the teaching of the mother tongue. The desirability in principle
of such a development follows from what I have claimed above: if speakers are
standardly operating in discourse under unknown determinants and with
Critical and descriptive goals in discourse analysis
53


unknown effects, it is a proper objective for schools to increase discoursal con-
sciousness. However, I have stressed the conditions for such a development,
because it would be naïve to think that its desirability in principle would 
be sufﬁcient for it to be achieved. On the contrary, it is likely to be ﬁercely
resisted.
Notes
1. The transcription conventions are: turns are numbered, excluding ‘back
channels’; beginnings of overlaps are marked with square brackets; pauses
are marked with dots for a ‘short’ pause and a dash for a ‘long’ pause; material
in round brackets was indistinct. For texts 2 and 3 I retain the conventions
used in their sources, which are indicated. Text 1 was part of the data used 
in a presentation to the Language Study Group of the British Sociological
Association (Lancaster Conference, June 1982) by myself and colleagues
Christopher Candlin, Michael Makosch, Susan Spencer, Jennifer Thomas.
It is taken from the television series Police as is text 5.
2. Italicised syllables carry primary stress; intonation is selectively marked;
utterance segments which overlap are enclosed within one pair of square
brackets; short pauses are marked ‘ˆ’.
3. I use the term ‘social formation’ to designate a particular society at a particular
time and stage of development (e.g., Britain in 1984). The term ‘society’ is
used too loosely and variously to serve the purpose.
4. The relationship between norms and action is not as simple as this suggests.
Sometimes, which norms are the appropriate ones is itself a matter for 
negotiation; then there may be alternative sets of norms available (see below);
and, as I show in section 4, norms may be rejected.
5. I have in mind throughout class societies, and more speciﬁcally capitalist
social formations such as the one I am most familiar with: that of modern
Britain.
6. Nor are ideologies to be equated with ‘propaganda’ or ‘bias’; the latter are
associated with particular communicative intentions (such as ‘persuading’),
the former are not.
7. The concept of BGK has a wide currency across a number of disciplines. The
following, for instance, are representative of pragmatics, discourse analysis
and sociology: Giddens (1976), Levinson (1983), Brown and Yule (1983).
8. I assume for present purposes that ‘knowledge’ and ‘ideology’ are clearly 
separable, which presupposes a much more categorical distinction between
science and ideology than may be sustainable.
9. I use the term ‘goal’ here with respect to parties in discourse, whereas my use
of the term earlier has been with respect to analytical goals. I don’t believe
there should be any confusion.
54
Language, ideology and power


10. This text and some of my comments on it derive from a part of the presenta-
tion referred to in note 1 which was jointly produced by Michael Makosch,
Susan Spencer and myself. I am grateful to all the colleagues referred to in
note 1 for providing the stimuli which led to the writing of this paper. I am
grateful to my wife Vonny for showing me how to be more coherent; remain-
ing incoherence is my own responsibility.
Critical and descriptive goals in discourse analysis
55


2.
Language and ideology
1 Introduction
T
his paper explores the theoretical question of what sort of relationships
there are between language and ideology, and the methodological ques-
tion of how such relationships are shown in analysis (which together I refer 
to as ‘language/ideology’). It is an attempt to build from the achievements 
and limitations of explorations of these questions within Marxism, especially
Althusser’s contribution to the theory of ideology and its development by
Pêcheux into a theory of discourse and a method for discourse analysis 
(see Althusser 1971; Haroche, Henry, Pêcheux 1971; Pêcheux 1982; 
Larrain 1979). I have found the self-criticism of Pêcheux and his associates 
in their most recent work a valuable resource for going beyond structuralist
accounts of language/ideology (Conein et al. 1981; Maldidier 1984; Pêcheux
1988).
I discuss the merits of ‘locating’ ideology in language structures or language
events and conclude it is present in both. I outline a conception of discourse
and discourse analysis which is compatible with this conclusion, and suggest
that a more diverse range of linguistic features and levels may be ideologically
invested than is usually assumed, including aspects of linguistic form and style
as well as ‘content’. I then argue that language/ideology issues ought to ﬁgure
in the wider framework of theories and analyses of power, for which the
Gramscian concept of hegemony is fruitful. This implies a focus in studies of
language/ideology upon change in discoursal practice and structures, seen 
as a dimension of change in the balance of social forces. I conclude with a 
discussion of the limits of ideology and the possibilities for combating ideo-
logical discourse.


2 Location of ideology
I want to argue that ideology invests language in various ways at various levels,
and that we don’t have to choose between different possible ‘locations’ of 
ideology, all of which seem partly justiﬁed and none of which seems entirely
satisfactory. The key issue is whether ideology is a property of structures or a
property of events, and the answer is ‘both’. And the key problem is to ﬁnd 
a satisfactory account of the dialectic of structures and events.
A number of accounts place ideology in some form of system of potential
underlying language practice – be it a ‘code’, ‘structure’, ‘system’ or ‘formation’
(e.g., a set of expressions in speciﬁed semantic relations). These structures 
are deﬁned for various varieties of a language, not for a language per se. The
‘structure’ option, as I shall call it, has the virtue of showing events, actual 
discoursal practice, to be constrained by social conventions, norms, histories.
It has the disadvantage of tending to defocus the event on the assumption that
events are mere instantiations of structures, whereas the relationship of events
to structures would appear to be less neat and less compliant. This privileges
the perspective of reproduction rather than that of transformation, and the
ideological conventionality and repetitiveness of events. Pêcheux is a case in
point, though he represents an advance on Althusser in opening up the pos-
sibility of resistance through ‘counteridentiﬁcation’ and ‘disidentiﬁcation’. 
It also tends to postulate entities (codes, formations, etc.) which appear to be
more clearly bounded than real entities are, thus privileging the synchronic
moment of ﬁxity over historical processes of ﬁxation and dissolution.
An alternative location for ideology would be the discursive event itself.
This has the virtue of representing ideology as a process which goes on in
events, and it permits transformation and ﬂuidity to be highlighted. But it can
lead to an illusory view of discourse as free processes of formation unless there
is a simultaneous emphasis on structures. There is a textual variant of this
location: ideologies reside in texts. While it is true that the forms and content
of texts do bear the imprint of ideological processes and structures, it is 
not possible to ‘read off’ ideologies from texts. This is because meanings are
produced through interpretations of texts and texts are open to diverse inter-
pretations, and because ideological processes appertain to discourses as
whole social events – they are processes between people – not to the texts
which are produced, distributed and interpreted as moments of such events.
Claims to discover ideological processes solely through text analysis run into
the problem now familiar in media sociology that text ‘consumers’ (readers,
viewers) appear sometimes to be quite immune to the effects of such ideologies
(Morley 1983).
Language and ideology
57


Both the structure and discourse options (as well as the text option) have
the limitation of being localised and particular. Ideologies cut across the
boundaries of situation types and institutions, and we need to be able to 
discuss how they transcend particular codes or types of discourse (a simple
example would be metaphors of the nation as a family), how ideology relates
to the structuring and restructuring of relations between such entities. 
The concept of ‘interdiscourse’ is helpful here; so too is Foucault’s concept 
of ‘order of discourse’ (Foucault 1971) which I shall use. Once again, the
structural focus on orders of discourse needs a complementary focus on
events, where these restructurings concretely take place.
An issue is what sort of entities are involved in the (re)structuring of orders
of discourse. Without attempting a detailed account of the structuring of
orders of discourse, I would like to suggest the entities which make them up
are (a) more or less clearly deﬁned, (b) variable in scale, and (c) in various 
relationships to each other, including the relationships of complementarity,
inclusion and contradiction. I remarked above that structures are sometimes
conceived of as more clearly bounded than they are; some entities seem to 
be sharply differentiated, others fuzzy. The entities which are articulated 
and rearticulated in discourse are not all fully ﬂedged codes or registers; 
they may be smaller scale entities such as turn-taking systems, lexicons 
which incorporate particular classiﬁcations, generic scripts for narratives 
(for instance), sets of politeness conventions, and so forth. Finally, orders of 
discourse should, I suggest, be seen as heterogeneous in the sense that they
articulate both compatible and complementary entities and contradictory
entities – such as contrasting lexicalisations, or turn-taking systems. These
suggested properties of orders of discourse accord with thinking in ‘second-
generation’ French discourse analysts. They also, as I shall show, harmonise
with the concept of hegemony.
Ideology is located, then, both in structures which constitute the outcome
of past events and the conditions for current events, and in events themselves
as they reproduce and transform their conditioning structures. In the following
two sections I shall present a way of conceptualising (use of) language and a
matrix for conceptualising ideology in its relation to economic and political
relations which harmonise with this position.
3 Discourse and text
The Saussurean conception of language use or parole sees it in individualistic
and asocial terms. In using the term ‘discourse’ I am claiming language use to be
imbricated in social relations and processes which systematically determine
58
Language, ideology and power


variations in its properties, including the linguistic forms which appear in
texts. One aspect of this imbrication in the social which is inherent to the
notion of discourse is that language is a material form of ideology, and lan-
guage is invested by ideology.
Also inherent to discourse is the dialectical relation of structure/event 
discussed above: discourse is shaped by structures, but also contributes to
shaping and reshaping them, to reproducing and transforming them. These
structures are most immediately of a discoursal/ideological nature – orders 
of discourse, codes and their elements such as vocabularies or turn-taking
conventions – but they also include in a mediated form political and economic
structures, relationships in the market, gender relations, relations within the
state and within the institutions of civil society such as education.
The relationship of discourse to such extra-discoursal structures and rela-
tions is not just representational but also constitutive: ideology has material
effects discourse contributes to the creation and constant recreation of the
relations, subjects (as recognised in the Althusserian concept of interpellation)
and objects which populate the social world. The parent–child relationships
of the family, the determination of what positions of ‘mother’, ‘father’ and
‘child’ are socially available as well as the subjection of real individuals to these
positions, the nature of the family, or of the home, are all shaped in the ideo-
logical processes of discourse. This could easily lead to the idealist inversion
referred to earlier whereby the realities of the social world are seen as emanating
from ideas. However, there are two provisos which together block this. First,
people are always confronted with the family as a real institution (in a limited
number of variants) with concrete practices: existing family structures are also
partly constituted in ideology and discourse, but reiﬁed into institutions and
practices. Second, the constitutive work of discourse necessarily takes place
within the constraints of the complex of economic, political and discoursal/
ideological structures referred to above – and I shall argue later in relation to
particular hegemonic projects and struggle. The result is that the ideological
and discoursal shaping of the real is always caught up in the networks of the real.
I see discourse as a complex of three elements: social practice, discoursal
practice (text production, distribution and consumption), and text, and the
analysis of a speciﬁc discourse calls for analysis in each of these three dimen-
sions and their interrelations. The hypothesis is that signiﬁcant connections
exist between features of texts, ways in which texts are put together and 
interpreted, and the nature of the social practice (see Paper 5 for details of 
this framework).
Ideology enters this picture ﬁrst in the ideological investment of elements
which are drawn upon in producing or interpreting a text, and the ways they
Language and ideology
59


are articulated together in orders of discourse; and second in the ways in
which these elements are articulated together and orders of discourse rearticu-
latedin discoursal events (detailed below). In the former connection, it should
be noted that the richness of the ideological elements which go into producing
and interpreting a text may be sparsely represented in the text. An example
might be the way in which scare quotes are used to signal a point of confronta-
tion between ideologies (and discourses) which are not further represented in
the text – around the word ‘personal’ in the expression ‘the “personal” problems
of young people’ in a left-wing newspaper (for which many ‘personal’ problems
will be social).
A further substantive question about ideology is what features or levels of
language and discourse may be ideologically invested. A common claim is 
that it is ‘meanings’ (sometimes speciﬁed as ‘content’ as opposed to ‘form’)
that are ideological (e.g., Thompson 1984), and this often means just or mainly
lexical meanings. Lexical meanings are of course important, but so too are 
presuppositions, implicatures, metaphors and coherence, all aspects of
meaning. For instance, coherent interpretations of texts are arrived at by inter-
preters on the basis of cues in the text, and resources (including internalised
ideological and discoursal structures) which they bring to text interpretation.
Coherence is a key factor in the ideological constitution and reconstitution of
subjects in discourse: a text ‘postulates’ a subject ‘capable’ of automatically
linking together its potentially highly diverse and not explicitly linked elements
to make sense of it. In postulating such a subject, a text contributes to con-
stituting such a subject.
The ‘form’–‘content’ opposition is itself misleading, however. If content is
to enter the realm of practice, it must do so in formal clothing, in texts or other
material forms, though it is possible to study forms as if they were unrelated to
content, as linguists sometimes do. In fact, formal features of texts at various
levels may be ideologically invested. For example, the representation of
slumps and unemployment as akin to natural disasters may involve a preference
for intransitive and attributive rather than transitive sentence structures (‘the
currency has lost its value’, ‘millions are out of work’, as opposed to ‘investors
are buying gold’, ‘ﬁrms have sacked millions’ – see Fowler et al. (1979)). At a
different level, crime stories in newspapers are written according to relatively
predictable scripts which embody ideological representations of crime
(Jordanidou 1990). Again, the turn-taking system in a classroom or politeness
conventions operating between a manager and a secretary imply particular
ideologial representations of teacher–pupil and manager–secretary relations.
Nevertheless, it may be useful to think of ideologies in terms of content-like
entities which are manifested in various formal features, and perhaps frame,
60
Language, ideology and power


schema, script and related concepts are of value in this respect (Schank and
Abelson 1977).
Even aspects of the ‘style’ of a text may be ideologically signiﬁcant. When
for instance public bodies such as government ministries produce public
information on their schemes and activities, they select a style of writing (or
indeed televising) partly on the basis of the image they thereby construct for
themselves. This can be regarded as a special sort of ideological process of
subject constitution. A topical case in point is the Department of Trade and
Industry’s publicity for its ‘enterprise’ initiatives. The Department seems to
be trying to create for itself the image of the entrepreneur of ‘enterprise 
culture’, in its efforts to persuade others to adopt the same image and identity.
It does this in part stylistically. Its publicity for instance is full of categorical,
authoritative and unmitigated statements about business practice aimed at
businessmen (e.g., ‘It’s no good expecting to make the right decisions for your
business if you don’t start with decent information’) which have I think more to
do with establishing a categorical and authoritative and decisive image than with
giving ‘information’ (or rather opinions) which addressees must already have.
4 Hegemony
The concept of hegemony originates in Lenin but is the centrepiece in an elab-
orated form of Gramsci’s analysis of Western capitalism and revolutionary
strategy in Western Europe. I shall make use of it both because it harmonises
with the dialectical conception of structure/event advocated above, and because
it provides a framework for theorising and analysing ideology/discourse
which avoids both economism and idealism. Hegemony cuts across and 
integrates economy, politics and ideology, yet ascribes an authentic place to
each of them within an overall focus upon politics and power, and upon the
dialectical relations between classes and class fragments.
Hegemony is leadership as well as domination across the economic, political,
cultural and ideological domains of a society. Hegemony is the power over
society as a whole of one of the fundamental economically deﬁned classes in
alliance (as a bloc) with other social forces, but it is never achieved more than
partially and temporarily, as an ‘unstable equilibrium’. Hegemony is about
constructing alliances, and integrating rather than simply dominating sub-
ordinate classes, through concessions or through ideological means, to win
their consent. Hegemony is a focus of constant struggle around points of 
greatest instability between classes and blocs, to construct or sustain or fracture
alliances and relations of domination/subordination, which takes economic,
political and ideological forms. Hegemonic struggle takes place on a broad
Language and ideology
61


front which includes the institutions of civil society (education, trade unions,
family), with possible unevenness between different levels and domains.
Ideology is understood within this framework in terms which bear the
seeds of all Althusser’s advances (Buci-Glucksmann 1980: 66)in, for instance,
its focusing of the implicit and unconscious materialisation of ideologies in
practices (which contain them as implicit theoretical ‘premisses’), ideology
being ‘a conception of the world that is implicitly manifest in art, in law, in 
economic activity and in the manifestations of individual and collective life’
(Gramsci 1971: 328). While the interpellation of subjects is an Althusserian
elaboration, there is in Gramsci a conception of subjects as structured by
diverse ideologies implicit in their practice which gives them a ‘strangely 
composite’ character (1971: 324), and a view of ‘common sense’ as both a
depositary of the diverse effects of past ideological struggles, and a constant
target for restructuring, in ongoing struggles. In common sense, ideologies
become naturalised, or automatised. For Gramsci, ideology is tied to action,
and ideologies are judged in terms of their social effects rather than their truth
values. Moreover, Gramsci conceived of ‘the ﬁeld of ideologies in terms of
conﬂicting, overlapping, or intersecting currents or formations’ (Hall 1988:
55–6), which highlights the question of how the elements of what he calls 
‘an ideological complex’ (Gramsci 1971: 195) come to be structured and
restructured, articulated and rearticulated, in processes of ideological struggle.
This is a perspective developed by Laclau and Mouffe (1985), though in terms
which reject basic Gramscian positions such as the rootedness of hegemony 
in class (see also Laclau (1979)).
The ideological dimensions of hegemonic struggle can be conceptualised
and analysed in terms of the view of discourse I have introduced above. An
order of discourse constitutes the discoursal/ideological facet of a contradictory
and unstable equilibrium (hegemony); notice that the view outlined above 
of an order of discourse as complex, heterogeneous and contradictory har-
monises with the concept of ideological complex. And discoursal practice 
is a facet of struggle which contributes in varying degrees to the reproduction
or transformation of the existing order of discourse, and through that of 
existing social and power relations. Let us take the political discourse of
Thatcherism as an example. Thatcherite discourse can be interpreted as a
rearticulation of the existing order of political discourse which has brought
traditional conservative, neo-liberal and populist discourse elements into a
new mix that has also constituted an unprecedented discourse of political
power for a woman leader. This discoursal rearticulation materialises an 
ideological project for the constitution of a new political base, new political
subjects, and a new agenda, itself a facet of the political project of restructuring
62
Language, ideology and power


the hegemony of the bloc centred upon the bourgeoisie in new economic and
political conditions. Thatcherite discourse has been described along these
lines by Hall (1988), and Fairclough (1989a) shows how such an analysis can
be carried out in terms of the conception of discourse introduced above, in a
way which accounts for (as Hall does not) the speciﬁc features of the language
of Thatcher’s political texts. I should add that the rearticulated order of dis-
course is a contradictory one: authoritarian elements coexist with democratic
and egalitarian ones (textually, for instance, inclusive we coexists with indeﬁnite
you), patriarchal elements with feminist elements, but always with the latter
member of each pair being contained and constrained by the former. The
rearticulation of orders of discourse, however, is achieved not only in productive
discoursal practice, but also in interpretation: because of the heterogeneous
elements which go into their production, texts are open to many ambivalences
which are reduced if not eliminated by particular interpretative practices
which draw upon particular conﬁgurations of discoursal elements as parts of
their interpretative procedures.
However, most discourse does not bear upon hegemonic struggle in such a
direct way as Thatcherite discourse. In most discourse, the protagonists (as it
were) are not classes or political forces linked in such relatively direct ways to
classes or blocs but, for instance, teachers and pupils, counsellors and clients,
police and public, women and men. Hegemony is a process at the societal
level, whereas most discourse has a more local character, being located in or
on the edges of particular institutions – the family, schools, neighbourhoods,
workplaces, courts of law, etc. We have to honour the speciﬁcity of such 
institutional domains. However, hegemony still provides both a model and a
matrix. It provides a model: in, let us say, education, the dominant groups also
appear to exercise power through constituting alliances, integrating rather
than merely dominating subordinate groups, winning their consent, achieving
a precarious equilibrium which may be undermined by other groups, and
doing so in part through discourse and ideology, through the constitution 
of and struggle around local orders of discourse, no less heterogeneous and 
contradictory than their societal counterpart. It provides a matrix: the achieve-
ment of hegemony at a societal level requires a degree of integration of local
and semi-autonomous institutions and power relations, so that the latter are
partially shaped by hegemonic relations. This directs attention to links across
institutions, and links and movement between institutional orders of discourse.
What is necessary but difﬁcult to accomplish is giving proper weight to inte-
gration without thereby playing down the relative autonomy and integrity of
non-class struggles: between the sexes, ethnic groups, and the various categories
of institutional agent.
Language and ideology
63


From the perspective of hegemony, it is processes which are in focus: 
local processes of constituting and reconstituting social relations through 
discourse, global processes of integration and disintegration transcending
particular institutions and local orders of discourse. Discoursal change, and
its relationship to ideological change and to social struggle and change in 
a broader sense, is where the emphasis must be placed, and where the 
language/ideology problem should be confronted. And in accordance with
the dialectical view of structure/event above, a study of discoursal change
needs a double focus on the discoursal event and on the societal and institu-
tional orders of discourse.
By change in discoursal events I mean innovation or creativity which in
some way goes against conventions and expectations. Change involves forms
of transgression, crossing boundaries, such as putting together existing codes
or elements in new combinations, or drawing upon orders of discourse or
their elements in situations which conventionally preclude them in a way
which gives a sense of a struggle between different ways of signifying a particular
domain of experience. Change leaves traces in texts in the form of the co-
occurrence of contradictory or inconsistent elements – mixtures of formal and
informal styles, technical and non-technical vocabularies, markers of authority
and familiarity, more typically written and more typically spoken syntactic
forms, and so forth. The immediate origins and motivations of change lie in
contradictions which may problematise conventions in a variety of ways. For
example, contradictions which occur in the positioning of subjects, such as
those involving gender relations, where gender-linked discoursal and other
practices have been problematised and changed under the impact of con-
tradictions between traditional gendered subject positions which many of us
were socialised into, and new gender relations. People are faced with what
Billig et al. (1988) call ‘ideological dilemmas’, which they attempt to resolve 
or contain through discoursal forms of struggle. On a rather different plane,
Thatcher’s political discourse can be seen to arise out of the problematisation
of traditional right-wing discoursal practices in circumstances where con-
tradictions become apparent between the social relations, subject positions
and political practices they are based in and a changing world. Such subjective
apprehensions of problems in concrete situations have their social conditions
in stuctural contradictions at the institutional and societal levels, upon which
discoursal events have cumulative effects. In terms of the framework for 
discourse analysis introduced in the previous section, social conditions and
effects are analysed in the dimension of social practice, ‘ideological dilemmas’
and attempts to resolve them in the dimension of discourse practice, and textual
traces in the dimension of text.
64
Language, ideology and power


In respect of structural change, changes which appear to move across
boundaries between institutional orders of discourse are of particular interest
in their possible links to wider hegemonic projects. Let me refer to two
changes of this sort. One is an apparent democratisation of discourse which
involves the reduction of overt markers of power asymmetry between people
of unequal institutional power – teachers and pupils, academics and students,
employers/managers and workers, parents and children, doctors and patients.
This tendency is manifested in a great many different institutional domains.
Although there are variations between them, it appears to be generally inter-
pretable not as the elimination of power asymmetry but its transformation into
covert forms. For example, teachers may exercise control in discourse with
pupils less through direct orders and overt constraints on their rights to speak
than through indirect requests and suggestions and the way they react and
respond (facially and physically as well as verbally) to pupils’ contributions.
Such discourse can be seen in terms of contradictory mixtures of discourses 
of equality and power. The second example is what I have called ‘synthetic
personalisation’ (Fairclough 1989a). This is the simulation of private, face-to-
face, person-to-person discourse in public mass-audience discourse – print,
radio, television. Both examples are I think interpretable in hegemonic terms,
though to do so properly would require more space than I have here. Discoursal
democratisation is of course linked to political democratisation, and to the
broad shift from coercion to consent, incorporation and pluralism in the 
exercise of power. Synthetic personalisation is I think a facet of a concomitant
process of the breaking down of divisions between public and private, political
society and civil society, as the state and its mechanisms (especially ideological)
of generating consent expand into private domains. Although both cases can
perhaps be seen in pessimistic terms as illusions of democracy, informality and
so forth being projected for ulterior motives, the fact that orders of discourse
do incorporate these elements if only in ways limited and constrained by others
renders them open, if we adopt a hegemonic model, to discoursal struggle
directed at promoting these elements, as it were. In this sense democratisation
and personalisation as strategies are high risk.
Are discoursal changes of this order necessarily ideologically invested, 
and what are their implications for the language/ideology problem? It is quite
conceivable that changes in discoursal practices and restructuring of orders of
discourse could come about for purely rational reasons. For example, it could
well be that doctors are more likely to arrive at sound medical judgements if
they talk with their patients conversationally on a roughly (at least apparently)
equal footing than if they merely subject them to batteries of preconstructed
verbal and physical examinations. But the rational motivations for such a
Language and ideology
65


change are virtually bound to attract an ideological overlay by the fact that the
change takes places within existing power relations inside and outside medicine.
Let me spell this out: in so far as changes in practices and restructurings can be
said to embody representations, propositions or assumptions which affect
(sustain, undermine) relations of power, they can be said to be ideological.
This is broadly similar to Thompson’s view of ideology as meaning in the 
service of relations of domination (though I would add resistance to domin-
ation), or Frow’s view of ideology as a ‘political functionalisation of speech’
(Thompson 1984: 4, Frow 1985: 204). For discourse, being ideological does
not therefore preclude being other things as well.
This does not mean, however, that the speciﬁc ideological import of a 
particular element is ﬁxed. Consider for example the apparently non-directive,
non-judgemental, empathising way of talking to people one-to-one about
themselves and their problems which we call ‘counselling’. Counselling has its
origins in therapy, but it now circulates as a technique across many institu-
tional domains. It is highly ambivalent ideologically. Most counsellors see
themselves as giving space to people as individuals in a world which increasingly
treats them as ciphers, which makes counselling look like a counter-hegemonic
practice. However, counselling is now used in preference to practices of an
overtly disciplinary nature in various institutions, which makes it look like a
hegemonic technique for subtly drawing aspects of people’s private lives into
the domain of power. Hegemonic struggle of an ideological order is partly
through counselling and partly over counselling.
The picture of language/ideology which emerges from this discussion is
moving towards Frow’s view of ideology as ‘a state of discourse . . . in relation
to the class struggle’ (1985: 204). That is, rather than attributing speciﬁc and
ﬁxed ideological ‘contents’ to elements, ideology is seen more dynamically 
as the shifting relationship of discoursal practices to hegemonic (and more 
local-institutional) struggle. Clearly some elements are more ideologically
ﬁxed than others – think for instance of vocabularies it would be difﬁcult not to
regard as sexist or racist. The point is, however, that many discoursal elements
at least which may manifest a degree of ideological ﬁxity may nevertheless be
turned around. Foucault makes the same point in referring to the ‘tactical poly-
valence of discourses’:
Discourses are tactical elements or blocks operating in the ﬁeld of force 
relations; there can exist different and even contradictory discourses within
the same strategy; they can, on the contrary, circulate without changing
their form from one strategy to another, opposing strategy. (Foucault 
1981: 101)
66
Language, ideology and power


This suggests a homology between discoursal ‘strategies’ and hegemonic
political strategies for constructing alliances and incorporating subordinate
groups, which underscores the value of the hegemony concept for exploring
discoursal change and language/ideology. It also suggests that perhaps the
relationship between discourse and hegemony is a matter of the latter limiting
the potential of the former: there is no speciﬁcally discoursal reason why there
should not be an unlimited articulation and rearticulation of elements. It is
hegemony – history – that curtails this discoursal potential and constrains
which articulations actually come about, their durability, and so forth. I should
add that the view I have set out of changes in the structure of orders of 
discourse as facets of an evolving hegemonic struggle will hopefully evoke
Foucault’s explorations of discourse and the technologies of power (Foucault
1972, Dreyfus and Rabinow 1982).
5 Limits of ideology
I have suggested that discoursal practices are ideologically invested in so far as
they contribute to sustaining or undermining power relations. Relations 
of power may in principle be affected by discoursal practices in any type of 
discourse, even in scientiﬁc and theoretical discourse. This precludes a 
categorical opposition between ideology on the one hand and science or 
theory on the other which some writers on language/ideology have suggested
(Zima 1981, Pêcheux 1982). This does not, however, imply that all discourse
is irredeemably ideological. Ideologies arise in class societies characterised 
by relations of domination, and in so far as human beings are capable of 
transcending such societies they are capable of transcending ideology. I do not
therefore accept the view of ‘ideology in general’ as a form of social cement
which is inseparable from society itself.
On a less Utopian level, it is also quite possible to combat ideology now.
The fact that all types of discourse are open in principle and no doubt to some
extent in fact in our society to ideological investment does not mean that all
types of discourse are ideologically invested to the same degree. It should not
be too difﬁcult to show that advertising is in broad terms more heavily invested
than the physical sciences, though the thrust of Foucault’s work (even if he
resists the concept of ideology) is to show that the social sciences have a 
heavy ideological investment. There are structural determinants of degrees 
of ideological investment, but that does not mean that ideology cannot be 
effectively combated in any circumstances. Ideology works, as Althusser
reminds us, by disguising its ideological nature. It becomes naturalised,
automatised – ‘common sense’ in Gramsci’s terms. Subjects are ideologically
Language and ideology
67


positioned as independent of ideological determination. Yet subjects are also
contradictorily positioned, and when contradictory positions overlap they
provide a basis for awareness and reﬂexivity, just as they lead to problematisa-
tion and change. A critically orientated discourse analysis can systematise
awareness and critique of ideology (which does not, of course, mean it is itself
automatically immune from it). From awareness and critique arise possibilities
of empowerment and change (Fairclough 1989a, Chapter 9). Since all such
movements take place within the matrix of hegemonic struggle, however, 
they are liable not only to be resisted but also to be incorporated. A critical 
discourse analysis must aim for constant vigilance about who is using its
results for what, and about whether its critique of certain practices is not 
helping to naturalise other equally but differently ideological practices.
Acknowledgements
I am grateful to Raman Selden for comments on a draft of this paper.
68
Language, ideology and power


3.
Semiosis, ideology and mediation. 
A dialectical view
M
y objective in this paper is to indicate how particular conceptualisa-
tions of mediation and ideology can be accommodated within a version
of CDA (see Chouliaraki and Fairclough 1999; Fairclough 2000a, 2001c,
2003; Chiapello and Fairclough 2002; Fairclough, Jessop and Sayer 2004).
The version of CDA which I shall work with here is somewhat different from
my previous publications on media (especially Fairclough 1995b). I shall
argue that this version of CDA can constitute a theoretical and methodological
resource in researching media and mediation, including the imbrication of
media in ideological processes, a resource which can most fruitfully be drawn
upon in combination with more established resources in media studies. The
term semiosis in the title is used in preference to discourse to refer to language
and other semiotic modes (e.g., visual images) in a general way, so as to avoid
the common confusion between ‘discourse’ (abstract noun) and ‘discourses’
(count noun). The latter will be introduced later.
1 Two examples
In the course of my discussion of ideology, I shall refer to two short mediated
texts in Romanian. The ﬁrst is a leaﬂet (a piece of A5 paper folded into two)
picked up at a large furniture store (called ‘Mobexpert Gallery’, from ‘mobila’
meaning ‘furniture’) in Bucharest in August 2003. The front of the leaﬂet
reads: ‘intra in Golden Club li elti privilegiat’ (‘Join the Golden Club and you
are privileged’), with the ﬁrst four words at the top of the page, the last three at
the bottom, and the image of a carefully manicured woman’s hand holding a
Golden Club membership card in the middle. The top of the centre page is
taken up with the same woman’s hand holding a gift voucher, and the lower


half by a text which reads ‘bucura-te de avantajele Golden Club’ (‘Enjoy 
the advantages of the Golden Club’), followed by a list of ‘advantages’ (gift
vouchers, special offers, price reductions etc.), and the back of the leaﬂet 
lists a number of ‘condioii’ (‘conditions’) for membership. The furniture
store’s logo appears twice, with ‘elti privilegiat’ (‘you are privileged’) incorpor-
ated into it. The second text was encountered on a visit to a bank in Bucharest
also in August 2003. A metre or so in front of the cashier’s desk there was 
a notice on a stand reading ‘Pastraoi limita de discreoie. Va muloumim.’ A 
close translation into English is ‘Observe the limit of discretion. We thank
you’. A similar notice in the UK might read something like ‘Please respect the
privacy of others. Thank you’, though my impression is that such notices 
are not usual in the UK, that the semiotic cues are more minimal and covert, 
for example, a line painted on the ground or some other sort of boundary
marker.
The practices of stores issuing ‘loyalty cards’, and maintenance of space
between a person being served in a bank, post ofﬁce etc. and others queuing,
are familiar and routine in ‘western’ countries like the UK. One can see such
practices as having been recontextualised in Romania and other formerly
socialist countries of Central and Eastern Europe in the course of a decade of
‘transition’ towards capitalism. For each of the two cases, I shall comment on
aspects of the Romanian context which are relevant to the nature and process
of recontextualisation.
Romania post-1989 is a profoundly unequal society, with huge differences
in wealth, income and resources between a small elite living mainly in Bucharest
and the vast majority of the population, and substantial poverty and social
deprivation. One might say, no doubt somewhat reductively, that there are 
two Romanias, two radically different lifestyles and associated expectations 
and values (with the proviso that the new ‘western’ values and practices have 
permeated both, if in different ways). Only members of the elite use stores
such as Mobexpert Gallery, or for that matter the banks. The qualiﬁcation for
membership of the Golden Club is spending at least k750 on furniture, while
the mean monthly wage for state employees is around k150. Most people
could not afford the furniture sold at Mobexpert. The people who are offered
the possibility of being ‘privileged’ as members of the Golden Club are already
the most privileged group in Romanian society. The Mobexpert Gallery from
this perspective is part of a network of spaces which the economic elite moves
within, including for instance the Bucharest mall, expensive restaurants,
health clubs etc., from which the rest of Romanian society is excluded by
price. The Romanian economic elite are not only objectively privileged within
Romanian society, they also seem to be preoccupied with their privileged
70
Language, ideology and power


position, with their distinction from others in Romanian society, with their
status as an elite.
The Golden Club card is a ‘loyalty card’ which gives certain ‘advantages’ to
those who hold it in terms of savings on future purchases, delivery and assembly,
and so forth. The term ‘privilege card’ is sometimes used in the UK and the
USA – such cards are represented as ‘rewarding’ customers for their ‘loyalty’.
Other terms like ‘reward card’ are also used. Some of these schemes seem to
construe the relationship between customer and company as rather like that
between courtier and monarch – the latter ‘rewards’ the former’s ‘loyalty’,
maybe grants ‘privileges’ in reward for loyalty. In many cases such contentious
if not bizarre representations of the commercial relationship between com-
pany and customer are kept covert through nominal compounds like ‘privilege
card’ which leave the verbal process and its participant relations (‘who is 
privileging who?’) opaque and vague. In the Romanian case, there isn’t a 
nominal compound but a clause with a copular verb (‘elti’, ‘are’) and an
attributive adjective derived from the past participle of a verb (‘privilegiat’,
‘privileged’). What the customer gains through membership of ‘Golden Card’
are represented not as ‘privileges’ but as ‘avantajele’, ‘advantages’, a term
which is very widely used in Romanian advertising and media for price reduc-
tions, special offers, good deals etc. What is striking about the Romanian case,
and different from similar material in the UK for instance, is not the presence
of the concept of ‘privilege’, but its presence as an attribute (‘privileged’) of
those who join the ‘club’. The tense of the verb is signiﬁcant: it is a present
tense verb, not a future tense verb – the latter would be more easily amenable
to being interpreted as an indirect way of saying that the customer will gain
certain ‘privileges’ (i.e., ‘advantages’) as a member. The clause with the present
tense verb, occurring three times in this short leaﬂet, construes membership of
the ‘club’ as conveying a ‘privileged’ status. There seems to be an appeal to the
economic elite’s preoccupation with privilege, both linguistically (construing
membership as ‘being privileged’, and as joining a ‘club’, which also implies
exclusivity and privilege) and in terms of visual semiotics (the carefully mani-
cured woman’s hand holding the card, and the colour gold). Membership of
the ‘club’ is offered not just as a way to get a good deal, but also as a status 
symbol and marker of distinction for people who are preoccupied with such
symbols and markers.
The second case calls for some historical context, especially with respect 
to queuing. Queuing in Romania before 1989, and in many contexts still 
now, has been a somewhat anarchic happening. People do not stand in line, 
no respect is shown for another’s ‘place’ in the queue, or for the privacy of an 
individual’s business with an ofﬁcial or consultant, yet at the same time queuing
Semiosis, ideology and mediation. A dialectical view
71


is a communal affair in which information about ofﬁcial requirements and 
procedures which organisations often do not provide is freely shared and
exchanged, and in which people also share their life stories, their problems
and their anxieties. But queuing is now radically different in certain contexts.
For instance, people queuing at cash machines in the street preserve as a 
matter of course a space between the person using the machine and the rest of
the queue (to the point where it is often unclear whether people are waiting 
to use the machine or just casually standing around). One might take the
notice in the Romanian bank to be socialising the public into ‘western’ queuing
behaviour. Yet given that people observe such queuing practices without 
such prompts in cases like cash machines, it seems likely that customers at the
cashier’s desk in the bank (who would also be among the much larger group of
people who use cash machines) would be aware of what is expected. Perhaps
therefore the notice is as much to do with distinction as with socialisation: if it
is informationally and pedagogically redundant, perhaps it works to reafﬁrm
the common commitment of the bank and its customers to practices and 
values of ‘discretion’, and thus serves both as publicity for the bank and as a
marker of distinction for the customers, an afﬁrmation of part of what makes
them different from the rest of Romanian society.
What was striking to me as a cultural outsider was that the focus is on
‘observing the limit of discretion’ in the queue rather than the privacy of the
person at the counter. If one compares ‘respect the privacy of others’ with
‘observe the limit of discretion’, the former gives salience to what is to be
respected (individual ‘privacy’), the latter to how to show respect (be ‘discrete’)
– the former perhaps takes for granted what the latter draws attention to.
Although the customers at the bank may not need to be socialised into 
‘western’ queuing practices, one can see a socialising force in the notice – the
implication is that people have to be taught how to respect the privacy of 
others. ‘Limita’ in Romanian can be interpreted as both (physical) ‘boundary’
and in terms of social and ethical (self)-restraint or acceptability, and both
senses can be seen as actualised in this case.
2 Mediation and ideology
I shall work from the view of mediation proposed by Silverstone (1999: 13),
mediation as ‘the movement of meaning’:
Mediation involves the movement of meaning from one text to another,
from one discourse to another, from one event to another. It involves the
constant transformation of meanings, both large scale and small, signiﬁcant
72
Language, ideology and power


and insigniﬁcant, as media texts and texts about media circulate in writing,
in speech and audiovisual forms, and as we, individually and collectively,
directly and indirectly, contribute to their production . . . Mediated 
meanings circulate in primary and secondary texts, through endless 
intertextualities, in parody and pastiche, in constant replay, and in the 
interminable discourses, both off-screen and on-screen, in which we as
producers and consumers act and interact, urgently seeking to make sense
of the world . . .
There are a number of issues here. First, as meanings move from text to 
text, they are open to transformation. Meanings do not simply ‘circulate’
unchanged between texts; movement of meanings involves both continuity
and change and, I would add, how much continuity and how much change is
contingent upon the nature of the events and texts that mediated meanings
move into. Second, the possibility of transformation suggests that mediated
meanings enter processes of meaning-making as part of the resources for
meaning-making. I prefer to see movement in these terms – ‘movement of
meaning’ is misleading given that meanings may be transformed in moving;
‘movement of resources for meaning-making’ is better. Third, these resources
for meaning-making are both speciﬁc and general, concrete and abstract –
they include for instance both concrete representations of speciﬁc events 
of the US/UK invasion of Iraq in particular news reports, and regular and
durable ways of representing such events (‘discourses’ in the sense in which I
shall introduce that term below). Fourth, a relationship is implied between
media texts and other sorts of texts (though the movement of resources for
meaning-making may be between media texts too). What differentiates media
texts from other sorts of texts? I see media texts as a class of texts which are
specialised for moving resources for meaning-making between texts, and
more abstractly between different social practices, ﬁelds, domains and scales
of social life.
Ideologies, in a ﬁrst formulation (elaborated below), are representations
which contribute to the constitution, reproduction, and transformation of
social relations of power and domination (‘ways in which meaning serves to
sustain relations of domination’, Thompson 1984). There are many different
views of ideology (Thompson 1984; Larrain 1989; Eagleton 1991; van Dijk
1998), but a major divide is between critical versus descriptive concepts of
ideology, and what essentially characterises critical concepts is that ideologies
are seen as one modality of power, a modality which constitutes and sustains
relations of power through producing consent or at least acquiescence, power
through hegemony rather than power through violence and force. My view is
Semiosis, ideology and mediation. A dialectical view
73


that critical social science including CDA requires a critical concept of ideology,
and that descriptive concepts of ideology empty the category of its distinctive
import and value in social research and analysis.
I shall now brieﬂy present the version of CDA referred to above, and then
discuss how the view of mediation and ideology I have just sketched out can be
accommodated within it.
3 Critical discourse analysis
CDA is based upon a realist social ontology (Sayer 2000), which sees both
concrete social events and abstract social structures as part of social reality.
Social structures can be conceived of as potentialities which are selectively
actualised in social events – what is possible, in contrast with what is actual.
The relationship between social structures and social events is mediated 
by social practices, which control the selective actualisation of potentials.
Diagramatically, these are:
• Social structures
• Social practices
• Social events.
There is a semiotic dimension to each level of abstraction:
• Social structures: semiotic systems (languages)
• Social practices: orders of discourse
• Social events: texts (including talk, ‘utterances’).
The concepts of semiotic system (language) and text are familiar in language
studies; the concept of order of discourse is relatively novel. Orders of discourse
constitute the social structuring of semiotic variation or difference. At the 
concrete level of texts one ﬁnds, of course, considerable semiotic variation,
which is not random but socially structured in accordance with relatively
durable and stable semiotic dimensions of social practices, i.e., orders of 
discourse. An order of discourse is a speciﬁc conﬁguration of discourses, 
genres, and styles (for these categories, see below), which deﬁne a distinctive
meaning potential, or, to put it somewhat differently, which constitute distinc-
tive resources for meaning-making in texts. The relationship between what is
semiotically possible (as deﬁned by semiotic systems) and the actual semiotic
features of texts is mediated by orders of discourse as ﬁltering mechanisms
which select certain possibilities but not others.
74
Language, ideology and power


Social events, and texts as the semiotic elements of social events, are shaped
by two sorts of causal powers, understanding causality in the critical realist
(non-Humean) sense as not entailing regularity – i.e., x can be said to cause y
without that entailing a regular correlation between x and y, because effects
have multiple causes which affect one another’s operation (Sayer 2000;
Fairclough, Jessop and Sayer 2004). Social events (and texts) are shaped on
the one hand by social practices and social structures, and on the other hand
by social agents. One may say that events (and texts) are locally and inter-
actionally produced by situated agents, but in ways which depend on the 
continuity of structures and practices (as well as the continuity – the habitus 
– of persons). At the same time, texts have causal effects on non-semiotic as
well as semiotic elements of social life – which is how they can do ideological
work. In terms of the classical sociological distinction, both the perspective 
of ‘verstehen’ and the perspective of ‘erklären’ are relevant to the study of 
texts: texts are caught up in processes of meaning-making, but they are also
(thereby) a part of the causal (including ideological) effects of events.
Texts ﬁgure in three main ways as part of events: in acting, representing 
and identifying. They are part of the action (talking or writing constitute ways
of acting, often in conjunction with non-semiotic action); they simultaneously
represent aspects of the world, and they simultaneously identify social actors,
contribute to the constitution of social and personal identities. One might
compare this with Halliday’s concept of ‘metafunctions’, though the particular
functions (or rather aspects of meaning) I have distinguished are different
(Halliday 1994). When people act, represent, identify in (texts as parts of)
events, they orient to more or less established and stabilised ways of acting,
representing and identifying, which are parts of social practices, constituted 
at the level of social practices, and therefore of orders of discourse, but also
habituses (Bourdieu and Wacquant 1992). Semiotically, the distinctions are:
• Genres: ways of acting
• Discourses: ways of representing
• Styles: ways of being.
Analysis of texts includes (a) interdiscursive analysis of which genres, 
discourses and styles are drawn upon and oriented to in a particular text, 
and how they are articulated together in the text; (b) linguistic (semiotic, 
pragmatic, conversational) analysis of actional, representational and identify-
ing meanings, and of their realisation in the linguistic forms of the text, and 
of how these meanings and forms realise the interdiscursive ‘mix’ of genres, 
discourses and styles.
Semiosis, ideology and mediation. A dialectical view
75


Events do not come singly, but in interconnected chains or, more loosely,
networks which are in part chains or networks of texts. Texts also connect
events, including events that are removed from each other in time and space.
Media texts clearly have a particular importance in this regard. Participants in
chains or networks of events orient to ways of chaining or networking which
are parts of networks of social practices, including, semiotically, what I 
have called ‘genre chains’ (Fairclough 2003), genres which are regularly and
predictably chained together such that meanings are moved and transformed
along the chain, and recontextualised and transformed in regular ways in
accordance with recontextualising principles. An example of (part of) a genre
chain would be the chain that routinely links signiﬁcant government statements
of publications, press conferences and/or press statements, and news reports.
Genre chains are among the semiotic conditions of possibility of ‘globalisa-
tion’ as ‘action at a distance’, and intensiﬁcations and shifts in globalisation are
conditional upon changes in this semiotic resource.
CDA has taken the category of ‘recontextualisation’ from Bernstein’s 
sociology of pedagogy (Bernstein 1990, 1996), and sought to operationalise 
it in discourse analysis, in fact, precisely recontextualise it, for instance 
by specifying processes of recontextualisation in terms of genre and genre 
chains. Relations of recontextualisation involve principles of selectivity and
ﬁltering devices which selectively control which meanings (which can now 
be speciﬁed and differentiated as which discourses, genres and styles) are
moved from one ﬁeld to another. But there are also internal relations within 
the recontextualising ﬁeld which control how recontextualised meanings are
articulated with, recontextualised in relation to, existing meanings – i.e., in 
the terms above what forms of interdiscursivity occur between recontextual-
ised and existing discourses, genres and styles. Taking these points together,
recontextualisation of meanings is also transformation of meanings, through
decontextualisation (taking meanings out of their contexts) and recontextual-
ising (putting meanings in new contexts). Moreover, recontextualisation
should be seen as an appropriation/colonisation dialectic (Habermas 1984;
Chouliaraki and Fairclough 1999): a matter of an opening to a potentially 
colonising external presence which is however potentially appropriated and
‘domesticated’.
More generally, social change (e.g., the transformations of capitalism,
including its globalisation, currently underway) includes change in social
practices and, crucially, the networking of social practices (social ﬁelds, social
domains). Following Jessop (2000), we can specify these transformations on
two dimensions: ‘Restructuring’ (a transformation of relations between social
ﬁelds and domains, such as the economic ﬁeld and ﬁelds such as education or
76
Language, ideology and power


the arts) and ‘re-scaling’ (the transformation of relations between the local,
national, (macro-)regional, and global scales of social life). ‘Globalisation’
understood as ‘a process (or set of processes) which embodies a transforma-
tion in the spatial organisation of social relations and transactions generating
transcontinental and interregional ﬂows and networks of activity, interaction,
and the exercise of power’ (Held et al. 1999), is a form of re-scaling. Changes 
in genres, discourses and styles, in orders of discourse, in genre chains, are 
a irreducible part of restructuring and re-scaling, and constitute semiotic 
conditions of possibility for these transformations overall. The relationship
between semiotic and non-semiotic elements of social events, and at a more
abstract level of social practices, is a dialectical relationship. The elements
(including semiosis, social relations and organisations and institutions, 
material objects and means and technologies, people with their beliefs and
feelings and values) are different, and the difference between them cannot 
be reductively collapsed, but they are not discrete: they are dialectically 
interconnected, semiotic elements ‘internalise’ non-semiotic elements, and
vice-versa (Harvey 1996).
Social transformations in contemporary social life are extensively 
‘discourse-led’, in the sense that it is discourses which change ﬁrst. As new
discourses enter and achieve salience or dominance in particular social ﬁelds
or domains and at different social scales, or more concretely in particular
organisations, or are recontextualised within them, dialectical processes may
ensue in which discourses are enacted in ways of acting (e.g., new ways of
managing, new procedures, routines etc.), inculcated in ways of being, in
social identities (e.g., new management identities, such as new types of
‘leader’), and materialised for instance in new spatial, including architectural,
forms. Enactment and inculcation may be non-semiotic, i.e., involve a dialectical
movement between the semiotic and the non-semiotic, or ‘intra-semiotic’: 
discourses may be enacted semiotically as genres (as well as manufacturing
processes), and inculcated as styles (as well as new forms of bodylines – which
are, of course, semioticised, but not reducible to semiosis).
These dialectical processes do not, however, proceed in abstraction 
from social relations of power. In taking recontextualisation to be a dialectic of
colonisation and appropriation, I am suggesting not only the potential for
struggle within the recontextualised context to inﬂect or deﬂect the colonising
effect through forms of appropriation, but also the potential for struggle over
forms of appropriation between social groups pursuing different strategies
within the recontextualised context, which might include for instance struggles
over identity which are germane to whether and how a discourse is inculcated
in new ways of being.
Semiosis, ideology and mediation. A dialectical view
77


4 Mediation and ideology
Let us come back to the questions of mediation and ideology, which I 
discussed in a preliminary way above, in the light of this brief theoretical
sketch of a version of CDA. In terms of this version of CDA, Silverstone’s 
discussion of mediation can be seen as suggesting a focus on recontextualisa-
tion. The processes and relations of mediation are processes and relations 
of recontextualisation, which speciﬁcally involve relations between the ﬁeld of
media and other social ﬁelds, though this ‘structural’ relation between ﬁelds
can simultaneously be a ‘scalar’ relation, for instance when we consider media-
tion within processes of globalisation (see the discussion of the Romanian
cases below). Chouliaraki (1999) has proposed that we can see media discourse
(‘discourse’ used in a third sense, meaning the type of language used
speciﬁcally in media) as ‘a recontextualising principle for appropriating 
other discourses and bringing them into a special relation with each other for 
the purposes of their dissemination and mass consumption’. We can also see
media texts in turn being recontextualised according to speciﬁc recontextual-
ising principles, e.g., in government, in everyday conversation, and so forth.
These relations are seen as obtaining between, in Bourdieu’s terms (Bourdieu
and Wacquant 1992), social ﬁelds, or relatively stable and durable networks 
of social practices (see below), rather than just ‘discourses’. Chouliaraki
(1999: 41) suggests that each genre has its own recontextualising principle,
which appropriates and reconstitutes discourses (Chouliaraki 1999: 41). I
shall assume rather that recontextualising principles attach to social ﬁelds
(conceived as networks of social practices) such as media, whose semiotic/
discoursal moment is orders of discourse, though the diversity of media – print
media, broadcast media, electronic media – entails a set of connected recon-
textualising principles rather than a unitary one. Recontextualising principles
are actualised in genres, conceived as regulative devices (Chouliaraki 1999),
‘systematically distributed forms of control’ (Threadgold 1989).
As I indicated above, recontextualisation and therefore also mediation may
involve ﬂows of discourses, genres and styles between ﬁelds. In the case of the
mediation/recontextualisation of representational meanings – discourses –
my discussion above of dialectical relations implies that discourses are open to
dialectical processes of enactment, inculcation and materialisation, including
‘intra-semiotic’ enactment and inculcation as genres and styles. Processes of
recontextualisation, including processes of mediation, may be ideological
processes. Bernstein puts this in terms of the movement of discourses in
recontextualisation: ‘Every time a discourse moves, there is a space for ideology
to play’ (Bernstein 1996: 26). Bernstein is I think right to focus on the primary
importance of the movement of discourses across contexts, ﬁelds, social 
78
Language, ideology and power


practices, scales in the work of ideological representation. A discourse de-
contextualised from its dialectical relationship with other elements of a ﬁeld or
network of social practices becomes an imaginary, very often working in a
metaphorical way in the re-imagining of aspects of the ﬁeld or practices it is
recontextualised within (e.g., re-imagining student–academic relations in
higher education as consumer–producer relations), and, of course, open to
enactment, inculcation and materialisation. Media institutions and processes
of mediation are clearly crucial in these ideological processes.
Ideology is, ﬁrst, a relation between meaning (and therefore texts) and
social relations of power and domination. It is one modality of power (another
is physical force). And ideology is, ﬁrst, a matter of representation. We may
call discourses ‘ideological’ where social analysis plausibly shows a relation
between their meanings (ways of representing) and social relations of power.
In so far as discourses are ideological, their dialectical semiotic and non-semiotic
internalisation in ways of acting and ways of being (enactment, inculcation), as
well as their materialisation in the physical word, is also an internalisation 
of ideology. So if ideology is, ﬁrst, representations (discourses), it is, second,
(a) action and its social relations (and genres); (b) persons/subjects (and
styles), as well as (c) the material world. Moreover, if ideology is, ﬁrst, a rela-
tion between texts (in meaning-making) and power, it is, second, a relation
between orders of discourse and power, and even languages and power,
because meanings achieve relative stability and durability in social practices
and social structures. The ‘recontextualisation’ of discourses (e.g., in pro-
cesses of mediation) may constitute meaning as a modality of power relations
across networks of social practices (structural relations between ﬁelds, scalar
relations between local, national, regional, ‘global’), i.e., it may be ideological.
The speciﬁc contribution of discourse analysis to ideological analysis is (a)
identifying discourses, and their linguistic realisations, (b) tracing the texturing
of relations between discourses, (c) tracing the ‘internal’ (to semiosis) dialectic
between discourses, genres and styles, (d) tracing the recontextualisation of
discourses (genres, styles) across structural and scalar boundaries. That in
itself does not tell us whether we are dealing with ideology. To do so requires
other forms of social analysis which explore (a) the causal effects of semiosis
(changing organisations, persons etc.), and (b) the relationship of all this to
relations of power, domination, struggle, resistance – the ‘external’ dialectics
of discourse.
5 The Romanian cases
The two Romanian cases introduced earlier are cases of mediation, through
the medium of print, and the media genres of the advertising leaﬂet and public
Semiosis, ideology and mediation. A dialectical view
79


notice. Resources for meaning-making can be seen as moved from the domain
of commercial organisations into the domain of consumption and thereby
potentially into the world of mundane experience and living, the life world.
But what is also clearly at issue if we consider such cases cumulatively over 
the period since 1989 is a movement across scales, a ‘re-scaling’, recontextu-
alising resources for meaning-making which are already established and to 
a degree harmonised on an international scale onto another national scale,
incorporating a part of Romanian social life into the international scale, 
contributing to the contemporary scalar complexity of Romanian society
(where international, national and local elements coexist in complex and 
contradictory articulation with each other). These processes can be subsumed
under ‘globalisation’.
But recontextualisation has been understood above as dialectic of colonisa-
tion and appropriation. Cases of this sort can easily be seen and often are seen
as simply cases of colonisation, of meanings, practices, discourses etc. being
imposed from the centres of capitalism onto the transitional peripheries. But
in my initial notes on the two cases I began to indicate how these resources for
meaning-making come to be appropriated within the speciﬁc social and power
relationships and social dynamics of Romanian society, and in particular how
they are appropriated as resources within the strategies of distinction of the
economic elite. This is not to suggest that only the economic elite are affected
by such ‘western’ practices – they have at least an aspirational resonance for
perhaps most of the population, and are no doubt appropriated into different
strategies, including strategies of distinction (for an intense preoccupation
with distinction seems to be a general trait of Romanian society) elsewhere.
There may also be resistance to them, though if there is resistance in Romania
it would seem to be a relatively covert resistance, for it does not appear to reach
the public space. Be that it as it may, any account of recontextualisation in 
such cases has to refer, in the terms introduced above, to the ‘causal powers’ 
of social agents, their appropriating actions and strategies (speciﬁcation of
which with respect to particular ﬁelds contributes also to specifying the 
recontextualising principles according to which recontextualisation takes
place), as well as to the changes in structure implied in the concept of re-scaling,
and also at the level of social practices to emergent change in orders of discourse
in Romania.
The moment of appropriation in processes of recontextualisation can be
explored analytically through interdiscursive analysis of how recontextualised
meanings are articulated in texts with existing meanings. When I came across
the two Romanian cases, I found them both familiar and transparent in the
light of practices in the UK and elsewhere, and yet in some respects opaque
80
Language, ideology and power


and puzzling, speciﬁcally the representation of membership of the Golden
Club as making people ‘privileged’, and the observation of ‘the limit of discre-
tion’. This experience of opacity on the part of a cultural outsider is a pointer
to interdiscursive hybridity: familiar recontextualised elements are articulated
together with unfamiliar elements in these cases.
A prominent theme in public debate on change and ‘transition’ in Romania
has been ‘changing mentalities’. It is often argued by intellectuals and politicians
that changes in Romanian ‘mentality’ are necessary for substantive social
change, and for successful integration of Romania into ‘western’ capitalism.
This focus on ‘mentality’ appears to have been introduced into the public
sphere and social life by intellectuals inﬂuenced by the French tradition of
research on ‘mentality’ (the cultural anthropologist Levy-Bruhl and the historian
Braudel are important ﬁgures in that tradition). Similar debates in the UK 
for instance represent ‘subjective’ aspects of change more as changes in ‘cul-
ture’ or ‘attitudes’ (for instance in the Thatcher government’s promotion of 
an ‘enterprise culture’ in the 1980s, Fairclough 1990). Problematic aspects 
of Romanian ‘mentalities’ are often attributed to the legacy of communism.
Change in ‘mentalities’ is called for in various areas of social life: work, business,
education and teaching, gender relations and parent–child relations in the
family, the human rights of homosexuals and minorities, especially gypsies.
This way of representing ‘subjective’ aspects of change has become an element
of dominant discourses of change and transition in intellectual and political
debate, but has also extended into various social ﬁelds and into the ‘lifeworld’
of ordinary living and experience. An indication of the latter discussions of
change in Romania on computer games forums on the internet rather frequently
refer to need to change, or the difﬁculty of changing, ‘mentalities’. Both of 
the cases can be seen in terms of these debates on ‘changing mentalities’, 
as covertly projecting ‘western’ mentalities. And one aspect of recontextual-
isation which shows itself as interdiscursive hybridity is the articulation 
of recontextualised ‘western’ discourses and practices with this distinctively
Romanian way of representing ‘subjective’ aspects of change in discourses of
change and ‘transition’.
I earlier referred to what is recontextualised as ‘practices’, practices of the
‘loyalty card’ and of discretionary spatial distance in certain sorts of queuing.
The theoretical framework sketched out above points us to the question: what
are these practices, these rituals, these ways of acting and interacting, an enact-
ment of? Is there a discourse, or discourses, here which, while not being
enunciated as such in these cases, nevertheless lies behind them, informs
them, becomes enacted in them? When my Romanian friend and I encountered
the two cases, we saw them as presences of ‘western individualism’. We might
Semiosis, ideology and mediation. A dialectical view
81


say that ‘behind’ the practices, enacted as the practices, there are discourses of
the individual, of society as made up of acquisitive and competitive individuals
in pursuit of their own material and symbolic advantage, of individuals as
endowed with certain rights to privacy and autonomy. In the ﬁrst case, the 
discourse of ‘competitive individualism’ is enacted in the practice of the 
‘loyalty card’, and inculcated in the identities of members of the economic elite
seeking competitive advantage with respect to both material and symbolic
goods through membership of the ‘club’. One might add that it is materialised
in the personalised, technologically sophisticated card itself (as one card holder
ironically told me, ‘It makes me feel important’). In the second case, the 
discourse of individual autonomy is enacted in the practice of preserving the
‘limit of discretion’, inculcated in individuals who have taken in the values and
behaviours of privacy and ‘discretion’, and materialised in the organisation 
of space in the bank, including the placing of a stand with the notice on it at a
distance from the counter. Thus the dialectical processes I have referred to
above are in evidence in both cases.
With respect to ideology and ideological processes, the centrality of 
individualist ideologies to the nature and workings of contemporary capitalism
is widely acknowledged. Ideas and values and practices of (autonomous, 
self-regulating, competitive etc.) individualism (and as pointed out above not
only the discourses but also the ways of acting including genres, ways of being
including styles, and material forms it is dialectically internalised in) can be
adjudged ideological in the sense that these ways of being and of seeing the self
and others are conditions of possibility for the operation of capitalist system
(in terms of motivations to acquire and consume, innovative working practices
based upon the self-regulation of employees, and so forth) and for sustaining
the social and power relations of capitalism, and in the sense that they con-
stitute misrecognition of the antagonisms and contradictions of the system
(misrecognition of relations between social groups and forces as relations
between individuals). In this respect, the recontextualisation of these interna-
tional beliefs, values and practices in Romania constitutes a not insigniﬁcant
part of the incorporation of Romania into the structures and power relations of
international capitalism, and is in that sense an ideological process of re-scaling.
This is against the background not only of the ofﬁcial commitment to collectivism
and egalitarianism before 1989, but the practical collapse of that commitment
into a form of individualism which is at odds with the individualist virtues 
promoted by contemporary capitalist society – a ‘dependent’ individualism
where people were totally dependent on the state yet selﬁshly pursuing their
own individual interests with no sense of communal responsibility (Barbu
1999; Poznanski 2000).
82
Language, ideology and power


But there is a more complex orchestration of scale: a binding together 
of power relations on international and national levels (as well as the local
level, in particular localities, organisations, institutions, though I have not dis-
cussed this) in which the same representations, values, practices and identities
may simultaneously work ideologically in spreading the new capitalism (and
its ‘neo-liberal’ politics) as ‘the only show in town’, and yet do ideological
work of a different character with respect to social dynamics and power 
relations at national and local scales. In the Romanian case, practices and 
values which work ideologically to inculcate subjects into the ‘global’ capitalist
economy and thus contribute to an emergent and expansive global hegemony
also work in the pursuit of strategies of distinction, which can be adjudged 
ideological in the sense that they misrecognise raw relations of economic and
ﬁnancial power in the ‘wild capitalism’ of contemporary Romania as relations
of distinction (e.g., ‘we know how to behave in queues, they don’t’), allow 
the rationalisation of gross differences of wealth and power which have 
often emerged through aggressive and even corrupt business practices and
exploitation in terms of what are widely regarded as inherent (or even genetic)
differences between people in intelligence and civilisation, and so misrecognise
the antagonisms and contradictions of the anarchic emergence of capitalism 
in Romania. At the same time, the ideological import of recontextualised 
elements is inﬂected by the distinctively Romanian focus on ‘changing men-
talities’ with respect to ‘subjective’ aspects of change. In so far as the failure of
Romania’s turn to capitalism to produce substantial improvements in the 
condition of the majority of Romanians is attributed to problems of ‘mentality’,
their failure to ‘change mentalities’, this way of representing the ‘subjective’
aspect of change can be seen as a potent ideological element.
Semiosis, ideology and mediation. A dialectical view
83


This page intentionally left blank


S e c t i o n  B
Discourse and 
sociocultural change


This page intentionally left blank


Introduction
T
he papers in this section were written between 1989 and 1992, and are
representative of the change of emphasis in that period from developing
CDA as a form of ideology critique to using CDA for bringing a focus on 
discourse to research on social change. This new emphasis culminated in 
the publication of my book Discourse and Social Change in 1992. The shift in
direction should not be overstated: there was a concern with social change 
in Language and Power (1989), and ideology remained a major concern in
Discourse and Social Change. Nevertheless the change in emphasis was
signiﬁcant in presaging the increasing interest in developing forms of trans-
disciplinaryresearch on social change which could effectively address relations
between discursive and non-discursive elements or dimensions of social
changes (see Section C).
The ﬁrst paper in this section (‘Critical discourse analysis and the mark-
etisation of public discourse: the universities’) was published in 1993. It has 
a certain historical value in analysing a relatively early stage of a profound
transformation (which is still going on) in not only universities but also virtu-
ally all public services and institutions in Britain and many other countries.
They have been restructured on the model of commodity markets. This is
arguably not just a simulation of markets based perhaps on their renewed pres-
tige since the 1970s, but part of a change in how ‘the economy’ was conceived,
imagined and eventually institutionalised which has shifted these public 
institutions either into or at least closer to ‘the economy’. Universities for
instance are now increasingly seen as and operating as a sector of the economy.
Retrospectively, this paper seems to me to be a good early example of what
CDA can contribute to social research on change.


The paper opens with a sketch of a social theory of discourse and a framework
for its critical analysis, which is centred around a combination of a Gramscian
theory of power as hegemony and a Bakhtinian theory of intertextuality: the
creative potentialities implicit in the latter are limited by the state of hegemonic
relations and hegemonic struggle. I suggest that the place and role of discourse
in society and culture is a historical variable, and discuss the role of discourse
within modern and especially contemporary (‘late modern’ according to
Giddens (1991)) society. Speciﬁcally, I consider the role of discourse in a
range of major contemporary cultural changes which have been thematised in
recent sociological analysis: shifts towards ‘post-traditional’ forms of social
life, more reﬂexive forms of social life, and a ‘promotional culture’. The bulk of
the paper is taken up with an analysis of discourse samples which illustrate 
the marketisation of higher education in contemporary Britain, as an instance
of contemporaneity in discursive practices tied in with these three cultural 
tendencies. My examples are (extracts from) advertisements for academic
posts, materials for a conference, a curriculum vitae, and undergraduate
prospectuses. The focus is upon shifts in the identities of groups within
higher education, especially academics, and upon authority relations between
groups, for example, between institutional managements and academic staff
or students. The paper concludes with a discussion of CDA as a resource for
people who are trying to cope with the alienating and disabling effects of
changes imposed upon them.
‘Discourse, change and hegemony’ links the ‘macro’ domain of state, 
government and policy with the ‘micro’ domain of discursive practice, by way
of the concept of ‘technologisation of discourse’. The technologisation of 
discourse is a speciﬁcally contemporary form of top-down intervention to
change discursive practices and restructure hegemonies within orders of 
discourse (in places of work, for instance), as one element within wider struggles
to reconstruct hegemonies in institutional practices and culture. It is a tech-
nology of government in a Foucaultian sense, and linked to what Gramsci calls
the ‘ethical state’ – the state as involved in engineering its subjects to ﬁt in 
with the demands of the economy (Forgacs 1988). It involves redesign of dis-
cursive practices on the basis of research into their institutional effectivity, 
and retraining of personnel. I discuss the emergence of various aspects of dis-
course technologisation, expert discourse technologists, a shift in the policing
of discursive practices associated with technologisation of discourse, the 
role within it of context-free ‘skills’, and strategically motivated simulation of 
conversation.
The paper sketches out a version of the ‘three-dimensional’ CDA framework
which I have used extensively elsewhere – CDA looks to establish connections
88
Discourse and sociocultural change


between properties of texts, features of discourse practice (text production,
consumption and distribution), and wider sociocultural practice. An extract
from a medical interview is analysed in these terms, and I argue that the link
between sociocultural practice and the other two dimensions involves the 
integration of ‘macro’ and ‘micro’ analysis of discursive events, where the former
includes analysis of discourse technologisation processes. On the one hand,
no instance of discursive practice can be interpreted without reference to its
context; in this example, for instance, one cannot determine whether the 
‘conversationalisation’ of medical discourse is democratising or manipulative
without reference to the ‘macro’ context and to discourse technologisation
processes. But on the other hand, ‘macro’ phenomena such as technologisa-
tion of discourse cannot be properly analysed without the evidence of their
actual effects on practice, which comes from analysis of discursive events. 
I demonstrate this with an extract from a university prospectus, which illus-
trates the dilemmas that people are placed in by discourse technologisation,
and strategies for resolving them through accommodation, compromise or
resistance.
Paper 6, ‘Ideology and identity change in political television’ is an application
of the framework of Paper 4 to analysis of media discourse – speciﬁcally, one
section of a late-night political discussion and analysis programme which was
broadcast during the 1992 General Election in Britain. The paper argues that
the discourse practice of the programme effects a restructuring between the
orders of discourse of politics, private life (the ‘lifeworld’), and entertainment,
through a mixing of some of their constituent genres and discourses. One
notable presence is the emergent television genre of ‘chat’, which is an institu-
tionalised simulation of ordinary conversation as a form of entertainment and
humour. I suggest that humour is a design feature of the mixed genre of the
programme; participants are shown to be orientating to a ground rule that
requires any serious political talk to be lightened with humour. This complex
discourse practice is seen as part of an unstable and shifting social practice, 
the scenario Habermas refers to as a ‘structural transformation of the public
sphere’ of politics (Habermas 1989), in which the domain of politics is being
restructured through a redrawing of its boundaries with leisure and the media
and with the lifeworld. The complex discourse practice is realised in hetero-
geneities of meaning and form in the text. I focus in particular on the effect
upon the textual construction of identities for the presenter of the programme
and the politicians he is interviewing, suggesting that the restructuring of
boundaries between forms of life and orders of discourse is condensed into
their complex personalities. The complexity of the discourse practice gives rise
to a high level of ambivalence, in that the mixture of genres entails uncertainty
Introduction
89


over which interpretative principles apply. The complex format also appears
to place heavy demands upon participants and cause difﬁculties for them
which are manifest in disﬂuencies and in failures to observe the ground rule
identiﬁed above, which are treated as sanctionable behaviour by other partici-
pants.The paper concludes with a discussion of the ideological effects of these
changes in political discourse.
90
Discourse and sociocultural change


4.
Critical discourse analysis and the
marketisation of public discourse: 
the universities
T
he objective of this paper is, ﬁrst, to set out my own view of critical 
discourse analysis, and, second, to illustrate the practice of critical 
discourse analysis through a discussion of marketisation of public discourse
in contemporary Britain. The ﬁrst section of the paper, ‘Towards a social 
theory of discourse’, is a condensed theoretical account of critical discourse
analysis. The second section, ‘Analytical framework’, sets out a three-
dimensional framework for analysing discursive events. Readers will ﬁnd the
view of the ﬁeld sketched out in these sections more fully elaborated in
Fairclough (1989a, 1992a). The third section makes a transition between the
rather abstract account of the ﬁrst two sections and the illustrative example: 
it is a reﬂection on language and discursive practices in contemporary (‘late
capitalist’) society, which it is claimed make a critical, social and historical 
orientation to language and discourse socially and morally imperative. The
fourth section is a text-based examination of the marketisation of discur-
sive practices as a process which is pervasively transforming public discourse
in contemporary Britain, with particular reference to higher education. The
paper concludes with a discussion of the value of critical discourse analysis, 
as a method to be used alongside others in social scientiﬁc research on social
and cultural change, and as a resource in struggles against exploitation and
domination.
1 Towards a social theory of discourse
Recent social theory has produced important insights into the social nature 
of language and its functioning in contemporary societies which have not so 
far been extensively taken on board in language studies (and certainly not in 


mainstream linguistics). Social theorists themselves have generally articulated
such insights abstractly, without analysis of speciﬁc language texts.1 What is
needed is a synthesis between these insights and text-analytical traditions
within language studies. The approach developed in this section of the paper
is aiming in that direction.
‘Discourse’ is a category used by both social theorists and analysts (e.g.
Foucault 1972, Fraser 1989) and linguists (e.g., Stubbs 1983, van Dijk 1987).
Like many linguists, I shall use discourse to refer primarily to spoken or writ-
ten language use, though I would also wish to extend it to include semiotic
practice in other semiotic modalities such as photography and non-verbal
(e.g., gestural) communication. But in referring to language use as discourse,
I am signalling a wish to investigate it in a social-theoretically informed way, 
as a form of social practice.
Viewing language use as social practice implies, ﬁrst, that it is a mode of
action (Austin 1962, Levinson 1983) and, secondly, that it is always a socially
and historically situated mode of action, in a dialectical relationship with other
facets of ‘the social’ (its ‘social context’) – it is socially shaped, but it is also
socially shaping, or constitutive. It is vital that critical discourse analysis explore
the tension between these two sides of language use, the socially shaped and
socially constitutive, rather than opting one-sidedly for a structuralist (as, for
example, Pêcheux (1982) did) or ‘actionalist’ (as, for example, pragmatics
tends to do) position. Language use is always simultaneously constitutive of 
(i) social identities, (ii) social relations and (iii) systems of knowledge and
belief – though with different degrees of salience in different cases. We there-
fore need a theory of language, such as Halliday’s (1978, 1994b), which
stresses its multifunctionality, which sees any text (in the sense of note 1) as
simultaneously enacting what Halliday calls the ‘ideational’, ‘interpersonal’
and ‘textual’ functions of language. Language use is, moreover, constitutive 
in both conventional, socially reproductive ways, and creative, socially trans-
formative ways, with the emphasis upon the one or the other in particular
cases depending upon their social circumstances (e.g., whether they are gen-
erated within, broadly, stable and rigid, or ﬂexible and open, power relations).
If language use is socially shaped, it is not shaped in monolithic or mechan-
ical ways. On the one hand, societies and particular institutions and domains
within them sustain a variety of coexisting, contrasting and often competing
discursive practices (‘discourses’, in the terminology of many social analysts).
On the other hand, there is a complex relationship between particular discur-
sive events (particular ‘instances’ of language use) and underlying conventions
or norms of language use. Language may on occasion be used ‘appropriately’,
with a straightforward application of and adherence to conventions, but it is
92
Discourse and sociocultural change


not always or even generally so used as theories of appropriateness would 
suggest (see Fairclough (1992d) for a critique of such theories).
It is important to conceptualise conventions which underlie discursive
events in terms of orders of discourse (Fairclough 1989a, 1992a), what French
discourse analysts call ‘interdiscourse’ (Pêcheux 1982, Maingueneau 1987).
One reason for this is precisely the complexity of the relationship between 
discursive event and convention, where discursive events commonly combine
two or more conventional types of discourse (for instance, ‘chat’ on television
is part conversation and part performance: Tolson 1991), and where texts are
routinely heterogeneous in their forms and meanings. The order of discourse
of some social domain is the totality of its discursive practices, and the rela-
tionships (of complementarity, inclusion/exclusion, opposition) between
them – for instance in schools, the discursive practices of the classroom, of
assessed written work, of the playground, and of the staff-room. And the order
of discourse of a society is the set of these more ‘local’ orders of discourse, 
and relationships between them (e.g., the relationship between the order of
discourse of the school and those of the home or neighbourhood). The
boundaries and insulations between and within orders of discourse may be
points of conﬂict and contestation (Bernstein 1990), open to being weakened
or strengthened, as a part of wider social conﬂicts and struggles (the boundary
between the classroom and the home or neighbourhood would be an example).
The categorisation of types of discursive practice – the elements of orders of
discourse – is difﬁcult and controversial: for present purposes I shall simply
distinguish between discourses (discourse as a count noun), ways of signifying
areas of experience from a particular perspective (e.g., patriarchal versus 
feminist discourses of sexuality), and genres, uses of language associated with
particular socially ratiﬁed activity types such as job interview or scientiﬁc
papers (see, further, Kress 1988, on the distinction between discourses and
genres).
By ‘critical’ discourse analysis I mean discourse analysis which aims to 
systematically explore often opaque relationships of causality and determina-
tion between (a) discursive practices, events and texts, and (b) wider social
and cultural structures, relations and processes; to investigate how such prac-
tices, events and texts arise out of and are ideologically shaped by relations 
of power and struggles over power; and to explore how the opacity of these
relationships between discourse and society is itself a factor securing power
and hegemony (see below). In referring to opacity, I am suggesting that such
linkages between discourse, ideology and power may well be unclear to those
involved, and more generally that our social practice is bound up with causes
and effects which may not be at all apparent (Bourdieu 1977).2
Critical discourse analysis and the marketisation of public discourse
93


2 Analytical framework
I use a three-dimensional framework of analysis for exploring such linkages, 
in particular discursive events. Each discursive event has three dimensions 
or facets: it is a spoken or written language text, it is an instance of discourse
practice involving the production and interpretation of text, and it is a piece 
of social practice. These are three perspectives one can take upon, three com-
plementary ways of reading, a complex social event. In analysis within the
social practice dimension, my focus is political, upon the discursive event
within relations of power and domination. A feature of my framework of 
analysis is that it tries to combine a theory of power based upon Gramsci’s 
concept of hegemony with a theory of discourse practice based upon the concept
of intertextuality (more exactly, interdiscursivity – see further below). The
connection between text and social practice is seen as being mediated by 
discourse practice: on the one hand, processes of text production and inter-
pretation are shaped by (and help shape) the nature of the social practice, and
on the other hand the production process shapes (and leaves ‘traces’ in) the
text, and the interpretative process operates upon ‘cues’ in the text.
The analysis of text is form-and-meaning analysis – I formulate it in this 
way to stress their necessary interdependency. As I indicated above, any text
can be regarded as interweaving ‘ideational’, ‘interpersonal’ and ‘textual’
meanings. Their domains are respectively the representation and signiﬁcation
of the world and experience, the constitution (establishment, reproduction,
negotiation) of identities of participants and social and personal relationships
between them, and the distribution of given versus new and foregrounded 
versus backgrounded information (in the widest sense). I ﬁnd it helpful to dis-
tinguish two sub-functions of the interpersonal function: the ‘identity’ function
– text in the constitution of personal and social identities – and the ‘relational’
function – text in the constitution of relationships. The analysis of these inter-
woven meanings in texts necessarily comes down to the analysis of the forms
of texts, including their generic forms (the overall structure of, for instance, a
narrative), their dialogic organisation (in terms, for instance, of turn-taking),
cohesive relations between sentences and relations between clauses in com-
plex sentences, the grammar of the clause (including questions of transitivity,
mood and modality), and vocabulary. Much of what goes under the name of
pragmatic analysis (e.g., analysis of the force of utterances) lies on the border-
line between text and discourse practice. (See Fairclough (1992a) for a more
detailed analytical framework, and see below for examples.)
The analysis of discourse practice is concerned with sociocognitive
(Fairclough 1989a and Paper 1) aspects of text production and interpretation,
94
Discourse and sociocultural change


as opposed to social-institutional aspects (discussed below). Analysis involves
both the detailed moment-by-moment explication of how participants pro-
duce and interpret texts, which conversation analysis and pragmatics excel at, 
and analysis which focuses upon the relationship of the discursive event to the
order of discourse, and upon the question of which discursive practices are
being drawn upon and in what combinations. My main interest, and main 
concern in this paper, is the latter.3The concept of interdiscursivity highlights
the normal heterogeneity of texts in being constituted by combinations of
diverse genres and discourses. The concept of interdiscursivity is modelled
upon and closely related to intertextuality (Kristeva 1980), and like inter-
textuality it highlights a historical view of texts as transforming the past – 
existing conventions, or prior texts – into the present.
The analysis of the discursive event as social practice may refer to different
levels of social organisation – the context of situation, the institutional context,
and the wider societal context or ‘context of culture’ (Malinowski 1923,
Halliday and Hasan 1985). Questions of power and ideology (on ideology, see
Thompson 1990) may arise at each of the three levels. I ﬁnd it useful to think
about discourse and power in terms of hegemony (Gramsci 1971, Fairclough
1992a). The seemingly limitless possibilities of creativity in discursive prac-
tice suggested by the concept of interdiscursivity – an endless combination
and recombination of genres and discourses – are in practice limited and con-
strained by the state of hegemonic relations and hegemonic struggle. Where,
for instance, there is a relatively stable hegemony, the possibilities for creativity
are likely to be tightly constrained. For example, one might draw a rather gross
contrast between dominance of cross-gender interaction by normative practices
in the 1950s, and the creative explosion of discursive practices associated with
the feminist contestation of male hegemony in the 1970s and 1980s.
This combination of hegemony and interdiscursivity in my framework for
critical discourse analysis is concomitant with a strong orientation to historical
change (Fairclough 1990a).
It may be helpful to readers to have available a summary of some of the main
terms introduced in the last two sections:
discourse (abstract noun)
Language use conceived as social practice.
discursive event
Instance of language use, analysed as text, dis-
cursive practice, social practice.
text
The written or spoken language produced in a
discursive event.
discourse practice
The production, distribution and consumption
of a text.
Critical discourse analysis and the marketisation of public discourse
95


interdiscursivity
The constitution of a text from diverse dis-
courses and genres.
discourse (count noun)
Way of signifying experience from a particular
perspective.
genre
Use of language associated with a particular
social activity.
order of discourse
Totality of discursive practices of an institu-
tion, and relations between them.
3 Language and discourse in late capitalist society
Critical discourse analysis tends to be seen, certainly in many linguistics
departments, as a marginal (and, for many, suspect) area of language study. Yet it
ought, in my view, to be at the centre of a reconstructed discipline of lingu-
istics, the properly social theory of language. My ﬁrst objective in this section
is to suggest that strong support for this position comes from an analysis of the
‘state’ of language and discourse (i.e., of ‘orders of discourse’) in contemporary
societies: if language studies are to connect with the actualities of contempor-
ary language use, there must be a social, critical and historical turn. A second
objective is to ﬁll in the wider context of the processes of marketisation of public
discourse discussed in the next section.
My premise in this section is that the relationship between discourse 
and other facets of the social is not a transhistorical constant but a historical
variable, so that there are qualitative differences between different historical
epochs in the social functioning of discourse. There are also inevitably con-
tinuities: I am suggesting not radical disjuncture between, let us say, pre-
modern, modern and ‘postmodern’ society, but qualitative shifts in the ‘cultural
dominant’ (Williams 1981)4 in respect of discursive practices, i.e., in the
nature of the discursive practices which have most salience and impact in a
particular epoch. I shall refer below particularly to Britain, but a global order
of discourse is emerging, and many characteristics and changes have a quasi-
international character.
Foucault’s (1979) investigations into the qualitative shift in the nature and
functioning of power between pre-modern and modern societies are suggestive
of some of the distinctive features of discourse and language in modern soci-
eties. Foucault has shown how modern ‘biopower’ rests upon technologies
and techniques of power which are embedded within the mundane practices
of social institutions (e.g., schools or prisons), and are productive of social 
subjects. The technique of ‘examination’, for example, is not exclusively 
linguistic but it is substantially deﬁned by discursive practices – genres – such
96
Discourse and sociocultural change


as those of medical consultation/examination and various other varieties 
of interview (Fairclough 1992a). Certain key institutional genres, such as
interview, but also more recently counselling, are among the most salient 
characteristics of modern societal orders of discourse. Discourse in modern as
opposed to pre-modern societies is characterised by having the distinctive
and more important role in the constitution and reproduction of power 
relations and social identities which this entails.
This Foucaultian account of power in modernity also makes sense of the
emphasis in twentieth-century social theory upon ideology as the key means
through which social relations of power and domination are sustained (Gramsci
1971, Althusser 1971, Hall 1982), the common-sense normalcy of mundane
practices as the basis for the continuity and reproduction of relations of power.
And Habermas (1984) gives a dynamic and historical twist to the analysis of
the discourse of modernity through his postulation of a progressive colonisa-
tion of the ‘lifeworld’ by the economy and the state, entailing a displacement of
‘communicative’ practices by ‘strategic’ practices, which embody a purely
instrumental (modern) rationality. The process is well illustrated, for example,
in the ways in which advertising and promotional discourse have colonised
many new domains of life in contemporary societies (see further below and 
the next section).
I ought not to omit from this brief review of language and discourse in
modernity phenomena of language standardisation, which are closely tied in
with modernisation; one feature of the modern is the uniﬁcation of the order
of discourse, of the ‘linguistic market’ (Bourdieu 1991), through the imposition
of standard languages at the level of the nation state.
Many of these characteristics of modern society are still evident in con-
temporary ‘late capitalist’ (Mandel 1978) societies, but there are also certain
signiﬁcant changes affecting contemporary orders of discourse; they thus
manifest a mixture of modernist and what some commentators (Jameson
1984, Lash 1990) characterise as ‘postmodernist’ features. The identiﬁcation
of ‘postmodernist’ features of culture is difﬁcult and necessarily contro-
versial in the sphere of discourse as in others. In what follows, I shall draw,
very selectively, upon two recent accounts of contemporary culture, as late 
modernity’ (see Giddens (1991) and the related discussion of the ‘risk society’
in Beck (1992)) and as ‘promotional culture’ (see Wernick (1991) and
Featherstone (1991) on ‘consumer culture’), to tentatively identify three sets
of interconnected developments in contemporary discursive practices.
1. Contemporary society is ‘post-traditional’ (Giddens 1991). This means
that traditions have to be justiﬁed against alternative possibilities rather than
being taken for granted; that relationships in public based automatically upon
Critical discourse analysis and the marketisation of public discourse
97


authority are in decline, as are personal relationships based upon the rights
and duties of, for example, kinship; and that people’s self-identity, rather than
being a feature of given positions and roles, is reﬂexively built up through a
process of negotiation (see also (3) below). Relationships and identities there-
fore increasingly need to be negotiated through dialogue, an openness which
entails greater possibilities than the ﬁxed relationships and identities of 
traditional society, but also greater risks.
A consequence of the increasingly negotiated nature of relationships is 
that contemporary social life demands highly developed dialogical capacit-
ies. This is so in work, where there has been a great increase in the demand 
for ‘emotional labour’ (Hochschild 1983), and consequently communicative
labour, as part of the expansion and transformation of the service sector. 
It is also true in contacts between professionals and publics (‘clients’), and in
relationships with partners, kin and friends. These demands can be a major
source of difﬁculty, for not everyone can easily meet them; there is a notable
new focus on training in the ‘communicative skills’ of face-to-face and group
interaction in language education.
This provides a frame within which we can make sense of the process of
‘informalisation’ (Wouters 1986, Featherstone 1991) which has taken place
since the 1960s in its speciﬁcally discursive aspect, which I have called the
‘conversationalisation’ of public discourse (Fairclough 1990a, 1992a, 1994).5
Conversationalisation is a striking and pervasive feature of contemporary
orders of discourse. On the one hand, it can be seen as a colonisation of the
public domain by the practices of the private domain, an opening up of public
orders of discourse to discursive practices which we can all attain rather than
the elite and exclusive traditional practices of the public domain, and thus a
matter of more open access. On the other hand, it can be seen as an appropria-
tionof private domain practices by the public domain: the infusion of practices
which are needed in post-traditional public settings for the complex processes
of negotiating relationships and identities alluded to above. The ambivalence
of conversationalisation goes further: it is often a ‘synthetic personalisation’
associated with promotional objectives in discourse (see (3) below) and linked
to a ‘technologisation’ of discourse (see (2) below).
2. Reﬂexivity, in the sense of the systematic use of knowledge about social life
for organising and transforming it, is a fundamental feature of contemporary
society (Giddens). In its distinctive contemporary form, reﬂexivity is tied to
what Giddens calls expert systems: systems constituted by experts (such as
doctors, therapists, lawyers, scientists and technicians) with highly specialised
technical knowledge which we are all increasingly dependent upon. Reﬂexivity
and expert systems even ‘extend into the core of the self’ (Giddens 1991: 32):
98
Discourse and sociocultural change


with the demise of the given roles and positions laid down within traditional
practices, the construction of self-identity is a reﬂexive project, involving
recourse to expert systems (e.g., therapy or counselling). Discursive practices
themselves are a domain of expertise and reﬂexivity: the technologisation 
of discourse described in Fairclough 1990a can be understood in Giddens’
terms as the constitution of expert systems whose domain is the discursive
practices of, particularly, public institutions.
3. Contemporary culture has been characterised as ‘promotional’ or 
‘consumer’ culture (Wernick 1991, Featherstone 1991).6 These designations
point to the cultural consequences of marketisation and commodiﬁcation –
the incorporation of new domains into the commodity market (e.g., the ‘culture
industries’) and the general reconstruction of social life on a market basis – 
and of a relative shift in emphasis within the economy from production to 
consumption. The concept of promotional culture can be understood in dis-
cursive terms as the generalisation of promotion as a communicative function
(Wernick 1991: 181) – discourse as a vehicle for ‘selling’ goods, services,
organisations, ideas or people – across orders of discourse.
The consequences of the generalisation of promotion for contemporary
orders of discourse are quite radical. First, there is an extensive restructuring
of boundaries between orders of discourse and between discursive practices;
for example, the genre of consumer advertising has been colonising profes-
sional and public service orders of discourse on a massive scale, generating
many new hybrid partly promotional genres (such as the genre of contemporary
university prospectuses discussed in the next section). Second, there is a
widespread instrumentalisation of discursive practices, involving the subordina-
tion of meaning to, and the manipulation of meaning for, instrumental effect.
In Fairclough (1989a), for instance, I discussed ‘synthetic personalisation,
the simulation in institutional settings of the person-to-person communica-
tion of ordinary conversation (recall the discussion of conversationalisation in
(1) above). This is a case of the manipulation of interpersonal meaning for
strategic, instrumental effect.
Thirdly, and most profoundly, and also most contentiously, there is a
change in what Lash (1990) calls the ‘mode of signiﬁcation’, the relationship
between signiﬁer, signiﬁed and referent. One aspect of this is a shift in the rela-
tive salience of different semiotic modalities: advertising, for example, had
undergone a well-documented shift towards greater dependence upon visual
images at the relative expense of verbal semiosis. But there is also, I suggest, 
a signiﬁcant shift from what one might call signiﬁcation-with-reference to
signiﬁcation-without-reference: in the former, there is a three-way relation
between the two ‘sides’ of the sign (signiﬁer, signiﬁed) and a real object (event,
Critical discourse analysis and the marketisation of public discourse
99


property etc.) in the world; in the latter there is no real object, only the constitu-
tion of an ‘object’ (signiﬁed) in discourse. Of course, the possibility of both
forms of signiﬁcation is inherent in language, but one can nevertheless trace
their comparative relative salience in different times and places.
The colonisation of discourse by promotion may also have major patho-
logical effects upon subjects, and major ethical implications. We are, of
course, all constantly subjected to promotional discourse, to the point that
there is a serious problem of trust: given that much of our discursive environ-
ment is characterised by more or less overt promotional intent, how can we 
be sure what’s authentic? How, for example, do we know when friendly con-
versational talk is not just simulated for instrumental effect?7 This problem of
trust is compounded by the signiﬁcance for reﬂexive building of self-identity
of choices made among the ‘lifestyles’ projected in association with the promo-
tion of goods. But the pathological consequences go deeper; it is increasingly
difﬁcult not to be involved oneself in promoting, because many people have 
to as part of their jobs, but also because self-promotion is becoming part 
and parcel of self-identity (see (1) above) in contemporary societies. The
colonising spread of promotional discourse thus throws up major problems
for what we might reasonably call the ethics of language and discourse.
This is, let me repeat, a tentative identiﬁcation of changes in discursive
practices and their relationship to wider social and cultural changes.
Nevertheless, this sketch does, I hope, give some sense of aspects of ‘the lan-
guage question’ as it is experienced in contemporary society. If this account
carries conviction, then it would seem to be vital that people should become
more aware and more self-aware about language and discourse. Yet levels of
awareness are actually very low. Few people have even an elementary meta-
language for talking about and thinking about such issues. A critical awareness
of language and discursive practices is, I suggest, becoming a prerequisite for
democratic citizenship, and an urgent priority for language education in that
the majority of the population (certainly of Britain) are so far from having
achieved it (see Clark et al. 1990, 1991). There is a major role and opportunity
here for applied language studies, yet it will not be capable of undertaking it
unless there is the critical, social and historical turn I am calling for.
4 Marketisation of public discourse: the universities
In this section I refer to a particular case and speciﬁc texts in order to illustrate
the theoretical position and analytical framework set out in the ﬁrst two 
sections, at the same time making more concrete the rather abstract account of
contemporary discursive practices in the previous section. The case I shall
100
Discourse and sociocultural change


focus upon is the marketisation of discursive practices in contemporary
British universities,8 by which I mean the restructuring of the order of dis-
course on the model of more central market organisations. It may on the face
of it appear to be unduly introspective for an academic to analyse universities
as an example of marketisation, but I do not believe it is; recent changes affect-
ing higher education are a typical case and rather a good example of processes
of marketisation and commodiﬁcation in the public sector more generally.
The marketisation of the discursive practices of universities is one dimension
of the marketisation of higher education in a more general sense. Institutions
of higher education come increasingly to operate (under government pressure)
as if they were ordinary businesses competing to sell their products to con-
sumers.9 This is not just a simulation. For example, universities are required
to raise an increasing proportion of their funds from private sources, and
increasingly to put in competitive tenders for funding (e.g., for taking on 
additional groups of students in particular subject areas). But there are many
ways in which universities are unlike real business – much of their income, for
instance, is still derived from government grants. Nevertheless, institutions
are making major organisational changes which accord with a market mode of
operation, such as introducing an ‘internal’ market by making departments
more ﬁnancially autonomous, using ‘managerial’ approaches in, for example,
staff appraisal and training, introducing institutional planning, and giving
much more attention to marketing. There has also been pressure for academics
to see students as ‘customers’ and to devote more of their energies to teaching
and to developing learner-centred methods of teaching. These changes have
been seen as requiring new qualities and skills from academics and indeed a
transformation in their sense of professional identity. They are instantiated in
and constituted through changed practices and behaviour at various levels,
including changed discursive practices, though these have very much been
‘top-down’ changes imposed upon academic staff and students and the extent
to which they have actually taken effect is open to question (see further below).
In what follows I wish to take up the discussion of ‘promotional’ culture in
(3) in the last section. I suggest that the discursive practices (order of discourse)
of higher education are in the process of being transformed through the
increasing salience within higher education of promotion as a communicative
function. This development is closely intertwined with the emergence of post-
traditional features (see (1) in the last section), and I investigate in particular,
focusing upon discursive practices, the following two interconnected questions:
(a) What is happening to the authority of academic institutions and academics
and to authority relations between academics and students, academic institu-
tions and the public etc.? (b) What is happening to the professional identities
Critical discourse analysis and the marketisation of public discourse
101


of academics and to the collective identities of institutions?10 This entails an
emphasis on interpretational dimensions of textual form/meaning (recall the
discussion of the multifuntionality of language and discourse in the ﬁrst 
section), and I refer in particular to four examples that are partially and of course
highly selectively representative of the order of discourse of the contemporary
university: press advertisements for academic posts (Example 1), programme
materials for an academic conference (Example 2), an academic curriculum
vitae (Example 3), and entries in undergraduate prospectuses (Example 4). 
I shall draw upon the analytical framework sketched out earlier.
Example 1: Advertisements
My ﬁrst example consists of three advertisements for academic posts which
appeared in the Times Higher Education Supplement on 22 May 1992.
Advertisements by the newer universities (until the summer of 1992, poly-
technics) and the older universities in general follow sharply different patterns
at the time of writing. Sample 1 is a typical newer-university advertisement;
Sample 2 a typical older-university advertisement, though, as Sample 3 shows,
there are intermediate types and incursions of the newer-university model 
into the more traditional one. (It will be interesting to see how practices evolve
during the ﬁrst few years of the post-binary system.) The analysis focuses
upon Sample 1 and to a lesser extent Sample 2. I present my analysis here 
in accordance with the three-dimensional framework introduced earlier, but
(for reasons of space) I am less systematic in discussing my other examples.
Discourse practice
Sample 1 is interdiscursively complex, articulating together a variety of genres
and discourses, including elements of advertising and other promotional 
genres. It is an illustration of one of the features of promotionalised discursive
practices I identiﬁed in the previous section – the generation of new hybrid,
partly promotional genres. An obvious promotional element is the presence of
features of commodity advertising genre, realised textually for instance in the
‘catchy’ headline (Make an Impact on the Next Generation) and in personalisa-
tion of the reader (you) and the institution (we).In the latter respect, advertising
simulates conversational genre, which is also therefore a part of the inter-
discursive ‘mix’. In addition to general commodity advertising elements, there
are elements from the genre of prestige or corporate advertising, including 
the self-promotional claims at the beginning (With our reputation . . . ) and
the logo. Some of the self-promotional material draws upon narrative genre;
102
Discourse and sociocultural change


Critical discourse analysis and the marketisation of public discourse
103
Example 1 Sample 1
SCHOOL OF ENGINEERING
With our reputation as one of the U K ’s leading centres of teaching excellence and research innovation, w e’re 
making a lasting impact on the next generation of innovators and business leaders in the field of Engineering 
-  and you can help.
With your am bm on, energy and expertise, you will be committed to teaching at both undergraduate and post-
graduate level, while enjoying the advantage of our close links with Industry and applied research initiatives to 
add to both your own reputation and ours.
S E N IO R  A C A D E M IC  P O S T  
V E H IC L E  E M IS S IO N  T E C H N O L O G Y
U p to £ 31,500 p.a. plus substantial enhancement available by negotiation.
The School of Engineering is renowned for its innovative work in the area of Vehicle Emission Technology 
and is a leader in the field of Automotive Research. A team leader is now required to join this active team  to 
help build on our success.
This leading post requires an outstanding Engineer who can bring expertise in at least one of the following:- 
Vehicle Pollution, Hybrid Vehicles, Air Quality System s. Y ou ’ll also need to be dedicated to progressing 
research and consultancy whilst lecturing to undergraduate and postgraduate students.
Along with appropriate qualifications, technological expertise and industrial experience, you will need to have 
energy, enthusiasm and communication skills to motivate your team.
We offer an excellent salary and benefits package, but more importantly the ideal environment and 
opportunity to really make a contribution to the future of automotive engineering.
You may be awarded the title of Professor if the relevant criteria are met.
For an informal discussion about the post please nng Professor David Tidm arsh, Director of School of 
Engineering on (0742) 533389.
Application forms and further details are available from the address below. Ref. 40/92.
L E C T U R E R S  /S E N IO R  L E C T U R E R S  
P R IN C IP A L  L E C T U R E R S
£10,949 -  £28,851 p.a.
C O M P U T E R  A ID E D  E N G IN E E R IN G
With expertise in one or more of the following: C A D , C A M , FEA , Expert System s, A M T . Ref. 41/92.
Q U A L IT Y  S Y S T E M S
Applications to both Design and M anufacturing Engineering, offering expertise in one or more of the 
following areas: T Q M , SP C , B S5750, B S7000, Taguchi M ethods. A capability to contribute to the teaching 
: :of operations managem ent will be an advantage. Ref. 42/92.
M ANUEA< I I RIN<i TE< JIN O IX > G Y
W'lth expertise in one or more of the following: M etal and Polymer Form ing, Non-conven- 
tional M anufacturing, A M T , Environmental Im pact of M anufacturing. Ref. 43/92.
O P E R A T IO N S  M A N A G E M E N T
With expertise in one or more of the following: Expert System s, D atabase System s, 
Sim ulation, M anufacturing Planning and Control, C IM , CA PP, M R P. Ref. 44/92.
EN V IR O N M E N T A L  E N G IN E E R IN G
(Tw o Posts)
Post 1: With expertise in one or more of the following: The chemistry of air/water 
pollution, the im pact of geology, hydrology and ecology on environmental issues, 
im pact of transport on the environment. Ref. 45/92.
in Electro-hydraulic Control System s, Autom ation, P L C s, Environmental N oise, N oise 
ibrations. Ref. 46/92.
Post 2: With expertise in 1
 
Control, Acoustics, Vibra
M A T E R IA L S  E N G IN E E R IN G  : M A T E R IA L S  R E S E A R C H  IN S T IT U T E
An experienced graduate M aterials Scientist or M etallurgist, ideally with an appropriate higher degree, to 
undertake research and development work in the M etals and Ceram ics Research Group. The research work 
will involve the use of extensive SE M /ST E M /X R D  and surface analysis facilities applied to a range of 
m etallurgical problem s with a particular emphasis on surface engineering. Ref. 47/92.
For all the above posts you will ideally have industry-related experience to add to your degree and a record of 
achievement in research and/or consultancy activities. You will be com m itted to teaching excellence at both 
undergraduate and postgraduate levels and also have the enthusiasm and ability to be part of an active group 
and to initiate and supervise research, consultancy and short course program m es.
If you feel you have the ideas and expertise to make an impact in a dynamic, forward-looking environment, 
then please send for an application form and further details to the Personnel Departm ent, Floor 3, 5 Storey 
Block, Pond Street, Sheffield S I 1WB. Telephone (0742) 533950. Closing date 8th June 1992.
We are actively implementing equality of opportunity policies and seek people who 
share our commitment. Job share applicants welcome. Women are under represented 
in this area and applications from this group are particularly welcomed.
The University working in partnership with industry and the professions.
Sheffield 
City Polytechnic
P rom isin g
Futures
MAKE AN 
IMPACT ON ■
•••• 
. 
W it
THE NEXT 
|
 
GENERATION ]


the section under the heading School of Engineering, for example, can be con-
strued as a (simple) story about the institution’s impact on the next generation.
A discourse of personal qualities is also an element of the interdiscursive mix
(e.g., with your ambition, energy), as is a discourse of (educational) manage-
ment, realised textually most notably in nominalisations such as teaching
excellence, expertise, a dynamic, forward-looking environment. There are also,
of course, elements of the more traditional genre and discourse of university
job advertisements (e.g., Application forms and further details are available
from the address below. Ref. 40/92).
Text
I begin with more general comments on contrasting interpersonal meanings in
Samples 1 and 2, then move on to a more detailed discussion of their textual
realisations.
104
Discourse and sociocultural change
Example 1 Sample 2
Example 1 Sample 3
University of 
Newcastle upon 
Tyne
Department of English 
Literature
University of 
Nottingham
The Department of Law is a thriving 
department committed to excellence in 
teaching and research across a broad range 
of legal 
disciplines. 
The 
successful 
applicant will share this commitment. 
Applications are invited from candidates 
with an interest in any field of Law, but the 
Department has a particular need in the 
area of Property Law.
The appointment will be made at the 
appropriate point on the Lecturer A and B 
scales according to age, qualifications and 
experience. Professor M.G. Bridge, the 
Head of the Law Department is happy to 
answer any enquiries (Ext. 3376).
Further details and application forms, 
returnable not later than 26th May, from 
the 
Personnel 
Office, 
University 
of 
Nottingham, University Park, Nottingham 
NG7 2RD (Tel: 0602 484848, Ext. 2696). 
Ref. No. 1529. (18699) 
B9905
LECTURER
Applications are invited for a Lectureship 
in the Department of English Literature 
from candidates who have expertise in any 
Post-Medieval field. The post is available 
to be filled from 1st October, 1992, or as 
soon as possible thereafter.
Salary will be at an appropriate point on 
the Lecturer Grade A scale: £12,860 -  
£17,827 p.a. according to qualifications 
and experience.
Further particulars may be obtained from 
the Director of Personnel, Registrar’s 
Office, University of Newcastle upon 
Tyne, 6 Kensington Terrace, Newcastle 
upon Tyne NE1 
7RU, with whom 
applications (3 copies), together with the 
names and addresses of three referees, 
should be lodged not later than 29th May, 
1992.
Please quote ref: 0726/THES.
(18704) 
B9905
Example 1 Sample 2
Example 1 Sample 3
the section under the heading School of 
Engineering, for example, can be con-
strued as a (simple) story about the institution’s impact on the next generation. 
A discourse of 
personal qualities is also an element of the interdiscursive mix 
(e.g., with your ambition, energy), as is a discourse of (educational) manage-
ment, realised textually most notably in nominalisations such as teaching 
excellence, expertise, a dynamic, 
forward-looking environment. There are also, 
of course, elements of the more traditional genre and discourse of university 
job advertisements (e.g., Application 
forms and 
further details are available 
from the address below. Ref. 40/92).
Text
I begin with more general comments on contrasting interpersonal meanings in 
Samples 1
 and 2, then move on to a more detailed discussion of their textual 
realisations.


The institutional identity projected in Sample 2 is impersonal, distant, 
settled (in a sense I explain below) and conservative. The institutional voice is
that of a traditional university. The institution claims authority only with
respect to the post and its conditions and procedures of application. There is
no attempt to project a speciﬁc professional identity for the potential applicant.
Very similar interpersonal meanings are present in those parts of Sample 1
which draw upon the traditional genre and discourse of academic advertise-
ments (e.g., Application forms and further details are available from the
address below), but the sample is characterised by contradictory interpersonal
meanings in accordance with its complex interdiscursive mix, and its most
salient interpersonal meanings are drawn from the dominant, promotional
and self-promotional elements in that mix. The predominant institutional
identity projected is personalised and assertive (self-promotional). While the
identity of the institution in Sample 2 is taken as settled and given, there is an
obvious sense in which Sample 1 is actively constructing an institutional 
identity. Again, not only is a professional identity for the potential applicant
set up in the text in contrast with Sample 2, but also it is actively constructed
in parts of the text which are about the qualities of a successful applicant 
(e.g., With your ambition, energy and expertise, you will be committed to 
teaching . . . ). In these sections, the institution is claiming authority over 
the identity of applicants (including in terms of what are traditionally seen as
personal qualities), as well as elsewhere (like Sample 2) over the post, its 
conditions and application procedures. The personalisation of both institu-
tion (we) and addressees (you), and the individualised address of potential
applicants (it is a singular not a plural you), simulate a conversational and
therefore relatively personal, informal, solidary and equal relationship
between institution and potential applicant, and other features (see below)
reinforce this.
Realisation of these interpersonal meanings involves analysis of the text in
several dimensions. The generic structure of Sample 2 follows traditional
advertising for academic posts: a heading identifying the institution, then the
main heading giving the title of the post, then details of the post and salary,
then procedure for applying. Sample 1 is hybrid, showing evidence of three
elements in its interdiscursive mix: commodity advertising, and prestige
advertising, as well as traditional advertising for academic posts. The tradi-
tional headings are missing, and there is a catchy advertising-style headline
(though not actually at the head of the advertisement) and a signature line
which identiﬁes the institution with a logo and slogan as well as its title. The
body of the advertisement begins with a promotional characterisation of 
the institution, and a characterisation of the suitable applicant for the posts
Critical discourse analysis and the marketisation of public discourse
105


advertised. These advertising and promotional elements foreground the 
predominant interpersonal meanings identiﬁed above.
Parts of Sample 1 are generically structured as narratives – the section
beneath the heading School of Engineering is an example. The rather simple
story is of the reader as a possible future employee working within the institu-
tion. Such narrative is not a feature of traditional university job advertisements
(nor of Sample 2), and its presence here is linked to the shift identiﬁed above
towards a more active discursive construction of professional identity. Notice
in this connection an otherwise rather odd feature of modality and tense,
exempliﬁed here in you will be committed to teaching, which occurs several
times in the sample; this is a potentially face-threatening prediction about the
professional ethics as well as behaviour of the potential employee, with the
modal verb (will) marking a high level of commitment to the proposition,
which, however, loses its face-threatening character in the imaginary scenario
portrayed in the narrative. Although the story is, as I have said, a rather simple
one, it is more elaborate than its meagre two sentences would suggest. These
narrative sentences have a form of complexity which one does not ﬁnd in 
traditional academic advertisements. Both sentences contain a number of 
subordinate clauses and both have prepositional phrases introduced by with
which contain presupposed propositions. In all, there are seven propositions
in this narrative (in abbreviated form: we have a reputation, we are making 
an impact, you can help, you have ambition, etc., you will be committed to
teaching, you will enjoy the advantage of our links, you will add to your 
reputation and ours). Notice that the paratactic clause linked with a dash to
sentence 1 (– and you can help) evokes a conversational style which gives a
touch of informality to the personalised relationship between institution and
potential applicant.
Turning to the grammar of the clause, I want to comment in turn on 
features of modality, mood and transitivity (Halliday 1985). The authority 
of the institution with respect to the post, its conditions and the procedure 
of application in Sample 2 is partly realised in mood and modality features.
Clauses are, of course, declarative, with high-afﬁnity epistemic (or ‘probability’)
modalities such as the post is available or salary will be . . . There is also one
instance of deontic (‘obligational’) modality (applications . . . should be
lodged), and one case ( further particulars may be obtained) with an ambivalence
between epistemic and deontic modality (mixing ‘possibility’ with ‘permis-
sion’) which is characteristic for this discourse. Sample 1 has several instances
of imperative mood (make an impact on the next generation, please send for an
application form) which accord with the personalised institution–audience
relationship noted above. As in Sample 2, the authority of the institution is
106
Discourse and sociocultural change


marked through high-afﬁnity epistemic modalities. However, explicit obliga-
tional modalities are absent. I noted above the frequency of clauses with 
modal auxiliary will marking futurity plus high-afﬁnity epistemic modality.
These are, in some cases, set within developed if simple narratives, as I 
have indicated, but this is not always so: the advertisement seems generally 
to cast the potential applicant in the imaginary role of future employee. 
But notice that these clauses (e.g., for all the above posts you will ideally 
have industry-related experience) provide alternatives to obligational clauses
(such as you should have industry-related experience), in which obligational
meanings can be backgrounded. This accords with the personalised, 
solidary and equal relationship claimed between institution and potential
applicant which I described above. So also does the foregrounding of the
activity of the potential applicant in these clauses (and also, for instance, in you
can help, with a modal verb ambivalent between ‘possibility’ and ‘ability’).
Although it takes us beyond mood to pragmatics and speech acts, let me also
note here the frequency of clauses which make claims about the institution
(e.g., The School of Engineering is renowned for its innovative work . . . ),
which realise the self-constructive and self-promotional institutional identity
I have referred to.
In terms of transitivity, there are two features of Sample 2 which contribute
to its qualities of impersonality: passives and nominalisations. Both are illus-
trated in its opening sentence: Applications are invited for a Lectureship. The
passive verb is agentless, so that the institution is not present in the surface
grammar, and the nominalisation (applications) also lacks an agent, so that 
the potential applicant is also absent. There are elements of this impersonal
style in Sample 1 (e.g., applications from this group are particularly welcomed)
but they are not salient.
There are a number of points which might be made about the vocabulary 
of these samples, but I shall make just two. First, the formal-sounding and
slightly archaic vocabulary of Sample 2 (such as thereafter, particulars,
lodged) accords with the impersonality and distance of the institutional 
identity set up. Vocabulary of this sort is not present in Sample 1. By contrast
(and this is the second point), Sample 1 uses a vocabulary and collocations of
educational management (teaching excellence, expertise, a dynamic, forward-
looking environment, progressing research, research and consultancy), as well
as a vocabulary of personal qualities and skills. From the perspective of dis-
cursive practice, these vocabularies belong to separate discourses which I
identiﬁed earlier as belonging to the interdiscursive mix. The appropriation of
these discourses is, I think, part of the process of constructing a new corporate
identity for the higher education institution.
Critical discourse analysis and the marketisation of public discourse
107


Social practice
The observations on marketisation of universities at the beginning of this section
are part of the wider social practice within which these discourse samples are
located. It is also relevant that these samples appeared in a period of transition
between announcement of the abolition of the binary divide between poly-
technics (referred to as the ‘newer’ universities above) and (older) universities,
and its full implementation. There are many relevant historical factors here. For
example, there have been particularly strong links between the newer universities
and business, and polytechnics were in conception more vocationally oriented
than universities, though they have also evolved many courses which are like
traditional university courses. Sample 1 illustrates a type of job advertisement
found widely for posts in business. For instance, a rapid survey of The
Guardian at the time of writing shows that the great majority of advertisements
for posts in marketing resemble Sample 1 rather than Sample 2 in terms of the
sorts of features discussed above. One development that is at issue here, there-
fore, seems to be the fracturing of the boundary between the orders of discourse
of higher education and business as regards advertising, and a colonisation of
the former by the latter. This can be construed as one rather particular discursive
manifestation of the processes of marketisation of higher education referred 
to above. As Sample 3 shows, this colonisation of academic discourse affects
older universities as well, though there is generally at the time of writing a
rather clear correlation between the two types of advertisement and the older
and newer universities. This case is, I think, an interesting one in terms of
struggles to restructure hegemony within the order of discourse of higher 
education. At present, there are in this speciﬁc area of discursive practice two
orders of discourse which have not been uniﬁed. I would predict that, with the
breakdown of divisions between institutional types, that situation is highly
unlikely to persist. It will be interesting to see whether and how the two orders
of discourse begin to unify, and whether and how a struggle develops around
the traditional advertising practice illustrated by Sample 2 and the new, inter-
discursively complex practice illustrated by Sample 1. A signiﬁcant issue in
monitoring developments will be to monitor changes in processes and routines
of drafting and production of advertisements, and it will also be interesting to
monitor the responses of potential applicants to different advertising styles.
Example 2: Programme materials; Example 3: Curriculum vitae
I want to refer rather more brieﬂy, and without systematically using the three-
dimensional framework of analysis, to two of my other examples, as further
108
Discourse and sociocultural change


instances of the incursion of promotion and self-promotion into the order 
of discourse of higher education, and of the reconstruction of, respectively, 
corporate and individual professional identities.
Example 2
The ﬁrst is the ‘pack’ given to participants in a one-day academic conference
held recently at Lancaster University.11The conference was a highly prestigious
event with two of the foremost sociologists in Europe as its main speakers. 
The ‘pack’ consisted of
(a) a brief account of the topic of, participation in and organisation of the con-
ference;
(b) a programme;
(c) a page of notes on ‘platform participants’, their academic positions, 
publications and other distinctions;
(d) a page on the research centre which co-organised the conference, its history,
personnel, research activities, relationships with other organisations;
(e) a rather spaciously laid-out seven-page list of participants with their insti-
tutions, divided into external participants and Lancaster participants;
(f ) an evaluation form for the conference.
Conferences of this sort are increasingly used as a means of promoting 
academic organisations, as well as being motivated for more conventional 
academic reasons, and this example is, I think, fairly typical of the tendency.
While (a) and (d) are the most obviously promotional elements, one could argue
that even (e) has a promotional function in using a rather spacious layout to
underline the distinguished array of participants in the conference. Here is (a):
This one-day conference links the growing body of sociological thought on
Risk in Society (as in recent studies by social theorists such as Giddens,
Beck, Baumann and others), with the phenomenon of world-wide environ-
mental concern and cultural change. It is timed to relate to the imminent
ﬁrst publication in English of Ulrich Beck’s celebrated book Risikogesellschaft
(The Risk Society), one of the most inﬂuential and best-selling works of
post-war European sociology.
The conference will bring together sociologists from the UK and con-
tinental Europe on these questions for the ﬁrst time. It is organised jointly
by Lancaster’s Centre for the Study of Environmental Change (CSEC) 
and Sociology Department, with the support of the Economic and Social
Research Council (ESRC).
Critical discourse analysis and the marketisation of public discourse
109


It is quite a good example of a widespread contemporary ambivalence; is this
information, or is it promotion? The promotional function seems to have
become more salient in (‘colonised’) a whole range of types of informative 
discourse. Does meaning (here, the giving of background information relevant
to the conference) have primacy, or is it subordinated to effect (constructing
the conference as a highly signiﬁcant event in the minds of its participants)?
For example, the information in sentence 2 is on one level certainly accurate
(Beck’s book has had a rapturous reception and has just been published in
English). Yet why imminent (with its portentous associative meaning) rather
than forthcoming? Why ﬁrst publication (implying, but only on the basis 
of a guess, that there will be more)? Why Ulrich Beck (it was simply Beck in 
sentence 1)? Why not stop at celebrated book (which gives the information
about the book’s reception), why add the reduced relative clause (one of the . . .
European sociology), especially since the addressees are those who have elected
to attend the conference, who are mostly ‘in the know’? Is this sentence on 
balance referring to the book and its imminent publication, or rather con-
structing the book and the event? In short, is this sentence mainly informative
or mainly to do with promoting the book (notice the vague – one might even
say euphemistic – verb relate to) and thereby implicitly the conference (if the
book is that signiﬁcant, so by implication is a conference where the author is
talking about the topic of the book)? As so often in contemporary society, the
giving of information is taking place in a context where there is a premium on
winning people to see things in a particular way. Notice the closed nature of
this promotional work; the conference is being promoted among its own par-
ticipants, who constitute a signiﬁcant section of the constituency empowered
to give the institution the recognition it is seeking. I should perhaps add that 
I suspect that these promotional objectives would be no mystery to most of
those who participated; people who attend such conferences seem generally
prepared to live with promotional objectives, limiting themselves to ironic,
distancing comments in private which suggest that for some academics at least
such apparently necessary work on institutional identity does not sit easily
with their sense of their own professional self-identity.
Example 3
The next example I want to look at speciﬁcally in terms of promotion – and
more exactly self-promotion – is an extract from a curriculum vitae (CV). Such
data are sensitive for obvious reasons, and I have therefore used an extract
from a CV I prepared myself in 1991 for an academic promotions committee.
The form of submissions to this committee is controlled by procedural rules
110
Discourse and sociocultural change


which specify the maximum length of a CV and the categories of information
it should contain, and require a ‘supporting statement’ of no more than ‘two
sides of A4 paper’. The extract I have chosen is a paragraph from the supporting
statement. Unlike the CV proper, the content of the supporting statement 
is not speciﬁed in the procedural rules. I had to make informal enquiries to 
ﬁnd out what was expected. I was able to look at previous submissions by 
colleagues, and I received advice from a colleague with experience of the 
committee. From these sources, I gathered that the supporting statement 
had to be a compelling account of one’s contribution to, if possible, all the 
categories of activity in two overlapping schemes of categorisation: to research,
teaching and administration; and to the department, the university, and the
wider community (these categorisation schemes are actually spelt out in the
procedural rules, though not speciﬁcally with reference to the supporting
statement). The advice I received was that one had to ‘sell’ oneself to stand 
any chance of success. The following extract from an internal memorandum,
produced shortly after I had prepared the submission, gives a sense of the 
prevailing wisdom at the time:
To succeed, departments have to ‘sell’ their candidates. One cannot expect
merit to gleam with its own halo; the halo has been assiduously polished up!
Put differently, this means that one has to hone one’s application to give an
impression of all-round excellence, preferably over a period of time, with
feedback from others.
This easily extends to an emphasis on the need for extended preparation 
for the well-honed application – for instance, it is helpful to have favourable
student feedback on one’s courses, ideally over several years. One’s future
promotability may become a signiﬁcant factor in the planning of one’s current
activities. Here is the extract:
Contributions to the Department
I have I believe played a signiﬁcant role in the academic and administrative
leadership of the Department over the past eight years or so. I was Head of
Department from 1984 to 1987 and again for one term in 1990, and I have
carried a range of other responsibilities including MA and undergraduate
programme coordination and admissions. I helped to set up and now help
to run the Centre for Language in Social Life. Through my coordination of
the Language, Ideology and Power research group and in other activities, 
I have stimulated research (e.g., on critical language awareness) among 
colleagues and postgraduate students, and helped form what is now being
recognised nationally and internationally as a distinctive Lancaster position
Critical discourse analysis and the marketisation of public discourse
111


on and contribution to study of language and language problems in contem-
porary British society. I am currently helping to edit a collection of Centre
for Language in Social Life papers for publication.
Some of the self-promotional properties of the extract are obvious enough.
There is a series of claims realised as clauses with past tense, present perfective
and present continuous verbs and I as subject and theme. These are mainly
claims which are categorical in their modality, positive assertions without
explicit modalising elements, though there is a subjective modality marker in
the ﬁrst clause (I believe) which (a) foregrounds the subjective basis of judge-
ment in the whole paragraph in that the ﬁrst clause is a summary/formulation
of the paragraph, but also (b) foregrounds (one might say rather brazenly) the
self-promotional nature of the activity. (For the analytical terminology used
here see Halliday (1994b) and Fairclough (1992a).) Except for one relational
process (I was Head of Department), all clauses in the extract contain action
processes. It would seem that material actional process verbs are consistently
being selected even where other process types would be just as congruent with
or more congruent with the happenings and relationships reported – for
instance, although I am indeed one of the ﬁve co-directors of the Centre for
Language in Social Life, it receives practically no ‘running’ from anyone, and
I might well (indeed better) have worded this am now an active member of.
Similarly played a signiﬁcant role in might have been been a signiﬁcant part of,
carried a range of other responsibilities might have been had a range of other
responsibilities, helped to set up might have been was a founding member of,
and so forth. These changes would, I think, reduce the sense of dynamic activity
conveyed in the extract. A noteworthy lexical choice is leadership in the ﬁrst
sentence. The wording of academic relationships in terms of leadership
belongs, in my view, to a managerial discourse which has come to colonise 
the academic order of discourse recently, and which I actually ﬁnd deeply
antipathetic. In terms of the characteristics of promotional discourse discussed
earlier, the extract is very much a signiﬁcation/construction of its subject/
object rather than just referentially based description, and meaning would
seem to be subordinated to effect.
I suppose I saw the preparation of the submission as a rhetorical exercise.
By which I mean that I was consciously using language in a way I dislike, 
playing with and parodying an alien discourse, in order to ‘play the game’ and
convince the committee of my merits. That is rather a comforting account of
events, and a common enough one; the self stands outside or behind at least
some forms of discursive practice, simply assuming them for strategic  effects.
I felt embarrassed about the submission, but that is, I think, compatible with
112
Discourse and sociocultural change


the rhetorical account. There are, however, problems with this account. In the
ﬁrst place, it assumes a greater consciousness of and control over one’s practice
than is actually likely to be the case. For instance, while I was quite conscious
of what was at stake in using leadership, I was not aware at the time of how 
systematically I was ‘converting’ all processes to actions, although I could have
been (and perhaps I ought to have been) – unlike most people I have the 
analytical apparatus. More seriously, the rhetorical account underestimates
the incorporative capacity of institutional logics and procedures. Whereas the
average academic rarely has contact with promotions committees, contact
with other organisational forms whose procedures are based upon the same
logics are necessary and constant. Doing one’s job entails ‘playing the game’
(or various connected games), and what may feel like a mere rhetoric to get
things done quickly and easily becomes a part of one’s professional identity.
Self-promotion is perhaps becoming a routine, naturalised strand of various
academic activities, and of academic identities.
Example 4: Prospectuses
My ﬁnal example consists of extracts from Lancaster University’s undergraduate
prospectuses for the years 1967–8 (Example 4.1), 1986–7 (Example 4.2), and
1993 (Example 4.3) see pages 119–124. (See also the prospectus sample in
Paper 5.) I have used part of the English entry from the ﬁrst, and part of the
Linguistics entries from the second and third (Linguistics was taught within
English in 1967–8). I focus upon differences between the 1993 and 1967–8
samples, the 1986–7 sample being included to show an intermediate stage in
the development of the prospectus genre. A ﬁrst observation is that the earliest
and most recent entries are sharply different in their content. The 1967–8
entry (Example 4.1) consists of: (a) approximately half a page on the English
BA degree, speciﬁcally on the view of the study of English it embodies; (b) an
itemised list of the ‘special interests’ of the department; (c) approximately one
page on the detailed content of the English BA degree. The 1993 entry
(Example 4.3) consists of (a) a box detailing entry policy and requirements;
(b) three paragraphs on the department – its staff, courses, academic links,
academic achievements, and ethos; (c) a headed section on assessment; (d) a
headed section on graduate careers; (e) a one-page diagrammatic summary 
of the undergraduate Linguistics degree. I shall focus my comments again on
aspects of authority and identity.
I shall begin with textual analysis, considering speciﬁcally meanings of
requirement and obligation and their formal realisations. Sections (a), (c) and
(e) of the 1993 entry (entry requirements, assessment, and the undergraduate
Critical discourse analysis and the marketisation of public discourse
113


degree structure) involve requirements placed by the institution upon students
or applicants. Most of the 1967–8 entry deals with degree structure, with entry
requirements and assessment being dealt with elsewhere in the prospectus.
Meanings of obligation and permission are extensively and overtly present in
the 1967–8 entry. There are quite a few obligational and permissive modal
auxiliary verbs (e.g., subjects may be offered, each undergraduate will choose,
third-year undergraduates must choose, any one course . . . may be offered) and
other modal expressions (second-year undergraduates . . . are required to
take; compare must take). Obligation is expressed lexically as well as mod-
ally (in no specialisation . . . is permitted, a very limited concentration . . . is
allowed). By contrast, although meanings of requirement and obligation are
implicit in the 1993 entry, they are not explicitly worded. This is facilitated by
the use of tabular and diagrammatic layout for the entry requirements and the
degree structure, which allow requirements to be left implicit. For instance,
while A/AS-level grades: BCC or equivalent implies that applicants are
required to achieve these grades, explicit obligational meanings are conspicu-
ously absent. The degree structure section consists mainly of phrases (or
‘minor clauses’ – see Halliday 1985), but where a full clause is used the wording
again backgrounds requirement (e.g., You take at least three, rather than, for
example, You must take at least three). The assessment section again uses
minor clauses and lacks overt obligational meanings.
A related contrast is between the impersonal style of the 1967–8 entry and
the personalised style of the 1993 entry. Notice, for example, that the three
passive verbs in the 1967–8 entry referred to above as instances of obligational
meaning (are required to take, is permitted, is allowed) are ‘agentless’, that is,
they lack an explicit agent, though in each case the institution is the implicit
agent (it is the department, or the university, that requires, permits and
allows). There are also other agentless passives in the entry where the institution
is implicit (e.g., the Language course is so constructed as to be). The opening
sentence uses a different syntactic–semantic means to maintain impersonality;
selecting the undergraduate courses as subject and agent of treat. This is, in
Halliday’s terms, a ‘grammatical metaphor’ for a ‘congruent’ (non-metaphorical)
grammaticisation with, for example, we as subject/agent of treat and under-
graduate courses within an adjunct (we treat English as a whole subject in our
undergraduate courses). Another impersonalising device is nominalisation;
the special interests of the Department include the following, with the nominal-
isation (the special interests of the Department) as clause subject, avoids more
personalised alternatives like members of the Department (or we) are particularly
interested in. . . . It is also worth noting that what appear to be merely descrip-
tive statements about the course could be reworded and regrammaticised in
114
Discourse and sociocultural change


personalised ways: compare (the actual) the course consists of three parts with
the department/we organise(s) the course in three parts.
Actually, there are two issues involved here. First, there is the issue of to
what extent participants (here the institution and the potential applicant/
student) in the processes referred to are made explicit or left implicit. Secondly,
there is the issue of the grammatical person of these participants when they 
are explicit: third person, or ﬁrst (we) and second person (you). (A further
question is whether ﬁrst and second person are singular or plural – in fact,
where they are used, the institutional ﬁrst person is plural (we) whereas the
second person is singular – addressees are addressed individually.) With
regard to the institution as participant, the 1967–8 entry is impersonal in both
senses – not only is the institution referred to in the third person where it is
explicit, it is often not explicit at all – whereas the 1993 entry is personalised 
in both senses as far as the institution is concerned – it is frequently explicit in
the text, and it is ﬁrst person.
But the picture is somewhat more complex for the addressees. There is
some second-person direct address in the 1993 entry (Linguistics does not
commit you to any one career, you take at least three of ). But applicants are
referred to in the third person in the opening entry requirements section (e.g.,
all accepted candidates are invited to open days – notice also the passive verb
and missing institutional agent), and applicants/students are not referred to in
the next section until its third paragraph (beginning We are a friendly . . . ),
and then in the third person (e.g., the people we teach, students). On the other
hand, the 1967–8 entry is again impersonal in both senses with respect to
adressees. For example:
. . . no specialisation in either language or literature separately is permitted
until the third year of study when a very limited concentration on either is
allowed.
While the agentless passives avoid personalisation of the institution as
noted above, the nominalisations acting as their subjects (no specialisation, a
very limited concentration) avoid personalisation of addressees (compare you
cannot specialise until the third year of study). An agentless passive is used to
the same effect: in Part II, various periods are studied. Where the student 
participants are explicitly textualised, in the third person, it is generally par-
ticular groups of students who need to be explicitly identiﬁed (e.g., second-year
undergraduates), though notice cases of individualised third person reference
with each (each undergraduate will choose) and generic reference with the
indeﬁnite article (may be offered by an undergraduate).
Critical discourse analysis and the marketisation of public discourse
115


Turning to some broader issues of social practice, these contrasting textual
features mark a major historical shift in the nature and objectives of university
prospectuses, in line with the wider changes in higher education I discussed
earlier. The 1967–8 entry gives information about what is provided on a take-
it-or-leave-it basis. In the 1993 prospectus, by contrast, the promotional func-
tion is primary; it is designed to ‘sell’ the university and its courses to potential
applicants, in the context of a competitive market where the capacity of a 
university to attract good applicants is seen as one indicator of its success, and
a factor which can affect how well it is funded. A revision of the prospectus can
lead to a dramatic increase in applications; for instance, when Lancaster
University revised its prospectus in the late 1980s, the number of applicants
went up by 15 per cent for two successive years. The content and form of the
contemporary prospectuses are informed by market research – evidence of
what applicants most want to know (hence the prominence of careers informa-
tion in the 1993 entry), an understanding of the literacy culture of young 
people (e.g., the salience within it of ‘glossy’ printed material of various sorts),
an understanding of the conditions of reading documents of this sort (they are
likely to be ﬂicked through rather than carefully read), and so forth.
These changes entail a shift in discourse practice, and speciﬁcally in the
processes of prospectus production, of which the textual features noted above
are realisations. The primacy of the promotional function in contemporary
prospectuses entails drawing upon genres associated with advertising and
other forms of promotional activity as well as the more traditional informa-
tionally oriented genre of university prospectuses, so that the 1993 entry, for
example, is an interdiscursively hybrid quasi-advertising genre. The two
entries are strikingly different in physical appearance: the earlier entry is based
upon the conventional printed page, whereas the 1993 entry uses a brochure-
style page size and layout with three print-columns per page, colour (the ﬁrst
page of the entry uses ﬁve colours), tabular layout and a photograph. The 
document is drawing upon visual and design features widely used in advertis-
ing and promotional material. As to the features noted earlier, promotional 
considerations are certainly behind the marked change in content between
1967–8 and 1993, especially the introduction of the three paragraphs about
the department, which bring in a genre of prestige or corporate promotion. The
personalisation of the institution (as we), which occurs heavily in this part of
the entry, is a part of this. Like individualised direct address with you, it is
widely used in advertising. The avoidance of explicit obligational meanings is
also in line with the elevation of the  promotional function. The avoidance of
explicit obligational meanings marks a signiﬁcant shift in authority relations.
Promotional material addresses readerships as consumers or clients, and
116
Discourse and sociocultural change


when someone is selling to a client, the client is positioned as having authority.
This is generally true in advertising. It is in contradiction with the traditional
authority of the university over applicants/students, and it places the institution
in something of a dilemma, for it will obviously still wish to impose requirements
and conditions upon entry, course structure and assessment. This dilemma
over authority is given a textual resolution (though not necessarily a very 
satisfactory one): these requirements are included in the text, but not in overtly
obligational forms. The text effects a compromise between the demands of
two different situations and the conventions of two different genres. The text
also effects a compromise as regards self-identity. The series of claims about
the department which make up the ﬁrst three paragraphs point to a promotional
genre, but the claims are quite restrained (in comparison with, for example,
Sample 1 of the job advertisements). A ﬁnal note is that the interdiscursive mix
I have suggested here appears to be achieving a hegemonic status in higher
education publicity, as part of a more general dominance of a marketing ethos
in this area of higher educational activity.
Summary
The four examples I have used above can hardly be said to be properly repre-
sentative of the complex order of discourse of a modern university, but they do
provide four contrasting ‘takes’ on the discursive practices of such institutions.
They have, I hope, suggested how analysis of the discourse of organisations
such as universities (in the terms of analytical framework introduced earlier) in
their ‘text’ and ‘discourse practice’ dimensions can illuminate such matters as
shifting authority relations and shifts in self-identity within organisations.
The particular shifts I have identiﬁed can be summed up as (i) the decline of
stable institutional identities which could be taken for granted, and a much
greater investment of effort into the construction of more entrepreneurial
institutional identities, (ii) a corresponding decline in the implicit (unspoken)
authority of the institution over its applicants, potential students and potential
staff, (iii) a reconstruction of professional identities of academics on a more
entrepreneurial (self-promotional) basis, with the foregrounding of personal
qualities.
The discursive instantiation of these shifts illustrates, I think, all three of
the sets of developments in contemporary discursive practices identiﬁed in the
previous section. I have already sufﬁciently highlighted the third of these, the
elevation and generalisation of the promotional function in discursive prac-
tices, and its consequences in terms of the hybridisation of discourse practice,
the subordination of meaning to effect, and the mode of signiﬁcation. But the
Critical discourse analysis and the marketisation of public discourse
117


shifts I have identiﬁed can also be read (with respect to the ﬁrst of my sets of
developments) in terms of Giddens’ account of the post-traditional nature 
of contemporary society, and the corresponding informalisation of society
which is partly constituted through a conversationalisation of discursive prac-
tices, which is also evident in my examples. The second set of developments,
associated with the increased reﬂexivity of contemporary life and my concept
of technologisation of discourse, is also relevant here: one dimension of the
much increased emphasis on staff development and training in higher educa-
tion is the training of staff in the discursive practices of, for instance, marketing
or preparation of research proposals for research councils (itself a heavily 
promotional form of discourse these days).
It would be premature to draw sweeping conclusions with respect to the
‘social practice’ dimension of my analytical framework on the basis of such a
limited range of illustrative examples. But as I indicated in Note 9, this paper
is linked to a longer-term study of change in higher education. One of the
questions which that study will address is whether developments in higher
education amount to the emergence of a new, reconstituted hegemony, and
whether one can talk of a restructured hegemony in the domain of the order 
of discourse in particular. It would be unwise to leap too quickly to such a 
conclusion before there has been some investigation of the reception of and
response to the sort of changes I have illustrated among various categories of
members of higher educational institutions. It may well be, for example, that
largely ‘top down’ changes in discursive practices are widely marginalised,
ignored or resisted by certain categories of staff and/or students in a signiﬁcant
range of their activities.
5 Conclusion
I conclude this paper with some brief reﬂections upon the social use and 
utility of a critical discourse analysis. I have tried to indicate how critical dis-
course analysis might contribute to more broadly conceived social research
into processes of social and cultural change affecting contemporary organisa-
tions. Discourse analysis is, I believe, an important though hitherto relatively
neglected resource for such research. It has the capacity to put other sorts of
social analysis into connection with the ﬁne detail of particular instances of
institutional practice in a way which is simultaneously oriented to textual
detail, the production, distribution and interpretation/consumption of texts,
and wider social and cultural contexts.
However, discourse analysis also has the capacity to be a resource for those
engaged in struggle within institutions. For many members of higher educational
118
Discourse and sociocultural change


Critical discourse analysis and the marketisation of public discourse
119
Example 4.1
English
The undergraduate courses treat English as a whole subject and not as two divergent 
specializations. Accordingly, when English is taken as a major subject for the degree of B.A., 
no specialization in either language or literature separately is permitted until the third year 
of study when a very limited concentration on either is allowed. For higher degrees, special-
ization in either language or literature may be complete or subjects may be offered which 
connect these two branches of study.
In the study of language for the B.A. degree, modern English is central and is combined 
with some general linguistics and phonetics, and in Part II with history of the language. 
Language specializations in the third year include optional courses on older forms of 
English, and also on various aspects of the modern language and of linguistics. The study 
of English language throughout the first degree course will include fieldwork, special studies 
of varieties of modern English and the use of language laboratory techniques. The Language 
course is so constructed as to be of value to those who wish to specialize in English as a 
second or as a foreign language. As much as possible of the material used for literary study 
is also used for the study of language.
In the study of literature the syllabus is divided into periods, each taught with emphasis on 
a different aspect of literary study. The first-year course, based mainly on modern literature, 
deals with problems of reading and with the forms and functions of literature in contem-
porary society. In Part II, various periods are studied, two in two-year courses and the 
remainder in one-year courses.
The special interests of the Department include the following:
1. Project work in the drama courses using the facilities which will be available in the 
Theatre Workshop, at present being designed.
2. Special studies of the relationship between language and literature, including work on 
literary structures from a linguistic point of view.
3. Poetry as a performed art and its links with song.
4. Relations between the study of literature and of philosophy.
5. Relations between literature and scientific thought.
6. Relations between literary and historical study.
Undergraduate studies
PART I (FIRST YEAR) COURSE
The course consists of three parts:
(a) Language: a general introduction, including some elementary phonetics and linguistics.
(b) Literature: a course on problems of reading, and the forms and functions of literature, 
based on modern English poetry and prose fiction and on texts from three different 
types of drama (Classical, Renaissance, Modern).
(c) Special courses: each undergraduate will choose one of the special courses referred to 
below, the choice being determined by his other first-year subjects.


120
Discourse and sociocultural change
Example 4.1 continued
(i) For those taking groups involving History or Economics or Politics or French 
Studies or Classical Background, a study of certain historical aspects of literature in 
the seventeenth century.
(ii) For those taking groups involving Economics or Politics or Philosophy, a study of 
some of the relationships of literature and philosophy, centred on the works of 
William Blake.
(iii) For those taking groups involving Environmental Studies, Mathematics or 
Philosophy, a study of certain scientific texts from a literary and linguistic point of 
view.
The Part I course, or selected parts of it, will also (timetable permitting) be available as a 
one-year minor course for certain second-year undergraduates majoring in Boards of 
Studies A, B and C who did not take English in their first year.
PART II (SECO N D AND TH IRD YEAR) COURSES
Major course
Second-year undergraduates majoring in English are required to take four lecture courses -  
two in literature and two in language, from the following:
(a) Literature 1780-1860 
Literature 1660-1780
Elizabethan Drama, including some project work in the theatre
(b) Varieties of Modern English I (study of the varieties of modern English outside the 
United Kingdom)
History of the English Language I
Principles and Techniques of General Linguistics, with special reference to English
Third-year undergraduates must choose four courses: either three language and one 
literature, or three literature and one language, or two of each. Any one course in language 
or literature may be offered by an undergraduate as a special option to be examined as such 
in the Final Examination. Third-year courses listed for 1966-67 (subject to the availability 
of staff) are as follows:
(a) Literature 1860-1966, Literature 1550-1660, Mediaeval Literature, Jacobean Drama.
(b) Old English, Middle English, Old Norse, Writing Systems, Linguistic Study of Style, 
Varieties of Modern English II, History of the Language II, Principles and Techniques 
of General Linguistics II.
Combined major course in English and French Studies -  see page 118 
Combined major course in English and Philosophy -  see page 118 
Combined major course in Latin and English -  see page 118


Critical discourse analysis and the marketisation of public discourse
121
Example 4.2
L I N G U I S T I C S
Linguistics (BA) Ql 00 Ling
Human Communication (BA) P300 Hum 
Comm
Classical Studies and Linguistics (BA) QQ98 
Class/Ling
Computer Science and Linguistics (BA) GQ51 
Comp/Ling
English and Linguistics (BA) QQ13 Eng/Ling
French Studies and Linguistics (BA) QRl 1 
Fr/Ling
German Studies and Linguistics (BA) RR32 
Germ/Ling
Italian Studies and Linguistics (BA) QRl 
3 
Ital/Ling
Language and Education (BA) Y656 Lang/Educ
Linguistics and Philosophy (BA) QV17 
Ling/Phil
Linguistics and Psychology (BA) LQ71 Ling/Psy
Modem English Language (BA) Q312 MEL
standing themselves and their place in society; 
on English, as one of the world’s most 
important means of communication and the 
language of one of its most significant 
literatures. Degree schemes in Linguistics, 
Human Communication, English and 
Linguistics and Modern English Language, as 
well as combined schemes with other 
departments, provide the perspectives.
The department makes use of a variety of 
modes of teaching in its undergraduate 
programme. Typically, teaching is by lecture 
and small group seminars of up to 12 
students, where the seminars are used to 
discuss readings related to the lecture topic. 
Many courses, especially those concerned with 
the collection of language data, concentrate 
on seminars and workshops and often involve 
more than one member of staff.
L
ancaster is a major centre in the United 
Kingdom for study in Linguistics, the 
science of human language. There are 
about five thousand languages, and their 
enormous diversity and complexity supply the 
raw data for Linguistics. Language is Man’s 
most remarkable achievement, and its 
systematic study provides insights into Man’s 
psychological and social nature. The study of 
language tells us something about the nature 
of the human mind, since languages are 
abstract systems of peculiar and labyrinthine 
structure and yet men are capable of 
communication in them very easily and 
speedily. Language is of interest sociologically, 
since it is the stuff that binds complex 
societies together: without language no 
sophisticated social organisation is possible. 
The Department of Linguistics and Modern 
English Language, which has a staff of 12, is 
unique among departments of Linguistics in 
the country in the way its degree schemes 
offer students three alternative but comple-
mentary perspectives: on the structure and 
functions of human language; on the use of 
symbols by humans as a means of under-
Linguistics and Human Communication offer 
useful training and expertise that are of special 
professional relevance to many working in 
education, public services and administration, 
industry and management, the mass media 
and creative arts, for example as language 
teachers, speech therapists, as social workers, 
as counsellors and as translators. Indeed an 
understanding of how language works and the 
structure and purposes of human communi-
cation is available in a whole range of careers 
in which there is a need for clear communi-
cation, sensitive to people’s interests and 
needs.
A detailed departmental prospectus can be 
obtained from the Departmental Secretary.
Admission requirements and policy
Linguistics is not a subject taught at 
school,and prospective applicants should try 
to get some idea of the subject before 
committing themselves to it. (They may read, 
for example, one or more of the following 
introductory books: The Articulate Mammal 
and Language Change: Progress and Decay by 
Jean Aitchison, Linguistics by D Crystal,


122
Discourse and sociocultural change
Example 4.2 continued
Phonetics by D J O ’Connor, Grammar and 
Semantics by F R Palmer.) The Department 
usually makes conditional offers on the basis 
of the UCCA form. We look for evidence of a 
keen interest in the structure of language per 
se and a willingness to analyse it objectively. 
When such evidence cannot be found in the 
UCCA form, we interview candidates. GCE 
attainments in Languages and Mathematics 
are taken as indications of likely talent in 
Linguistics, but there are no specific formal 
prerequisites. (For the general requirements 
see page 178.) We welcome applications from 
mature candidates.
About 25 candidates gain admission each year 
to the degree scheme in Human 
Communication and to single and combined 
major degree schemes in Linguistics.
Part 1
 course in Linguistics
The purpose of this course is to provide a 
foundation for the Part II studies of students 
who intend to major in Linguistics or in 
Human Communication and to provide a 
balanced and self-contained introduction for 
those undergraduates who go on to major in 
another subject.
Part I Linguistics comprises Introduction to 
General Linguistics (151) which is com-
pulsory and which introduces students to core 
areas of the subject (Phonetics, Phonology, 
Syntax, Semantics, Pragmatics and Socio-
linguistics), together with a set of options 
(152) in which students choose two of a range 
of more specialised topics each studied for half 
the year. The available options vary from year 
to year: they currently include Structure of a 
non-Indo-European Language (e.g. Chinese, 
Arabic or Hebrew), Writing systems, History 
of Modern Linguistic Thought, Field 
Methods,the Linguistics of Literacy.
Linguistics (3-year scheme)
Part I
Students are free to choose any two courses 
from the list on page 175 in addition to 
Linguistics at Part I, subject to timetable 
restrictions and departmental advice; but it is
wise to select courses that will permit at least 
one alternative choice of Part II degree scheme 
(since you might wish to change your mind). 
Subjects that combine well with Linguistics 
include English and the other language 
subjects, Computer Studies, Educational 
Studies, Philosophy, Psychology, and 
Sociology, and the Department of Linguistics 
has close links with those departments.
Part II
(Six units in Linguistics, two units in a minor 
and a free ninth unit course: see page 18.)
Students take six units in Linguistics from a 
wide range of courses on various aspects of the 
subject. A unit can comprise either two half-
unit courses or one full course. They cover the 
core areas studied in Part I and specialisms 
that include Sociolinguistics, Psycho-
linguistics, Stylistics, and Anthropological, 
Computational, Philosophical and Applied 
Linguistics. Some of the courses are designed 
specifically for the needs of the students 
combining Linguistics with a particular 
subject, while others are appropriate for all 
students of Linguistics. For detailed 
information on the courses available see the 
departmental prospectus.
Students also take two courses in a minor, 
chosen freely (subject to departmental advice 
and prerequisites: see page 175), and a free 
ninth unit course.
Human Communication (3-year scheme)
The degree scheme in Human 
Communication, jointly offered by the 
departments of Linguistics, Psychology and 
Sociology, places language in a broader 
context; it investigates human communication 
as a unified field of academic enquiry through 
the interrelated perspectives of the three 
subjects. Its aim is to bring the student to an 
awareness of the centrality of communication 
in human behaviour and consciousness. The 
only specific entry requirement is that 
undergraduates who take Psychology in Part I 
must have a pass in Mathematics at Ordinary 
level. 
'


institutions, for example, the dramatic changes of the last decade or so have
been profoundly alienating, yet their capacity to resist them has been weakened
by their reluctance to fall back upon traditional practices and structures 
which have been widely criticised from the Left and the Right and which have 
been the target for change. Many have experienced a sense of helplessness,
which critical discourse analysis can, I believe, help to illuminate. Part of 
Critical discourse analysis and the marketisation of public discourse
123
Example 4.3
L in g u is tic s  a n d  H u m an  C o m m u n ic a tio n  
S o c i a l  S c i e n c e s  I
i*i
A.* 
I 
iv.
I
 
. 
<
 t: ^
 \1. :
Hu. n i t  
i h u 
i'll
A/AS-level grades: BCC or
equivalent; AS-levels accepted 
GCSE: Maths and normally a 
language for Linguistics courses 
Scottish Highers: BBBBB 
International Baccalaureate: 
30pts
BTEC: at least merits in BTEC 
National
Mature students: we are keen 
to recruit mature students.
All accepted candidates are 
invited to open days; interviews 
in special cases.
The Department of 
Linguistics and Modem 
English Language is one of 
the largest in the U K with a 
teaching staff of fourteen.
We offer a series of flexible 
degrees with a wide range of 
courses in ‘core’ areas like 
phonetics, grammar and 
discourse analysis; areas 
which connect strongly with 
other disciplines, like 
sociolinguistics and 
psycholinguistics; and more 
‘applied’ areas like adult 
literacy, language teaching 
and the linguistic study of 
literature. We have strong 
links through collaborative 
degrees with English, 
Computer Science, the social 
sciences (especially 
Psychology and Sociology) 
and Modem Languages.
We received a grade 4 
(national excellence in most 
areas of Linguistics and 
international excellence in 
some) in the 1989 research 
ratings carried out by the 
Universities Funding 
Council. We are especially 
well known for our research 
work in Linguistics in 
relation to language 
teaching, for the study of 
language in social settings 
(e.g. school classrooms and 
interaction between cancer 
patients and their carers), foi 
the automatic analysis of 
texts by computer, and for 
the linguistic study of 
literature.
We are a friendly and 
flexible group of teachers 
who like to have social 
contact with the people we 
teach. Every year, students 
are invited to join staff for a 
walking weekend in the 
nearby Lake District. There 
are also opportunities for 
students to spend pan of 
their second year in 
Copenhagen as part of an 
ERASMUS student 
exchange arrangement. We 
are currently exploring 
similar links with universities 
in other European countries.
Assessment
For Linguistic and Human 
Communication courses: 
coursework (at least 60%)
and exams. For courses run 
by the English Department: 
coursework (50% in the first 
year, usually 40% in later 
years) and exams.
What our 
graduates do
Linguistics and Human 
Communication offer useful 
training and expertise that 
are of special professional 
relevance to many working 
in education, language 
teaching, speech therapy, 
translation, industry and 
commerce, management, the 
mass media, creative arts, 
social work and counselling.
Recent graduates have gone 
to work or train as teachers 
of English overseas, teachers 
of English as a mother 
tongue, computer 
programmers and 
consultants, bankers, 
chartered accountants, O & 
M analysts, air traffic 
planners, managers in the 
retail industry, personnel 
managers, journalists, social 
workers, nurses and so on. A 
sizeable proportion of our 
Linguistics graduates take up 
employment overseas.
A degree in Human 
Communication or 
Linguistics does not commit 
you to any one career, but 
can open many doors.
institutions, for example, the dramatic changes of the last decade or so have 
been profoundly alienating, yet their capacity to resist them has been weakened 
by their reluctance to fall back upon traditional practices and structures 
which have been widely criticised from the Left and the Right and which have 
been the target for change. Many have experienced a sense of helplessness, 
which critical discourse analysis can, I believe, help to illuminate. Part of


124
Discourse and sociocultural change
Example 4.3 continued
the difﬁculty, which emerges from an investigation of discursive practices, 
is a polarisation between unacceptable traditional practices and equally 
distasteful, highly promotional, marketised new practices. Advertisements 
for academic posts are a very small but interesting case in point: they do appear
to be rather starkly polarised, as I showed earlier, with no real alternative to 
the two main types. The situation can be conceived of in terms of an absence
within the order of discourse: the absence of a language – of discursive practices
L in g u is tic s  a n d  H u m an  C o m m u n ic a tio n  
S o c i a l  S c i e n c e s
BA  Hons Linguistics Q100
page
See also Culture and Communication 
119
Human Communication 
135
English Language 
136
English Language and Literature 
137
Education and English Language 
123
Linguistics and Japanese studies 
186
and combined degrees in Linguistics and 
Computer Science 
56
English 
164
Modem Language (French or German or Italian) 
194
Philosophy 
139
Psychology 
139
First vear sr
Linguistics 
A second subject 
A third subject
see page 40 
see page 40
Registration requirem ent: none
Core course in general linguistics, plus options such as 
pragmatics, historical linguistics, literacy.
Average weekly workload: lectures 2hrs, 
seminar/workshop 2 hrs (plus private study time)
Assessm ent: coursework 60%, exam 40%
5
 Second and third years •
Linguistics units consist of full courses or two half-
courses (marked h)
You take at least three of:
Phonetics (h)
Phonology (h)
Syntax (h)
Semantics (h)
and your choice of the 
following, to make at 
least six units in total:
Morphology in the 
extended standard 
theory (h)
Pragmatics (h)
Language acquisition 
Literacy and cognition
(h)
Computational 
linguistics (h) 
Language processing 
Interpreting language in 
use (h)
Language in society 
Grammar, genre and 
social context (h) 
Discourse analysis (h) 
Language, ideology and 
power (h)
Language and gender 
(h)
Language learning and 
teaching (h)
Language and education 
Second language 
acquisition and 
language pedagogy (h) 
The teaching of 
language and 
literature (h) 
Present-day English 
language 
Stylistics of poetry (h) 
Stylistics of prose and 
prose fiction (h) 
Stylistics of drama (h)
\ Bilingualism (h)
<
 Independent study
Up to three courses in 
another subject


– through which authority relations and institutional and professional identi-
ties different from either traditional or marketised forms can be constituted.
Critical discourse analysis cannot solve this problem, but it can perhaps point
to the need for a struggle to develop such a new ‘language’ as a key element in
building resistance to marketisation without simply falling back on tradition,
and perhaps give a better understanding of what might be involved in doing so.
Notes
I am grateful to Teun van Dijk, Theo van Leeuwen and Ruth Wodak for their 
helpful comments on an earlier version of this paper.
1. I use the term ‘text’ for both written texts and transcripts of spoken interaction.
2. The pendulum of academic fashion seems to be swinging against such an
‘ideological’ view and in favour of a greater stress on self-consciousness and
reﬂexivity (see Giddens 1991). While accepting the need for some correction
in this direction (see further on reﬂexivity below), I believe it is wrong-
headed to abandon the ideological view. See General Introduction.
3. The two are not, of course, independent. The nature of detailed production
and interpretation processes in particular cases depends upon how the 
order of discourse is being drawn upon. See Fairclough (1992a: 18–19) for a
critical discussion of conversation analysis in these terms.
4. I am using this term rather more loosely than Williams, for whom dominant,
emergent and oppositional culture were tied to dominant, emergent and
oppositional classes. See Wernick (1991: 183–4) for discussion.
5. Wouters (1986), however, sees informalisation and formalisation as cyclical
phenomena, and suggests a new wave of formalisation since the 1970s.
6. The discussion here draws heavily upon Wernick (1991) as well as
Fairclough (1989a).
7. Another question is whether practices which are widely simulated are not
thereby devalued in a general way.
8. At the time of writing, the binary divide between universities and polytechnics
is being dissolved. I shall refer below to the ex-polytechnics as the ‘newer 
universities’ and to the ‘older universities’.
9. The account in this paragraph is drawn from collaborative work with Susan
Condor, Oliver Fulton and Celia Lury.
10. The threefold focus upon changes in the market, in authority, and in self-
identity broadly characterises much of the work of the Lancaster Centre for
the Study of Cultural Values, of which I am a member. I draw here particularly
upon a recent formulation by Russell Keat.
11. Conference on ‘The Risk Society: Modernity and the Environment’, 29 May
1992, Lancaster University.
Critical discourse analysis and the marketisation of public discourse
125


5.
Discourse, change and hegemony
Abstract
In this paper I use the term ‘technologisation of discourse’ to identify a 
distinctively contemporary mode of language policy and planning, the appli-
cation speciﬁcally to discourse of the sort of ‘technologies’ which Foucault
(1979) identiﬁed as constitutive of power in modern society. Technologisa-
tion of discourse involves the combination of (i) research into the discursive
practices of social institutions and organisations, (ii) redesign of those prac-
tices in accordance with particular strategies and objectives, usually those 
of managers or bureaucrats, and (iii) training of institutional personnel in
these redesigned practices. It is being used in a widening range of types of
institution, notably within the service industries and the professions, and in
increasingly systematic ways.
I regard technologisation of discourse as an important resource in attempts
by dominant social forces to direct and control the course of the major social
and cultural changes which are affecting contemporary societies. This argu-
ment is developed below within the framework of a Gramscian theory of
power in modern capitalist societies as ‘hegemony’, together with an assump-
tion that hegemony and hegemonic struggle are constituted to a signiﬁcant
degree in the discursive practices of institutions and organisations. Discourse
conventions may embody naturalised ideologies which make them a most
effective mechanism for sustaining hegemonies. Moreover, control over the
discursive practices of institutions is one dimension of cultural hegemony.
Technologisation of discourse is part of a struggle on the part of dominant
social forces to modify existing institutional discursive practices, as one dimen-
sion of the engineering of social and cultural change and the restructuring of


hegemonies, on the basis of strategic calculations of the wider hegemonic 
and ideological effects of discursive practices. However, hegemonic projects
are contested in discursive and other modes of practice, and technologisation
of discourse is no exception. I argue that this mode of language policy and
planning needs to be investigated not only at more ‘macro’ levels of policy 
formation and implementation, but also through a critical method of dis-
course analysis which can show how technologisation of discourse is received
and appropriated by those who are subjected to it, through various forms 
of accommodation and resistance which produce hybrid combinations of
existing and imposed discursive practices.
The paper is structured as follows. The ﬁrst section is theoretical. It gives a
necessarily skeletal account of social class, political power and the state in
modern society in terms of Gramsci’s concept of hegemony, and a view of how
discourse and discursive change, and speciﬁcally the technologisation of dis-
course, ﬁt into such a framework. The second section is methodological. It
sketches out, with examples, a multidimensional ‘critical’ approach to discourse
analysis, based upon the theoretical positions adopted in the ﬁrst section,
which is I suggest a suitable approach for use in research on social and cultural
change and its discursive aspects. The third and ﬁnal section focuses upon the
policy and planning dimension of the paper and the concept of technologisa-
tion of discourse, locating it within the theoretical and methodological frame-
works set out in the ﬁrst two sections.
1 Discourse and hegemony
I
n the sphere of language as in other spheres, the nature of policy formation
and implementation varies according to the political and organisational
structures within which it takes place. For example, simple models of policies
radiating outwards and downwards from central government do not match 
the complexities of modern states in developed capitalist societies such as
Britain or the USA. In the case of technologisation of discourse, there are clear
tendencies at national and even transnational levels which can be linked to
state and dominant class (including capitalist multinational) interests without
too much difﬁculty; yet it is not possible to trace them to one or even several
particular moments of locations of central policy formation. Rather, the policies
and planning which underlie processes of discourse technologisation have
been determined at different levels and different times, in many different 
institutions and organisations, within the private domain as well as within the
public domain. Of course, these instances are linked together in various ways
(e.g., through a common relationship to the social scientiﬁc expertise which
Discourse, change and hegemony
127


discourse technologisation depends upon), but the decision-making and
implementational processes are autonomous.
We need therefore a theory of power, class and state in modern capitalist
societies which can account for the relationship of such developments as 
technologisation of discourse to class and state interests, without reducing
complex relationships between organisations, institutions and levels to a 
‘conveyor belt’ view of state power. Such a theory is available in Gramsci’s
studies of the structures of power in Western capitalist societies after the 
First World War, and the sort of revolutionary strategies they implied. (See
Gramsci (1971), Buci-Glucksmann (1980), Forgacs (1988). Quotations 
from Gramsci are taken from Forgacs (1988).) For Gramsci, the political
power of the dominant class in such societies is based upon a combination of
‘domination’ – state power in the narrow sense, control over the forces of
repression and the capacity to use coercion against other social groups – and
‘intellectual and moral leadership’ or ‘hegemony’ (Forgacs 1988: 249).
Correspondingly, the state is a combination of ‘political society’ (the public
domain, the domain of state power in the narrow sense) and ‘civil society’ (the
private domain, the domain of hegemony) – or as Gramsci graphically puts 
it, ‘hegemony protected by the armour of coercion’ (Forgacs 1988: 235). It 
is the hegemonic control of the dominant class over the institutions of civil 
society (education, work, family, leisure etc.) within the ‘outer defences’ of 
the repressive state apparatus that makes revolutionary transformation of
modern capitalist societies so difﬁcult, and imposes upon the revolution-
ary party the long-term ideological and hegemonic struggles of a ‘war of 
position’, rather than direct confrontation with the state in a ‘war of 
manoeuvre’.
Gramsci links hegemony to the functioning of the state as an ‘ethical state’:
‘every state is ethical in as much as one of its most important functions is to
raise the great mass of the population to a particular cultural and moral level, 
a level (or type) which corresponds to the needs of the productive forces of
development, and hence to the interests of the ruling classes’ (Forgacs 1988:
234). And, referring to Fordism and Taylorism in the USA, Gramsci discusses
‘the need to elaborate a new type of man suited to the new type of work’. One
aspect of hegemony is thus cultural and ethical engineering, the reshaping of
subjectivities or ‘selves’ (Keat and Abercrombie 1990), and technologisation
of discourse is one aspect of this process as I shall argue in more detail later.
However, it is necessary ﬁrst to provide an account of how discourse ﬁts 
into Gramsci’s theoretical framework. (See also the account of the interaction
of hegemony and discourse provided in Laclau and Mouffe (1985) and 
128
Discourse and sociocultural change


Hall (1988), working with a somewhat different concept of discourse. A fuller
account is given in Fairclough (1992a).)
There is a dual relationship of discourse to hegemony. On the one hand,
hegemonic practice and hegemonic struggle to a substantial extent take the
form of discursive practice, in spoken and written interaction. Indeed, my use
of the term ‘discourse’ rather than (say) ‘use of language’ implies the imbrica-
tion of speaking and writing in the exercise, reproduction and negotiation of
power relations, and in ideological processes and ideological struggle. The
concept of hegemony implies the development in various domains of civil
society (e.g., work, education, leisure activities) of practices which naturalise
particular relations and ideologies, practices which are largely discursive. A
particular set of discourse conventions (e.g., for conducting medical consulta-
tions, or media interviews, or for writing crime reports in newspapers) implicitly
embodies certain ideologies – particular knowledge and beliefs, particular
‘positions’ for the types of social subject that participate in that practice (e.g.,
doctors, patients, interviewees, newspaper readers), and particular relation-
ships between categories of participants (e.g., between doctors and patients).
In so far as conventions become naturalised and commonsensical, so too 
do these ideological presuppositions. Naturalised discourse conventions are
a most effective mechanism for sustaining and reproducing cultural and 
ideological dimensions of hegemony. Correspondingly, a signiﬁcant target 
of hegemonic struggle is the denaturalisation of existing conventions and
replacement of them with others.
An example I develop in the next section is doctor–patient consultations.
In contemporary British society (for example), there is a dominant traditional
mode of conducting consultations, and emergent alternative modes. In the
dominant mode, doctors ask questions according to pre-set agendas, patients
are limited to answering questions, and trying to squeeze anything which does
not ﬁt into the doctors’ agendas into elaborations of their answers. The tone 
is impersonal and often brusque, the patient being treated as a bundle of
symptoms rather than a person. (See Mishler (1984) and Fairclough (1992a)
chapter 5, for a more detailed account.) This traditional mode of consultation
corresponds to conventional hegemonic relations within medicine, and it is
based upon and reproduces ideological assumptions about the nature of
medicine, the social identities of doctors and patients, and the nature of the
doctor–patient relationship, which partly constitute those hegemonic relations.
Conversely, alternative modes of consultation which have more conversational
properties, often drawing upon counselling as a model, are emerging as a part
of struggles to challenge and restructure existing hegemonic relations. In my
Discourse, change and hegemony
129


view, any analysis of hegemony and hegemonic struggle within an institution
such as medicine must include analysis of discursive practices and of relation-
ships (of dominance, or of opposition and confrontation) between diverse 
discursive practices.
The second aspect of the dual relationship of discourse to hegemony is that
discourse is itself a sphere of cultural hegemony, and the hegemony of a class
or group over the whole society or over particular sections of it (or indeed,
these days, hegemony on a transnational scale) is in part a matter of its capacity
to shape discursive practices and orders of discourse. The importance of 
cultural hegemony in the sphere of discourse follows from the ideological
potency of discursive practices and conventions referred to in the last para-
graph. Hegemony in this sphere also includes, as Gramsci himself pointed out
(Forgacs 1988: 357ff), the relationships set up between different language
varieties (different languages, different dialects), and the emergence of a 
dominant standard variety. The hegemony of a class or group over an order of
discourse is constituted by a more or less unstable equilibrium between its
constitutive discursive practices, which may become unbalanced and open 
to being restructured in the course of hegemonic struggle. For example, in 
traditional forms of medical practice, doctors did act as counsellors (‘lay
priests’) to their patients as well as body-menders, but the two sets of (discursive)
practices tended to be kept distinct; in the struggle of alternative forms of 
medical practice against traditional forms, this boundary within the order of
discourse tends to be weakened, so that the discursive practices of counselling
and medicine in the narrow sense merge to produce a new discursive practice.
See the next section for an illustration. I should add that hegemonic struggle
includes struggle on the part of dominant forces to preserve or restructure and
renew their hegemony in the sphere of discourse, as well as struggle on the part
of dominated groups.
The two aspects of the relationship of discourse to hegemony distinguished
above are of course closely connected, in that it is in concrete discursive practice
that hegemonic structurings of orders of discourse are produced, reproduced,
challenged and transformed. Any instance of discursive practice can thus 
be interpreted in terms of its relationship to existing orders of discourse and
discursive practices (is it broadly normative, reproducing them, or creative,
contributing to their transformation?), as well as its relationship to existing
social structures, ideologies and power relations (e.g., in the case of consultations
between male doctors and women patients, do they reproduce or challenge
dominant gender relations and ideologies?).
In the paragraphs above I have already introduced a historical and 
dynamic dimension into the relationship between discourse and hegemony
130
Discourse and sociocultural change


through references to hegemonic struggle: hegemonic struggle takes place 
to a signiﬁcant extent in discourse, where the ‘stakes’ include the structuring
of orders of discourse as well as other dimensions of hegemonies. This 
has important theoretical and methodological implications for the study of 
social and cultural change: accounts of social change need to give more serious
attention to discourse than they have done in the past, and to the question of
how discursive change relates to (instantiates, constitutes or reﬂects) social
and cultural change; and discourse analysis needs to be used alongside other
types of analysis (e.g., sociological, ethnographic) in research on change. The
general point is that the investigation of change requires a combination of
‘micro’ forms of analysis (discourse analysis is one) and more ‘macro’ forms 
of analysis (see Fairclough 1992a). These conclusions have considerable 
current relevance, because of the radical changes which are affecting contem-
porary societies, and more especially because discourse is coming to be an
increasingly salient and deﬁning element in certain areas of social life such 
as many types of work (notably in the service industries), so that social and 
cultural changes are largely changes in discursive practices (see further below).
This is the context in which technologisation of discourse is becoming
increasingly prominent as a conscious and strategic intervention to reshape
discursive practices on the basis of calculations of their wider hegemonic and
ideological effects.
2 A critical approach to discourse analysis
My purpose in this section is to give a brief description, with illustrative 
examples, of an approach to discourse analysis which is based upon the 
theoretical positions above (see Fairclough 1989a, Fairclough 1992a). It is 
an approach which is, I believe, suitable for use in the sort of research into
social and cultural change I referred to above. What in particular makes it 
suitable for such work is that it foregrounds links between social practice 
and language, and the systematic investigation of connections between the
nature of social processes and properties of language texts. (I use ‘text’ for 
the language ‘product’ of discursive processes, whether it be written or 
spoken language; a spoken ‘text’ can of course be turned into a written text 
by being transcribed.) It also facilitates the integration of ‘micro’ analysis (of
discourse) and ‘macro’ analysis (including analysis of language policy and
planning). It is moreover a ‘critical’ approach to discourse analysis in the 
sense that it sets out to make visible through analysis, and to criticise, con-
nections between properties of texts and social processes and relations 
(ideologies, power relations) which are generally not obvious to people who 
Discourse, change and hegemony
131


produce and interpret those texts, and whose effectiveness depends upon this
opacity.
The approach I have adopted is based upon a three-dimensional conception
of discourse, and correspondingly a three-dimensional method of discourse
analysis. Discourse, and any speciﬁc instance of discursive practice, is seen 
as simultaneously (i) a language text, spoken or written, (ii) discourse prac-
tice (text production and text interpretation), (iii) sociocultural practice.
Furthermore, a piece of discourse is embedded within sociocultural practice
at a number of levels: in the immediate situation, in the wider institution or
organisation, and at a societal level; for example, one can read an interac-
tion between marital partners in terms of their particular relationship, 
relationships between partners within the family as an institution, or gender
relationships in the larger society. The method of discourse analysis includes
linguistic description of the language text, interpretation of the relationship
between the (productive and interpretative) discursive processes and the text,
and explanation of the relationship between the discursive processes and the
social processes. A special feature of the approach is that the link between
sociocultural practice and text is mediated by discourse practice; how a text 
is produced or interpreted, in the sense of what discursive practices and 
conventions are drawn from what order(s) of discourse and how they are 
articulated together, depends upon the nature of the sociocultural practice
which the discourse is a part of (including the relationship to existing 
hegemonies); the nature of the discourse practice of text production shapes
the text, and leaves ‘traces’ in surface features of the text; and the nature of the
discourse practice of text interpretation determines how the surface features
of a text will be interpreted. On page 133 there is a diagrammatic representation
of this approach.
I want to illustrate the approach by applying it to an example which 
exempliﬁes:
1. Texts with heterogeneous and contradictory features.
2. A complex relationship between discourse practice (text production) 
and discourse conventions; one could show a similarly complex relation-
ship between text interpretation and conventions, but I shall not do so
here.
3. A relationship between such heterogeneous textual features and such 
complexity of discourse processes, and processes of sociocultural change.
The example is an extract from a consultation between a doctor (a ‘general
practitioner’ in the British medical system) and his female patient (a dot 
132
Discourse and sociocultural change


indicates a short pause, a dash a longer pause, and overlaps are shown with
square brackets).
1. Patient:
but she really has been very unfair to me . got G no
Doctor:
I hm
Patient:
respect for me at G all and I think . that’s one of the
Doctor:
I hm
5. Patient:
reasons why I drank sG o much you G know G —
Doctor:
I hm
I hm
I hm
Patient:
a G nd em
Doctor:
I hm are you you back are you back on it have you started
drinking Gagain
10. Patient:
Ino
Doctor:
oh you haven’t (uncleaGr)
Patient:
I no . but em one thing that the lady on
the Tuesday said to me was that . if my mother did turn me out
of the G house which she
15. Doctor:
I yes
Patient:
thinks she may do G . coz . she doesn’t like the way
Doctor:
I hm
Patient:
I’ve been she has turned me G out be G fore . and em .
Doctor:
I hm
I hm
Discourse, change and hegemony
133
Process of production
Text
Process of interpretation
Discourse practice
Description (text analysis)
Interpretation (Processing analvsis)
> Explanation (social analysis)
Sociocultural practice
(Situational; institutional; societal)
Dimensions of discourse
Dimensions of discourse analysis


20. Patient:
she said that . I could she thought that it might be possible to
me for me to go to a council G ﬂat
Doctor:
I right
yes G yeah
Patient:
I but she said it’s a very em she wasn’t
25.
G pushing it because . my mother’s got to sign a
Doctor:
I hm
Patient:
whole G lot of G things and e: . she said it’s difﬁcult
Doctor:
I hm
I hm
Patient:
G and em . there’s no rush over it . I I don’t know
30. Doctor:
I hm
Patient:
whether . I mean one thing they say in AA is that you shouldn’t
change anything G . for a year
Doctor:
I hm
Doctor:
hm yes I think I think that’s wise . I think that’s
35.
wise (5 second pause) well look I’d like to keep you know 
seeing you keep . you know hearing how things are going from
time to time if that’s possible
The text is characterised by a conﬁguration of heterogeneous and con-
tradictory properties. I want to illustrate that in terms of a contrast between the
fact of certain occurrences and their manner of occurrence. On the one hand,
the fact of the occurrence of the doctor’s question about whether the patient
(an alcoholic) has started drinking again (are you back are you back on it have
you started drinking again) in lines 8–9, which breaks topic and which is
repeated as a check (oh you haven’t (indistinct)) in line 11; and the fact of the
occurrence of the doctor’s assessment of the advice the patient has received 
(I think that’s wise. I think that’s wise) in line 34; and of the doctor’s directive
to the patient to see him again in lines 35–37–well look I’d like to keep you know
seeing you keep . you know hearing how things are going from time to time if
that’s possible. On the other hand, the manner of these contributions from the
doctor: the doctor’s question in lines 8–9 both in its working (the vague initial
formulation – are you back are you back on it– and the reformulation – have you
started drinking again), and in a strikingly quiet and fast delivery (which I
have not tried to represent) which give this presumably vital medical question
the appearance of an aside; and the assessment in line 34, which includes an
explicit subjective modality marker (I think) which modulates its authorita-
tiveness; and the directive (lines 35–37), which is extremely tentative, hedged
( you know etc.) and indirect.
134
Discourse and sociocultural change


In terms of discourse practice, it appears to me that the doctor is creatively
articulating two different discourse conventions, that associated with traditional
medical consultations, and that associated with counselling. Of course, this is
not just this doctor’s personal achievement; this is a common and widespread
articulation. On the one hand, the doctor as in traditional consultations 
pursues an agenda which controls and determines the structure of the inter-
action, and this is manifest in the fact of occurrence of the doctor’s question,
assessment and directive. On the other hand, the doctor like the counsellor 
in a counselling session appears to cede much of the control and leadership 
of the interaction to the patient. The typical apparent non-directiveness of 
counselling is manifest in the manner of occurrence of the question, assessment
and directive. The contradictory demands of medical practice and counselling
are tenuously reconciled through the choice of forms of realisation for these
speech acts. A more overtly counselling feature is the degree of empathy
shown by the doctor, in the textual form of his substantial back-channelling
activity (hm, right, yes, and so on).
The nature of the discourse production process can itself be referred to 
the wider sociocultural practice within which it occurs. For instance, at the
institutional level, the doctor belongs to a minority oppositional group within
ofﬁcial medicine which is open to the practices of alternative medicine and
counselling. Institutional members with a knowledge of relations and struggles
within medicine may well interpret the doctor’s articulation of diverse con-
ventions in this instance as anti-authoritarian – against the authority of the
doctor over the patient, and the authority of the medical establishment over
the profession; breaking down the professional elitism of doctors by giving the
patient greater control in the consultation, and sanctioning the introduction
via counselling of more informal and conversational discursive practices
which patients are familiar with and at the same time treating the patient as a
person, an individual.
However, this particular mix of medical discourse and counselling dis-
course is one institutionally local instance of a global feature of the contemporary
societal order of discourse; the colonisation of institutions in the public
domain by types of discourse which emanate from the private domain. This
tendency could be called the ‘conversationalisation’ of institutional discourse.
Conversationalisation entails greater informality, and interactions which have
a person-to-person quality in contrast with the interaction between roles or
statuses which characterises more traditional institutional discourse. It also
entails more democratic interaction, with a greater sharing of control and a
reduction of the asymmetries which mark, say, conventional doctor–patient
Discourse, change and hegemony
135


interaction. Conversationalisation can I think be seen as a discursive part of
social and cultural changes associated at some levels at least with increased
openness and democracy, in relations between professionals and clients for
instance, and greater individualism.
However, while these developments cannot be simply equated with a
spread of consumerism, they have come to be tied in with – one might say
appropriated by – consumerism to some extent. Correspondingly, commer-
cial organisations, including increasingly organisations like the professions, 
social services and even the arts which are being drawn into commercial and
consumerist modes of operation, are under pressure to transform their 
organisational practices and ‘cultures’ in this direction, undertaking in many
cases systematic strategies of training and other forms of intervention to
achieve these ends. Technologisation of discourse is a part of this process, 
and in many cases a central objective of technologisation of discourse is the
achievement of a shift towards more conversationalised discursive practices as
a part of these broader organisational and cultural changes. Thus conversa-
tionalised discursive practices are open to contradictory investments, being
linked either to democratisation or to new strategies of control, and being
therefore themselves a focus of hegemonic struggle.
Returning to the example, I would suggest that it is difﬁcult to interpret 
the mixing of medical discourse and counselling discourse, in the sense of
arriving at a conclusion about the social value and import that it has, without
placing it in the context of longer-term transformations affecting orders of 
discourse, tendencies of the sort referred to in the previous paragraph, and the
current state of hegemonies and hegemonic struggles (including deployment
of technologisation of discourse) in the discursive sphere within the institution
concerned. In this case, I suspect there is at least an ambivalence about 
the mixing of discursive practices; it may instantiate a democratic and anti-
authoritarian stance on the part of the doctor, but it may also constitute the
imposition upon the patient of a new mode of control more in accordance with
contemporary cultural emphases.
This discussion points to the necessary interdependence of ‘micro’ ana-
lyses of speciﬁc discourse samples and more ‘macro’ analysis of longer-term
tendencies affecting orders of discourse, the construction and restructuring 
of hegemonies in the sphere of discursive practices, and language policy and
planning. These ‘macro’ dimensions constitute part of the context of any dis-
cursive event, and are necessary for its interpretation. Conversely, as I shall
argue in the next section, no account of discourse technologisation (or other
‘macro’ developments) can forgo an investigation of how planning initiatives
are received and responded to (adopted, paid lip service to, accommodated,
136
Discourse and sociocultural change


opposed), which can come only from analyses of speciﬁc discourse samples.
‘Micro’ and ‘macro’ analyses of discourse and discursive change are mutually
dependent.
3 Technologisation of discourse1
Technologisation of discourse is a process of intervention in the sphere of 
discourse practices with the objective of constructing a new hegemony in the
order of discourse of the institution or organisation concerned, as part of a
more general struggle to impose restructured hegemonies in institutional
practices and culture. In terms of the analytical method introduced in the last
section, it involves an attempt to shape a new synthesis between discourse
practice, sociocultural practice and texts. This is done through a process of
redesigning existing discursive practices and training institutional personnel
in the redesigned practices, on the basis of research into the existing discursive
practices of the institution and their effectivity (be it in terms of the efﬁciency
of organisational operations, the effectiveness of interaction with clients or
‘publics’, or the successful projection of ‘image’).
My use of the term ‘technology’ derives ultimately from Foucault’s analyses
of the alliance between social sciences and structures of power which constitutes
modern ‘bio-power’, which has ‘brought life and its mechanisms into the realm
of explicit calculations and made knowledge/power an agent of transformation
of human life’ (Foucault 1981). Technologies of discourse are more speciﬁcally
a variety of what Rose and Miller call ‘technologies of government’: ‘the strat-
egies, techniques and procedures by means of which different forces seek 
to render programmes operable, the networks and relays that connect the
aspirations of authorities with the activities of individuals and groups’ (Rose
and Miller 1989). Referring to liberalism as a mode of government, these
authors see the ‘deployment’ of ‘political rationalities and the programmes 
of government’ as ‘action at a distance’, involving the ‘enrolment’ of those 
they seek to govern through ‘networks of power’ incorporating diverse agents 
and ‘the complex assemblage of diverse forces – laws, buildings, professions,
routines, norms’. Discourse is, I would suggest, one such ‘force’ which becomes
operative within speciﬁc ‘assemblages’ with other forces.
Technologisation of discourse has, I think been accelerating and taking on
ﬁrmer contours in the past decade or so, but its lineage is longer. For example,
‘social skills training’ (Argyle 1978) is a well-established application of social
psychological research, and technology of government, which has a partially
discursive nature. Large units of practice such as interview are assumed to be
composed of sequences of smaller units which are produced through the 
Discourse, change and hegemony
137


automatic application of skills which are selected on the basis of their contribu-
tion to the achievement of goals. It is assumed that these skills can be isolated
and described, and that inadequacies in social (including discursive) practice
can be overcome by training people to draw upon these skills. Social skills
training has been widely implemented for training mental patients, social
workers, health workers, counsellors, managers, salespeople and public
ofﬁcials. One example given by Argyle is training in the ‘personnel interview’
(used for instance for disciplinary interviews in workplaces), which (and this
quotation points to the design element) ‘can make it a pleasanter and more
effective occasion’ (Argyle 1978).
I shall use the following list of ﬁve characteristics of technologisation of 
discourse as a framework for elaborating the deﬁnition given above.
1. The emergence of expert ‘discourse technologists’.
2. A shift in the ‘policing’ of discourse practices.
3. Design and projection of context-free discourse techniques.
4. Strategically motivated simulation in discourse.
5. Pressure towards standardisation of discourse practices.
There have long been specialists in persuasive and manipulative discourse,
but what we might call contempory ‘technologists of discourse’ have certain
distinguishing features. One is their relationship to knowledge. They are social
scientists, or other sorts of expert or consultant with privileged access to 
scientiﬁc information, and their interventions into discursive practice there-
fore carry the aura of ‘truth’. Another is their relationship to institutions. They
are likely to hold accredited roles associated with accredited practices and
routines in institutions, either as direct employees or as expert consultants
brought in from outside for particular projects. For example, ‘staff development’
and ‘staff appraisal’ are two recent additions to the institutional practices 
of British universities. Both the training of staff and the training of appraisers
are partly training in a variety of discourse practices – lecturing, organising 
seminars, interviewing, designing publicity materials, writing research 
proposals. And both directly employed staff and outside management con-
sultants are being drawn into specialised institutional roles and practices,
partly as discourse technologists. These relationships of discourse technologists
to knowledge and to institutions distinguish contemporary forms of discourse
technologisation from earlier forms of intervention in institutional discourse
practices.
Discourse practices are, I think, normally ‘policed’ – subjected to checks,
corrections and sanctions – though there is a great deal of variation in how
138
Discourse and sociocultural change


overtly or how rigorously. One effect of technologisation of discourse is, 
I suggest, to shift the policing of discourse practices from a local institutional
level to a transinstitutional level, and from categories of agent within particular
institutions (be it education, law, medicine) to discourse technologists as 
outsiders. In addition to a shift in the location of policing agents, there is a shift
in the basis of their legitimacy. It has traditionally been on the basis of their
power and prestige within the profession or institution that certain categories
of agent claimed the right to police its practices; now it is increasingly on 
the grounds of science, knowledge and truth – the discourse technologist as
expert as well as outsider.
Discourse technologists design and redesign what I shall call ‘discursive
techniques’, such as interviewing, lecturing or counselling, to maximise their
effectiveness and change them affectively – recall the objective of making a 
disciplinary interview ‘a pleasanter and more effective occasion’. Argyle recom-
mends that an interview should end with a review of what has been agreed 
and ‘on as friendly a note as possible’, suggestions about design which involve
the design of particular utterances (to be ‘friendly’) as well as the overall 
organisation of the interview. I suspect that the tendency is for techniques to
be increasingly designed and projected as ‘context-free’, as useable in any 
relevant context. This tendency is evident in training, where there is a focus
upon the transferability of skills – ‘teaching for transfer’ is a prominent theme
in recent vocational education, for example. Moreover, the projection of such
context-free techniques into a variety of institutional contexts contributes to a
widespread effect of ‘colonisation’ of local institutional orders of discourse by 
a few culturally salient discourse types – advertising and managerial and market-
ing discourse, counselling, and of course interviewing (Fairclough 1989b).
The redesign of discourse techniques involves extensive simulation, by
which I mean the conscious and systematic grafting onto a discourse technique
of discourse practices originating elsewhere, on the basis of a strategic calcula-
tion of their effectivity. I have in mind particularly simulation of meanings and
forms which appertain to the discursive constitution of social relationships
and social identities – which have ‘interpersonal’ functions in systemicist 
terminology (Halliday 1978). The recommendation that an interview end on
a friendly note is an invitation to the interviewer to simulate the meanings and
forms (those of language but also other semiotic modalities) of ‘friendliness’,
meanings and forms which imply and implicitly claim social relations and
identities associated more with domains of private life than with institutional
events like interviews. Opening frontiers between the private and the institu-
tional; institutional appropriation of the resources of conversation; conver-
sationalisation and apparent democratisation of institutional discourse
Discourse, change and hegemony
139


(already referred to above) – these are pervasive features of the technologisation
of discourse.
The ﬁnal characteristic of discourse technologisation in my list is that 
it constitutes a powerful impetus towards standardisation and normalisa-
tion of discourse practices, across as well as within institutions and different 
types of work. The importance of expert outsiders as discourse technologists,
the shifting of the policing of discourse to a transcendent position ‘above’ 
particular institutions, and the trend towards context-free discourse tech-
niques – all of these are centralising and standardising pressures upon 
discourse practice: pressures which meet with resistance, however, as I shall
suggest below.
The contemporary prominence of technologisation of discourse reﬂects
the increasing relative importance of discursive practices in certain areas of
social life, especially various types of work. It is well known that there has been
an increase in service industry at the expense of manufacturing industry, and
the ‘skills’ necessary for jobs in service industries are to a substantial extent
‘communication skills’. The quality of the ‘product’ in service industries often
depends largely upon discursive practices and capacities of workers. Even
within manufacturing industry, discursive practices are becoming more
important, as new technologies bring about a shift from repetitive and solitary
work on a production line to more variable work in teams. In a context of rapid
change in the nature of work, the engineering of change in discursive practices
assumes some importance.
The engineering of change in discursive practices is part of a process of 
cultural engineering and restructuring cultural hegemony – as Gramsci put 
it, ‘elaborating a new type of man suitable to the new type of work’ (Forgacs
1988: 234). For example, the simulation of conversational discourse in 
institutional settings – the ‘conversationalisation’ of institutional discourse –
has implications for the social identities of, and social relationships between,
those who operate in them. A professional such as a doctor or lawyer cannot
shift to a conversational mode of interaction with patients or clients without
taking on in some degree a new social identity, and projecting a new social
identity for the patient or client. These new identities draw upon models in
the ‘lifeworld’, the private sphere. The same is true where interaction between
managers and workers, and more generally those at different points on hier-
archical scales, becomes more conversational. However, the engineering of
social identity may have unforeseen pathological consequences; the widespread
simulation of conversation and its cultural values may lead to a crisis of sincerity
and a crisis of credibility and a general cynicism, where people come to be
unsure about what is genuine and what is synthetic.
140
Discourse and sociocultural change


People in their actual discoursal practice may react in various ways to 
pressures for change emanating from the technologisation of discourse: 
they may comply, they may tactically appear to comply, they may refuse to be
budged, or they may arrive at all sorts of accommodations and compromises
between existing practices and new techniques. The latter is perhaps the most
common and certainly the most interesting case. Study of such accommoda-
tions in the discursive practice of workplaces, for example, strikes me as a
likely source of insight into the actual impact of technologies of government on
practice, and into ongoing processes of change in social relations and social
identities.
I want to suggest that the production of discourse under such conditions of
change places producers in ‘dilemmas’ (Billig et al. (1988)) which are an effect
of trying simultaneously to operate in accordance with divergent construc-
tions of social relationships and social identities, and that these dilemmas lead
to accommodations and compromises which are manifested in the ambivalence
and heterogeneity of spoken or written texts.
Let me relate these suggestions to a speciﬁc example, an extract from a
British university prospectus (see pages 143 and 144), using the approach to
discourse analysis presented in the last section. The recent evolution of uni-
versity prospectuses reﬂects clearly pressures on universities to operate under
market conditions, and to ‘sell’ their courses, using discursive techniques
from advertising. Some of the changes that have occurred are immediately evid-
ent in the physical appearance of prospectuses; the typical course entry has
shifted in ten years from a couple of pages of quite dense writing to a mixture
of written text, colour photographs, and sophisticated graphics. But prospec-
tuses also show how academics have responded to the dilemmas that these
pressures have placed them in by accommodation and compromise. These
dilemmas centre upon the contradiction between a traditional professional- (or
producer-) orientated relationship between university and applicant, where 
the university is the ‘authoritor’ admitting or rejecting applicants according to
its criteria for entry; and a ‘consumer-orientated’ relationship being forced
upon universities by the economic position they have been placed in, where
the applicant is the authoritor choosing (as consumers do) among the range of
goods on offer. On the former model, a prospectus would focally give informa-
tion about courses and conditions of entry, on the latter model it would ‘sell’
courses. In fact, contemporary prospectuses attempt a balancing act between
these two discursive practices, and in terms of professional identities, they
show academics trying to reconcile being academics and being salespeople.
This dilemma shows up in the heterogeneity of the text, and in particular in
how its heterogeneity in terms of semiotic modalities and genres (written text
Discourse, change and hegemony
141


and photograph on the left, list of courses and graphic display on the right)
relates to its heterogeneity in terms of meanings, or more precisely speech
functions (the main ones are informing, regulating and persuading). Let me
begin with regulating. It strikes me as signiﬁcant that everything to do with
requirements imposed by the university upon the applicant – entry require-
ments, course requirements – is located in the synoptic right-hand section of the
entry. This allows requirements to be separated from any source or authoritor,
so that the problematic meaning (problematic, that is, in the consumer-orientated
model) of the university imposing requirements upon applicants does not
have to be overtly expressed. This occlusion is evident in the wording of the
graphic display: you will need rather than for instance we require shifts the
onus onto the student, and the agentless passives (will be accepted, candidates
who are offered places will be invited). In the written text, regulating is avoided,
and aspects of the degree scheme which might normally be seen as requirements
are semanticised in other terms. For example, in paragraph 3 taking courses in
several disciplines comes across as an assurance (students will gain valuable
experience) rather than a requirement; similarly in paragraph 4, taking the
three speciﬁed courses in the ﬁrst year comes across as a description (students
pursue . . . ) rather than a requirement.
Let me turn from regulating to the other two speech functions, informing
and persuading. The most fully persuasive modality is the photograph, which
positions the applicant in some unspeciﬁed but most attractive ‘American’
scene, co-constructing the potential student, the programme and the univer-
sity within a mythical ‘America’. The sentences of the written text on the 
other hand are in many cases ambivalent between informing and persuading 
– persuasion is certainly a signiﬁcant speech function, but in a mainly covert
form which anticipates substantial inferential work on the part of the reader
(as, of course, does the photograph). The opening paragraph for instance
appears on the face of it to consist of three bits of information (with lively as 
a transparently persuasive lexicalisation) – about the tradition of American
Studies at the university, the introduction of a specialised degree, and content
of the degree. The ﬁrst two sentences are in an overtly temporal relation-
ship marked by the contrast between present perfective and simple present
verb forms, and the temporal conjunct now. A little inferential work on the 
part of the reader can construct these markers and bits of information into 
a persuasive narrative according to which the degree is the culmination of a
cross-disciplinary tradition. Similarly in other paragraphs, persuasion is
mainly covert. The academic’s dilemma appears to be resolved through a
compromise; the written text is designed to persuade while appearing to be
merely informative.
142
Discourse and sociocultural change


There are many variants of such accommodations and compromises
between ‘telling’ and ‘selling’, reﬂecting the dilemmas of professionals in various
domains faced with commodiﬁcation and marketisation and pressure to use
associated discourse techniques. In Fairclough 1988b, I analysed the effect of
contradictory producer- and consumer-orientations and authoritor–authoritee
relations on the modality of a brochure about a bank’s ﬁnancial services. One
might also see the text analysed in the last section in similar dilemmatic terms:
in terms of the compromises effected by a medical practitioner in attempting to
adopt a patient-orientated counselling or therapeutic style of medical interview
while maintaining control over medically important aspects of the interview.
Similarly, Candlin and Lucas (1986) have shown how a family-planning coun-
sellor tries to reconcile contradictory pressures to control clients’ behaviour
Discourse, change and hegemony
143
Two pages from the Lancaster University 1990 Undergraduate Prospectus 
(see page 144)
Photograph of American scene 
[not reproduced here]
Lancaster students have always shown 
lively interest in American subjects, 
whether in the English, History, Politics 
or other departments. Now it is possible 
to take a specialised degree in 
American 
Studies. 
This 
degree 
combines 
different 
disciplinary 
approaches to the study of the United 
States and offers options covering 
American 
history, 
literature, 
and 
politics from the earliest colonial 
settlements to the present day.
In addition, American Studies majors 
will spend their second year at an 
American university, such as the 
University of Massachusetts at Amherst 
or 
another 
selected 
American 
university. Lancaster’s close American 
connections make 
it possible to 
integrate the year abroad into the 
degree, so that, unusually in British 
universities, the American Studies 
degree can be completed in three years. 
Special counselling will ensure close 
integration between the year abroad 
and the two years at Lancaster.
Degree studies at Lancaster call on 
specialists in a number of departments,
and, as with most Lancaster degrees, 
students will gain valuable experience 
in more than one discipline. But a 
substantial degree of flexibility is 
maintained, and it is possible for 
students to concentrate substantially on 
either history or literature or politics if 
they so choose.
The first year is largely devoted to 
providing a disciplinary grounding, and 
students pursue the normal first year 
courses in the History, English and 
Politics departments, taking American 
options where they exist. Thereafter the 
course of study is almost exclusively 
devoted to American topics, and may 
include the writing of a dissertation of 
an American theme.
American Studies graduates pursue 
careers normally associated with a 
humanities or social science education: 
education, 
business, 
journalism, 
publishing, librarianship, and social 
service, with the wider opportunities 
which may come from students’ transat-
lantic experience and perspective.
ancaster University 1
990 Undergraduate Prospectus 
Two pages from the Lancaster University 1


and yet as counsellors to refrain from any form of direction, through the indirect
linguistic realisation of speech acts. In all such cases, people are using discourse
as one medium in which they can attempt to negotiate their identities and their
relationships with others in problematical circumstances of change.
There is, however, a signiﬁcant gap between such practices of accommoda-
tion and compromise, and the impetus within technologisation of discourse
towards more standardised and context-free discourse practice; technologies
of government generate strategies of resistance. What appear in a social psycho-
logical perspective as attempts to resolve dilemmas appear in the perspective of 
a politics of discourse as discursive facets of processes of hegemonic strugglein
which the structuring of orders of discourse and of relationships between
orders of discourse is at stake. The outcomes are restructured orders of dis-
course, innovative mixing of genres, and the emergence of new genres and
144
Discourse and sociocultural change
B A Hons American Studies Q400
First Year
History (American options)
English
Politics
Second, Year
Four or five courses in American subjects taken at a 
United States university, including at least one 
interdisciplinary course.
Third Year
Four or five courses, normally from:
History:
The History of the United States of America 
Religion in America from Jamestown to 
Appomatox, 1607-1865 
From Puritan to Yankee: New England, 
1630-1730
The Great Alliance: Britain, Russia and the 
United States, 1941-1945 
Cold war America: The United States from 
Truman to Kennedy
English:
American Literature, 1620-1865 
American Literature, 1865-1940 
American Literature, 1940-1980
Politics:
The Politics of Race
United States Government: The Politics of the 
Presidency 
The American Policy Process 
United States Foreign Policy since 1945
Assessment: see under appropriate subjects.
YOU WILL NEED
Courses
A-level
O-level/GCSE
A pass in a 
foreign 
language
BBC/BCC 
normally incl. 
English
Amer-St
or other qualifications (IB, EB, Scottish Highers) at a comparable standard. 
AS*levels: will be accepted.
Interview policy: special cases only.
Open days: candidates who are offered a place will be invited.


sub-genres. One should also not exclude the possible appropriation of dis-
course technologisation by dominated social forces.
Let me note ﬁnally that important changes are taking place in language 
education and training in Britain (and I imagine elsewhere), for example, in
the new national curriculum for schools and in the ‘communication’ elements
of pre-vocational education programmes which seem to be closely linked to
technologisation of discourse. There is a new emphasis on oracy and spoken
language education, on face-to-face interaction and interaction in small groups,
sometimes explicitly justiﬁed in terms of changing communicative requirements
in work. And there is an extension to language of competence-based models of
education which see knowledge operationally in terms of what people can do,
and see education as training in skills. These new priorities and approaches
contrast with more traditional emphases on written Standard English. Their
emergence can, I think, be interpreted as the spread of a technologising 
orientation to discourse into the general educational system, most obviously
into vocationally orientated programmes, but also to a degree into the general
school curriculum. The competence- and skill-based approach harmonises
with technologisation of discourse in a number of ways: it focuses upon 
training in context-free techniques (skills); it is a pressure for standardisationof
practices; it ﬁts with autonomous notions of the self, each individual being
construed as housing a conﬁguration of skills which can be worked upon and
improved.
4 Conclusion
I have identifed technologisation of discourse as an emergent domain of 
language policy and planning, and have tried to locate it within a view of social
and cultural change which highlights the role of discourse, insisting at the
same time that discursive aspects of change, including policy and planning
dimensions, should be investigated with methods which integrate ‘micro’ and
‘macro’ modes of analysis.
Note
1. This section of the paper is a modiﬁed version of part of ‘Technologisation of
discourse’, N. Fairclough (1996) in Costas-Coulthard, C.R. and Coulthard,
M. (eds) Critical Discourse Analysis, Routledge.
Discourse, change and hegemony
145


6.
Ideology and identity change in
political television1
1 Introduction
T
his paper is an analysis of part of a late-night political television programme
entitled Midnight Special which was broadcast during the April 1992
British General Election campaign on Channel 4. The reporter is a well-known
TV presenter and ‘personality’ Vincent Hanna, and this part of the programme
features a panel of MPs, one from each of the three main parties (Conservative,
Labour, Liberal Democrat). I shall be using the framework for CDA described
in Paper 4. Let me summarise the argument of the paper. I want to suggest 
that the Midnight Special programme is complex, creative and productive
interdiscursively, that is, in its discourse practice. This is manifested through
a mixing of genres and discourses, including the mixing of elements of (i) con-
ventional political interview, (ii) simulated conversation, and (iii) entertainment
– performance, ‘act’, even including comedy routine. Following Tolson (1991),
we might group together the second and third of these as constituents of 
‘chat’, understood by Tolson as an institutionalised version of conversation
which serves as a form of entertainment (see further below). The generic and
discoursal mixture of the discourse practice is realised textually in hetero-
geneity: the text is heterogeneous in its meanings (ideational and interpersonal,
and both identity and relational aspects of the latter) and in their realisations in
the forms of the text. The complexity and creativity of the discourse practice
accords with the complex, unstable and innovative sociocultural practice it is
a part of. Putting the same points in different terms, the contradictions of the
sociocultural and discourse practice are manifest in the heterogeneities of 
the text. The discourse practice here is representative of a more general tend-
ency for the order of discourse of political broadcasting to be restructured,
speciﬁcally through a redrawing of boundaries between the discursive practices


(and orders of discourse) of the traditional political public sphere, the private
sphere of the ‘lifeworld’, and the media as institution of entertainment. This
restructuring of orders of discourse is one facet of a more general restructuring
of relationships between these domains of life. One might see this in terms of
the possible emergence of a new hegemonic structure in the domain of politics
and political broadcasting, and associated ideological changes affecting social
identities, social relations, and knowledges (see further below).
My analysis will focus upon a point in the programme immediately follow-
ing a report on a Conservative Party Election Broadcast which was centred
upon the origins and personality of the Prime Minister, John Major. The
extract is a discussion of the report between Vincent Hanna, the presenter,
and MPs Jonathan Aitken (Conservative), Robin Corbett (Labour) and
Simon Hughes (Liberal Democrat).2 I shall supplement this extract with 
others later. My main aims in the analysis of the ﬁrst extract are to illustrate 
the genre mixing referred to above; show how it is realised in heterogeneous
textual meanings and forms, which constitute identities, social relations, and
knowledges in complex and contradictory ways; and suggest that ambivalence
and disﬂuency are two notable and signiﬁcant features of this mixed-genre 
discourse.
(talk and laughter)
VH:
/splendid piece there by Fiona Murch# the arts 
correspondent . of Channel 4 news. now . . . you
struck me during that as if you weren’t sure whether
to laugh or throw up
5.
JA:
/well I’ll give him an Oscar (laughter) . in a loyal way.
(laughs) it looked to me rather attractive I mean it is
a good story you have to admit that
VH:
G yeah
JA:
Ithe boy from Brixton who’s made it to Number 10 e:
10.
left school at 16 it’s a G good yarn a good script. um
VH:
I (unclear)
JA:
I Gshould think John Schlessinger’s probably (voiced
VH:
I (but unclear)
JA:
hesitation) e:m done a ﬁrst class job I I’m looking for-
15.
ward to it. looking forward to seeing the real thing# =
VH:
=backing nervously away from this question Jonathan
G (unclear)
JA:
I what is the question sorry (laughter).
G I said I’d give him an Oscar (laughter)
20. VH:
I do you ﬁnd it (laughs)
/do you# ﬁnd it embarrassing that the . party 
leaders descend to this kind of .
Ideology and identity change in political television
147
/smiling# 
/smiling#
/laughing#


JA:
/no I think it’s G showbusiness it’s poli
I thing
25. VH:
JA
G
modern politics#
VH
I right
ﬁne OK
JA:
um . and (voiced pause) I mean I I wonder how many
votes are in it I mean . I think in the last election we
30.
just saw a s-soupcon of it there . Neil Kinnock’s
broadcast with the Beethoven’s 9th. it was an
VH:
G right
JA:
I outstanding G piece of
VH:
I Brahms Brahms 1st
35. JA:
/no it was Beethoven’s 9th
VH:
no
JA:
anyway . let’s not argue about the music# but it was the
um the rather stunning um presentation of Kinnock
/in a much better light than certainly I’d ever seen him 
40.
before# and . it didn’t make a tupenny ha’penny worth
of votes in the end . I mean the so I think it’s part of
the razzamatazz of electioneering but . /the British
people are not fooled by . any . director’s presenta-
tion I think in the end . uh it is the issues an and the
45.
substantive things that count
#
VH:
well from one practising journalist to another . /Ro#
Robin Corbett
I want to begin with the discourse practice and the mixing of genres. A 
preliminary point is that genres drawn upon within a text may be related to
each other in various ways. In this extract, we have both ‘sequential’ and
‘mixed interdiscursivity’ (Fairclough 1992a: 118): to some extent there is a
sequential alternation between parts of the text which seem to be primarily
political interview or primarily ‘chat’, but many particular parts of the text
(even down to individual clauses) are also interdiscursively mixed.
The most obvious presence of conventional political interview genre in 
the section of the programme from which the extract is taken is the control
exercised by VH over turn-taking and topic. In this part of the programme,
which is located between two reports, VH interacts with each of the politicians
in turn. Although VH does not always ask questions, his talk does count as 
elicitations which require (and receive) an on-topic response; so while there is
a direct question in lines 21–24 (do you ﬁnd it embarrassing that party leaders
descend to this kind of thing), VH’s contributions in lines 2–4 (you struck me 
as if you weren’t sure whether to laugh or throw up) and lines 16–17 (backing 
148
Discourse and sociocultural change
/smiling#
/smiling#
/smiling#
/sober#
/laughing# 


nervously away from this question Jonathan) are not questions, but are still
elicitations requiring responses. The elicitation in lines 16–17 might also be
taken as fulﬁlling the conventional interviewer’s responsibility to sanction an
interviewee who fails to answer ‘the question’. But if it is a sanction it is heavily
mitigated, by humour and by ﬁrst-name address: the difﬁculty for the interpreter
is to know whether the interpretative procedures associated with conventional
political interview apply in this case, given a general ambivalence of genre 
(see further below on ambivalence).
There are also elements of political discourse (on the distinction between
genre and discourse, see Paper 4), notably in lines 42–45, which consist of
two hackneyed formulae of political speech-making (‘the British people are
not fooled by . . .’; ‘in the end it is the issues . . . that count’). The shift into
political discourse is marked by but in line 42, and is accompanied by a shift to
a more measured delivery, and a sober facial expression which JA sustains
while the camera is on him even after he has ﬁnished speaking. Although I 
do not have the space to pursue this dimension of the analysis here, different
discourses and genres imply bodily as well as linguistic differences, and a text
which mixes genres and discourses may entail complex and hybrid corporeal-
ities (Threadgold 1989).
Turning to conversational elements in the generic mix, before VH speaks
there is a snatch of talk and laughter (from RC, I think) presumably directed at
the report, and VH’s ﬁrst word (splendid) is audibly said ‘smilingly’, and, in
fact, he is smirking through the ﬁrst part of this contribution. Such features
would be unproblematic in conversation but would not be expected in con-
ventional political interview, and the same is true of the elicitation directed by
VH at JA (you struck me during that as if you weren’t sure whether to laugh or
throw up), in terms of its force (it is a comment on JA’s apparent response to the
report), its use of a conversational formula for reporting someone taken aback
by events (‘x looked as if s/he didn’t know whether to y or z’), and style (note
the lexical selection of throw up), as well as perhaps the absence of an explicit
nomination of JA to respond. It is also conversational in the sense that it elicits
a personal response from JA ‘as an individual’ rather than as occupier of an
ofﬁcial political role (representative of the Conservative Party): a politician
would not standardly feel a need to answer such a comment in a personal way
even if it was made. Both VH in making the comment and JA in answering it in
a personal way show an orientation to their co-involvement, conversationally,
as individuals here rather than role-holders. A noteworthy feature of this
exchange and the extract generally, which is indicative of this conversational
orientation to person rather than position, is the density of ‘mental process’
clauses (Halliday 1994b). Some of the mental process verbal groups are:
Ideology and identity change in political television
149


struck (3), weren’t sure (3), looked (6), I should think (12), I’m looking forward
(14), do (you) ﬁnd (21), (I) think (23), (I) wonder (27). A number of these
operate modally as what Halliday calls ‘subjective’ modality markers, high-
lighting the subjective basis of commitment to propositions (there is an example
even of the political discourse of lines 42–45 – recall my earlier suggestion that
there is extensive mixed interdiscursivity). A further conversational feature of
VH’s talk are the responses he makes during JA’s contributions, in lines 8
(yeah), 27 (right, ﬁne OK), and 32 (right). Notice also how VH’s elicitation in
lines 16–17 ‘latches’ onto the end of JA’s contribution, giving it the force of a
rejoinder. In the disagreement about the music (lines 34–37), both VH’s inter-
ruption of JA to correct him and JA’s assertive and mock-outraged response
are again more typical of conversation than of conventional political interview.
VH’s opening elicitation/comment (you struck me as if you weren’t sure
whether to laugh or throw up) is also a humorous one, delivered in a deadpan,
ironic way which is part of VH’s style (and ‘personality’), and perhaps part of
the communicative ethos of the programme. (This is perhaps an example of
how ‘personality’ can be transformed into ‘product image’ in the leisure market,
indicating that the preoccupation with personality in the contemporary media
may not be the substantive concern for individuals that it is often represented
as being). Humour is a major element of this section of the programme, 
and it is systematically registered by the participants through their smiles 
and laughter. Although there is, of course, humour in conventional political
programmes such as Question Time, it is incidental, whereas here it is a 
basic and sustained feature of the talk. There is an element of ‘chat’ in the pro-
gramme, a form of witty conversation which is at the same time entertainment,
performance. In line 19, JA’s humorous response to VH’s (humorous) elicita-
tion (what is the question) has the split-second timing of a line in a comedy
double-act. Even some of the apparently serious parts of the programme 
have an undercurrent of humour. For instance, in JA’s serious answer to VH’s
(serious) question in lines 24–45, there are elements of ironic humour (e.g.,
we saw just a soupcon of it, lines 29–30). The ground rules of the programme
seem to require serious political talk not to be sustained for more than a few
seconds without being ‘lightened’ by humour (see further below). There is a
general correspondence in ‘key’ between VH’s elicitations and the responses
they elicit. In this case, for example, a humorous elicitation elicits a humorous
response, and its humour is also marked by JA’s smiling delivery. I shall have
more to say about the humour of the programme shortly in discussing its high
level of ambivalence.
Another aspect of the presence of elements of conversation and enter-
tainment/performance in the generic mix is the way in which viewers are
150
Discourse and sociocultural change


addressed and constructed in the programme. VH begins with direct address
on camera to the audience, before (now . . . you struck me) swivelling his 
chair sideways to face and address JA. It is a general feature of this part of the
programme that, except for VH at points of transition between report and 
studio discussion, the audience is not addressed, and indeed there is little 
surface evidence at all of orientation to audience or of contributions being
designed for viewers rather than co-participants. The talk is designed ostensibly
as if the studio were a private place and as if this were a private conversa-
tion. This is, of course, just an intricate pretence: like all broadcast talk, the
programme is in reality carefully designed for its audience. Interestingly, 
the pretence is at one point explicitly alluded to by Robin Corbett when he 
jokingly reveals a professional secret, ‘just . . . inside this studio because I
know it won’t go anywhere else’. Vincent Hanna joins in the joke by agreeing
with him (‘no’). The programme is constructed as a spectacle for, rather than
interaction with, the viewer, and viewers are positioned as voyeurs surrepti-
tiously observing the ‘conversation’ (including a substantial amount of close
observation of participants through camera close-ups). Yet at the same time
viewers are constructed in the Corbett–Hanna joke as ‘knowing’ with respect
to the pretence and the act.
The generic mix I have sketched out above leads to a text with complex and
contradictory meanings, in terms of the identities set up by/for participants
and audience, the relationships between participants, and between partici-
pants and audience, and the ‘knowledges’ which are constituted in the text.
Let me summarise some aspects of this as they show up in the extract. VH has
a composite identity as part political interviewer, part entertainer, and part 
conversationalist, and JA’s identity includes the two latter elements plus 
of course that of politician, and the relationship between them is correspond-
ingly complex (interviewer–politician, double act, co-conversationalists).
These complex identities and relations articulate together the three domains
of public (political) life, the media as a domain of leisure and entertainment,
and private life. And that articulation is anchored in, and condensed into,
speciﬁc personalities. These complex identities and relations are realised in
the language used, in the co-occurrence of heterogeneous meanings and
styles, some details of which I have referred to above. Although I am stressing
contradictoriness and heterogeneity, such language, identities and relations
can come in time to be naturalised (and indeed to an extent probably is now).
Audience members are as I have suggested positioned as voyeurs watching 
the conversation as an entertaining spectacle, but also through the elements of
more conventional political discourse in the programme as political subjects,
as citizens.
Ideology and identity change in political television
151


2 Ambivalence
One consequence of genre mixing which I have already referred to is that it
produces a great deal of ambivalence. Genres are associated with particular
principles of interpretation, so that the interpretation of any given linguistic
text will depend upon how it is contextualised generically. Where two or more
genres are operative, the question arises as to how they are hierarchised. For
example, interpreters might ask whether the extract above or a part of it is still
‘at bottom’ political interview so that interpretative principles associated with
interview should apply.
JA’s response to VH’s ﬁrst elicitation (lines 5–15) will serve as an illustration.
I am not sure whether to take it ‘at bottom’ as a conventional political response,
a defence of his leader, mitigated in a way which accommodates it to the
ground rules of this programme, or as a performance, an entertainment, 
where the audience is invited to share the joke of JA dutifully going through the
motions of defending Major. Let me pursue ﬁrst a reading according to the
interpretative principles of conventional political interview. As a politician in
an election campaign JA is bound to defend his leader against attack, yet in the
cultivated intimacy of studio conversation he cannot solemnly defend what is
commonsensically agreed to be indefensible – electoral ‘razzamatazz’. Being
positive about Major’s performance in the indirect, metaphorical and humorous
way of well I’ll give him an Oscar . . . in a loyal way allows him to reconcile
these conﬂicting demands. The rest of JA’s contribution (from it looked to 
me to looking forward to seeing the real thing) seems on the face of it a more 
serious defence of Major. It is very defensive (notice the ‘low afﬁnity’ modalities
it looked to me, I should think, probably, the ‘hedges’3 rather, I mean, and you
have to admit). There is also as VH points out a nervous quality to it, in the
repetitiveness and in its rhythm of delivery. But the apparent shift to a more
serious key is offset by the fact that JA continues to smile throughout, and by
lexical markers of continuing humorousness (the boys from Brixton, yarn). The
nervousness upon this reading might indicate the balancing act JA is trying to
bring off, aggravated perhaps by the potentially derailing interruptions which
VH seems to embark upon at two points (line 10) and the disafﬁliation which
VH expresses in the way he says yeah in line 8. Alternatively, however, one could
read JA’s answer according to the interpretative principles of entertainment: as
a joke which depends upon our recognition of JA going through the political
motions of defending his leader, where the conspicuous defensiveness and
nervousness (as well as in a loyal way)are so many cues to help us ‘see’ the joke.
There is a similar ambivalence about VH’s second elicitation (backing 
nervously away from this question Jonathan, lines 16–17). Like the ﬁrst, it is
152
Discourse and sociocultural change


not a question but a comment on JA’s answer. On one reading, VH is ‘at 
bottom’ operating in his role as interviewer and sanctioning JA’s failure to
answer the ‘question’, but mitigating the sanction with humour, with an indirect
formulation of it, and with ﬁrst-name address, in accordance with the ethos of
the programme. On another reading, there is no real sanctioning going on, it
is just a joking way of giving the ﬂoor back to JA.
3 Disﬂuency
The programme is characterised by a rather high incidence of disﬂuency.
Disﬂuencies seem to register the difﬁculties which participants are faced with
in trying to negotiate the mixed genres of the programme. The following 
contribution by RC follows an interaction between VH and SH about a sharp
rebuke administered by Paddy Ashdown to a journalist, which ends in a long
and seemingly uncomfortable pause. It is not clear whether RC takes it upon
himself to come to the rescue or whether VH nominates him non-verbally to
do so – VH does appear to turn towards RC during the pause.
RC:
well prickly Paddy Ashdown there eh . uh I mean I have uh
some sneaking sympathy for him except of course that . um . we:
. need to feed this monster . . television . in order to try and .
grub around for the extra handful of votes and you’re you’re
quite right . uh most of us will do : m— most things . the most
improbable things outside of an election period . to: snatch a
headline or better still get ten seconds . on ﬁlm . but . um . . I 
I agree to this extent I think that . um . . I don’t think uh . Paddy
should have put in exactly those words but I think there is 
a line to be drawn somewhere a judgement to be made it is . . 
is this wrong when I say this is our election and not yours . 
ours and the electors’ rather than television’s. 
VH:
well I— I mean you’re not wrong to say anything on this pro-
gramme (laughter) you can say what you want I mean I would I
hope it’s the voters’ election
The transcription only captures a part of what is going on, but nevertheless
RC’s disﬂuency is evident in the number and positioning of voiced (uh, um)
and unvoiced pauses, the false starts, and the anacolutha (constructions which
are started then abandoned, e.g., it is in line 10). RC’s opening (well prickly
Paddy Ashdown there eh seems to be a joke which does not come off, and there-
after he is manifestly struggling to put together a coherent contribution, his
discomfort even being registered at one point by a ﬂustered and anxious look
Ideology and identity change in political television
153
5.
10.
15.


from VH. It is an indication of RC’s lack of control that he effectively asks for
VH’s judgement on whether what appears to be his main point is legitimate (is
this wrong when I say this is our election and not yours). This is perhaps an
appeal for help, asking VH to rescue him from his discursive discomfort
(which he does not do).
Apart from instances of disﬂuency, there are points in the programme
where participants apparently fail to conform with its ground rules and ethos.
I include these with disﬂuencies because they also are indicative of difﬁculties
that participants have in negotiating the complex expectations of the pro-
gramme. On such occasions there is sometimes evidence of sanctioning
devices for keeping participants in order. The following extract includes RC’s
reaction to Major’s ‘performance’ in the Conservative election broadcast:
RC:
I don’t th— I shall be very surprised if that movie on
the basis of the snatch I’ve seen gets a any Oscar
nominations . the thing is a joke . . it’s an absolute
joke . . a bloke in the back of a chauffeur-driven car 
5.
. . uh . trying to send out the message you too can do
this sweetheart if you vote Tory . I don’t believe it.
VH:
Simon Hughes
SH:
that . particular . clip of ﬁlm looked pretty dire . 
I have to / say#
RC makes a rather sharp attack on the election broadcast which seems to be
treated as ‘over the top’ in terms of the programme’s ground rules and ethos.
Perhaps the camped-up ‘message’ you too can do this sweetheart if you vote
Tory is an attempt to mitigate the attack with humour, but it doesn’t appear to
come off; there is no audible or visible recognition of this as a joke. There is no
response to RC’s attack from VH – perhaps an indication that it is embarrassing
or reprehensible in the context of the programme – and VH, after a pause
which is perhaps just long enough to be uncomfortable, shifts squarely into
the conventions of political panel interview in simply nominating SH as next
speaker. SH’s contribution begins with a strikingly measured (in terms of
rhythm of delivery) and mitigated (through hedging – pretty dire, modalisa-
tion – I have to say, and his laughing delivery of say) critique of the broadcast
which ostensibly does adhere to what I think are the ground rules of the 
programme – that political point-scoring should be mitigated. This seems to
be a way for SH to dissociate himself from RC’s immoderate attack and get the
programme back on track. The example illustrates how participants can 
come unstuck in trying to negotiate the complex demands of this mixed-genre
154
Discourse and sociocultural change
/laughing#


format, and also the availability of sanctioning devices for keeping participants
in line with the ground rules and ethos of the programme.
A further illustration of sanctioning devices but also of ways in which a 
participant can try to pre-empt sanctioning is the following:
SH:
but the- there’s an interesting thing I mean I think that .
certainly the Labour Party last time and I under-
stand this time . and it looks like the Tory Party last time
and this time . are staging most of their leaders’ .
appearances
VH:
(unclear) what do you mean staging
JA:
don’t pretend Paddy Ashdown isn’t
G staging things (unclear)
SH:
I well well no it in a slightly different way what I
mean is the Labour Party had . ticket only rallies 
G membership only GraGllies . and and Neil Kinnock was
JA:
I hm
H
Ihm
VH:
I yes
SH:
only seen in front of his G own people . and it gave the
RC:
I yes yes
SH:
impression of solidarity and support . and Mrs Thatcher
again generally had a prearranged careful oppor Gtunity
VH:
Ithat’s
(indeed) for security G reasons
JA:
I hm
SH:
in in her case . much more than the leader of the opposi-
tion . fair to say . it looks as if John Major in the round .
members again supporters . people who are not going
to be hostile throw wobbly questions . I I have to say I
think Paddy doesn’t put himself in that position . the
meetings certainly the venues that I’m aware of . any-
body could turn up
G I mean it’s a risky it’s risky
VH:
I well it’s possible but then he is the only one of the
three party leaders who’s trained to kill
SH:
:/well yes G and maybe that#
/smiling#
JA:
I he’s the only one who has trouble 
getting a crowd
SH seems to take a great deal of trouble preparing the ground for what can be
construed as the political point-scoring which occurs towards the end of this
contribution. Firstly in claiming the ﬂoor for the point he wants to make he
types it as ‘an interesting thing’, which implies he is about to make an analytical
Ideology and identity change in political television
155
5.
10.
15.
20.
25.
30.


rather than a point-scoring contribution. Secondly, SH’s claims are carefully
and cautiously modalised: I understand in line 2, it looks like in line 3 with the
meaning of appearance foregrounded through look being heavily stressed and
carrying a falling intonation contour, it looks as if in line 22, and I have to 
say and I think (a sort of double modalisation) in lines 24–5. Thirdly, SH 
downtones his claims with hedges: slightly in line 9, generally in line 17.
Nevertheless, his claim about ‘staging’ is sharply challenged in lines 6–8 by VH
and JA. Thereafter, all the participants seem to be working at re-establishing 
a tone of reasonable discussion: the other participants’ audible responses
(lines 12, 13, 15) to SH’s conciliatory explanation in lines 9–18 signal agree-
ment and acceptance; VH’s intervention in 18–19 is a supportive clariﬁcation
rather than a challenge, and again SH is conciliatory in his response and
accepts VH’s point (‘fair to say’). There are no audible responses from the
other participants for the rest of SH’s contribution until VH interrupts SH
with a joke, followed by another from JA which also interrupts SH, which
deﬂate SH’s political point-scoring. All of the participants – SH in his cau-
tious design of his contribution, the others in their response – in this exchange
are demonstrating an orientation to the programme’s ground rules and to the
delicate balance which they require between serious (and especially partisan)
politics and chat: the former is tolerated if at all only in short bursts, and 
preferably mitigated by humour. The implicit message is that reasonable, 
fair-minded non-partisan discussion is acceptable (in moderation), but part-
isan point-scoring is not, especially when it is not mitigated, and is a fair target for
humorous attack.
4 Mediatised political discourse: a new hegemony?
Let me summarise the analysis so far in the terms of the CDA framework 
introduced in Paper 4. I have suggested that the Midnight Special programme
is characterised by a complex discourse practice involving the mixing of 
genres and discourses of politics, conversation and entertainment; that this
complexity is realised in heterogeneous and contradictory textual meanings
(identities, relations and knowledges) and forms; and that it leads, on the text
production side of the discourse practice, to disﬂuences and other difﬁculties
in managing the complex demands of this hybrid format, and, on the text
reception side, to considerable ambivalence.
I now want to comment upon how these properties relate to the sociocultural
practice which the discourse practice and the text are embedded within.
There are some difﬁculties in doing so, especially within the conﬁnes of a
short article. Firstly, an account of aspects of the social context at various 
156
Discourse and sociocultural change


levels of generality which may be relevant to reaching an understanding of the
discursive and textual features of the programme risks being a many-sided and
highly complex account in its own right. I can do no more than identify broad
themes here. Secondly, a full analysis would need to generalise over contem-
porary political discourse as an order of discourse and political broadcasting
within that, whereas all this paper does is refer to one programme which is
illustrative of one trend within that order of discourse. I think it is a particularly
signiﬁcant trend in the emergence of a new hegemony in political discourse,
but that can obviously be no more than a hypothesis.
I want to suggest that the discourse practice illustrated in this programme
is a signiﬁcant part in a shift in social practice which involves, in the terms of
Habermas (1989), a ‘structural transformation of the public sphere’ of politics.
One aspect of this transformation is a restructuring of the relationship between
the traditional sphere of politics, the media as a domain of entertainment, and
private life. Public life, including important elements in the political process
such as conferences, elections and proceedings of Parliament, has become
increasingly open to media coverage. However, there is a contradiction and a
gap between the public nature of media production and media sources, and
the private nature of media reception, which is embedded within a home and
family life. The gap has been bridged, as work by Cardiff and Scannell has
recently shown (Cardiff 1980, Scannell 1992) by a progressive (if not always
even) accommodation of public practices and discourses towards the private
conditions of reception. One aspect of this movement has been a ‘domestication’
(Cardiff) or ‘conversationalisation’ (Fairclough 1994) of mediated public 
discourse – though as I suggested earlier there are also more general cultural
conditions favouring conversationalisation, which is by no means conﬁned to
media (Fairclough 1994). At the same time, media consumption has evolved
as an important element of leisure activity, in which audiences expect relaxa-
tion and entertainment, and in which audiences are increasingly constructed
as consumers rather than citizens. ‘Chat’ has emerged as a genre in which an
institutionalised version of private discursive practice, conversation, becomes
a form of entertainment.
The mediatisation of politics has entailed a shift from the media merely
transmitting political events happening elsewhere whose nature was determined
autonomously, to the media generating its own political events (interviews,
debates, programmes such as Midnight Special) and political events which
happen elsewhere being reshaped to enhance their media worthiness. The
revaluing of ordinary life and its practices in the media goes along with a
devaluing of public, formal, impersonal, demagogic and so forth practices.
Correspondingly, we can perhaps see a restructuring of hegemony in the
Ideology and identity change in political television
157


sphere of political practice and political discourse which is placing the 
chatty, conversational, entertaining political discourse illustrated by Midnight
Special in an increasingly dominant position in the order of broadcast political
discourse, and the order of political discourse more generally. There is in this
connection a paradoxical quality to the programme: one of its main themes is
dismissing the ‘razzamatazz’ of electioneering and party political broadcasts,
what JA in the extract calls ‘showbusiness’; one thing that the participants
share is a cynical view of politics in that form. And yet the programme itself is
manifestly a form of ‘showbusiness’, an act, a performance. It is I think highly
signiﬁcant of the shift in dominance within the political order of discourse 
that more traditional forms of political performance attract general derision,
whereas other emergent forms are apparently acceptable.
What is at issue in the restructuring of the order of political discourse is 
the nature of politics in a fundamental sense, including: political beliefs,
knowledges, practices and representations; political identities; and political 
relations. In terms of the beliefs and knowledges, there is little space for 
serious debate of political issues, which is present only in a ﬂeeting and
ambivalent form; in terms of identities, politicians are reconstituted as ‘real’
individuals and personalities (a concept which, like ‘chat’, bridges the public
realm of entertainment and the private realm) and the political public is recon-
stituted as voyeurs and consumers of spectacle, yet at the same time ‘knowing’
about the conventions and illusions of the new political game; in terms of 
political relations, politicians and public are constructed as co-members of a
private domain culture whose dominant values are ordinariness, informality,
authenticity and sincerity. Issues of truthfulness and authenticity have perhaps
become more salient here than issues of truth.4
The features of the programme I noted above in the discussion of disﬂuencies
are of interest in the latter connection: on the one hand they indicate perhaps
the tolerability of disﬂuences and misjudgements in the new sphere of political
discourse, but on the other hand they perhaps suggest the risks for politicians
which go hand in hand with the opportunities offered by their new accessibility
and visibility (Thompson 1990: 247). Politicians are certainly losing their 
traditional mystique and authority, though this is not perhaps a development
which is explained only by the evolution of broadcast politics: there has been
a more general shift, or apparent shift, of authority away from professional
groups such as teachers, doctors and lawyers as well as politicians, which
some have taken to be entailed by a shift of authority towards consumers in
‘consumer society’ (Keat, Whiteley and Abercrombie 1994).
The changes I am pointing to, and which are illustrated in Midnight
Special, have I believe an ideological nature. Much ideological analysis of
158
Discourse and sociocultural change


media has focused upon stability and reproduction, but analysis of change in
media output and of relatively innovative types of programme such as this one
provides an opportunity for investigating the emergence of ideologies. In 
suggesting that, for instance, the representations of traditional politics and the
identities and relations set up for politicians and for the political public in 
this programme are ideological, I am assuming that (a) there is a difference
between the actuality of political practice and its representations in the media,
and (b) its representations in the media are enabling for real political practice,
speciﬁcally in (c) helping to sustain relations of domination which structure
real practice. I have some sympathy with the account in Pilger (1992) of appar-
ently ever-increasing openness and visibility of the political process being
underlaid by an increasingly secretive state engaged in more and more covert
operations, and an increasingly disciplinary society. In this light, the restruc-
tured order of political discourse has more of a legitimising function than a
democratising function, though the ambivalence of conversationalisation
which I referred to earlier precludes simple black-and-white interpretations.
Notes
1. This paper is based upon a presentation at a conference on media discourse 
at Strathclyde University in September 1992. I am grateful for comments of
other participants on the presentation.
2. Pauses are indicated as dots, one for a short pause and two for a longer pause.
Overlaps are shown by square brackets. Talk which is unclear is indicated in
round brackets, as are vocalisations such as laughter. Aspects of non-verbal
communication simultaneous with talk (including laughter) are shown in the
margin, and their onset and termination in the text are marked respectively as
‘/’ and ‘#’.
3. Modalities can be differentiated in terms of the degree of speaker afﬁnity with
(commitment to) a proposition (or a person) that they express – see Hodge and
Kress (1988). A hedge is a device for qualifying, toning down or mitigating an
utterance – see Brown and Levinson (1978).
4. In the terms of Habermas 1984, some parts of the media are perhaps manifesting
a shift in the relative salience of implicit validity claims, in favour of truthfulness
and sincerity, and at the expense of truth. I am grateful for this point to Martin
Montgomery and Sandra Harris, in their contributions to the conference 
mentioned in note 1.
Ideology and identity change in political television
159


This page intentionally left blank


S e c t i o n  C
Dialectics of discourse:
theoretical developments


This page intentionally left blank


Introduction
T
he two papers in this section were published in 2000 and 2004, though
an earlier version of the second (‘Critical realism and semiosis’) appeared
in 2002. The theoretical framework developed in the book which I co-authored
with Lilie Chouliaraki, Discourse in Late Modernity, informs the ﬁrst one in
particular, as does my book New Language, New Labour? The latter was
aimed at a general readership, whereas this paper addresses the contribu-
tion of CDA to research on change in governance with reference to the New
Labour ‘reform’ of social welfare in Britain for a more specialised readership.
Both of these papers contribute to the goal of strengthening CDA theoretically
which was part of the research programme I adopted in the late 1990s (along-
side strengthening CDA methodologically, and applying it in research 
projects on various themes – see the General Introduction). Papers which 
are more focused on methodology appear in Section D, though there is some
overlap between the two sections in theoretical and methodological concerns.
Several signiﬁcant theoretical developments are represented in these
papers.
1. Recasting CDA in terms of a differentiation of three levels of social life: the
level of social structures, the level of social practices, and the level of social
events and actions, with social practices being seen as mediating the rela-
tionship between (abstract) structures and (concrete) events and actions.
Each level has a semiotic (linguistic–discoursal) element or dimension:
languages (level of structures), orders of discourse (level of practices), texts
(level of events/actions).
2. Seeing CDA as a form of relational analysis, primarily concerned with 
relations, speciﬁcally (a) relations between semiotic and non-semiotic 


elements, (b) relations between levels, especially relations between texts
and orders of discourse, (c) relations within orders of discourse and within
texts. It approaches relations as articulations between semiotic and non-
semiotic elements (e.g., between discourses, material practices and events,
and non-semiotic elements of social relations) and between semiotic 
elements (e.g., between different discourses or different genres) which are
variable and change over time and space.
3. Seeing relations as dialectical, i.e., as relations between elements which 
are different but not discrete, where one element can be ‘internalised’ in
others.
4. Identifying action, representation (or ‘construal’) and identiﬁcation as
three primary, simultaneous and interconnected facets of social process
and social interaction, and genres, discourses and styles respectively as
their semiotic or discoursal elements or ‘moments’ at the level of social
practices.
5. Working with a realist and speciﬁcally critical realist ontology which
asserts that there is a real world which exists independently of our (always
limited) knowledge of it and of whether or how we represent it, rejects 
versions of discourse theory which collapse the distinction between reality
and discourse, yet also asserts that the real world is socially and discur-
sively constructed.
The ﬁrst paper in this section (‘Discourse, social theory, and social
research: the discourse of welfare reform’) illustrates a transdisciplinary way 
of working in CDA research. Adopting a transdisciplinary approach affects
the development of both theory and methodology in CDA; I argue in ‘A 
dialectical–relational approach to critical discourse analysis in social research’
in Section D that theory and methodology are far from being mutually exclu-
sive, that methodology has a highly theoretical character. A commitment to
transdisciplinary research is a particular way of interpreting a commitment to
interdisciplinary research. It sees the theoretical and methodological develop-
ment of the disciplines, theories or frameworks which come into dialogue
within such research as arising from that dialogue. In this paper I discuss a
transdisciplinary approach to political change, speciﬁcally change in modes of 
governing (or ‘governance’) associated with New Labour in Britain. I show how
this allows categories from sociological and political theories to be recontex-
tualised within CDA in order to enhance the capacity of CDA to contribute 
to deepening and strengthening transdisciplinary research on such issues.
This is not an eclectic ‘add-on’ of such categories; it implies a process of the-
oretical development to ‘translate’ them into CDA categories and relations.
164
Dialectics of discourse: theoretical developments


The main categories come from Bernstein’s sociology of pedagogy (the cat-
egories of recontextualisation, framing and classiﬁcation) and from Laclau
and Mouffe’s political theory (the categories of equivalence and difference). 
I show in the paper that CDA can make a stronger contribution to trans-
disciplinary analysis of the New Labour mode of governing which has been
used in the process of ‘welfare reform’ by ‘internalising’ these categories
within its own theory and methodology.
The second paper (‘Critical realism and semiosis’) was written with co-
authors who institutionally belong to a sociology department and have inter-
ests in (‘cultural’ and ‘moral’) political economy and a strong association 
with critical realism. The paper may present difﬁculties for readers whose
background is in discourse studies because its focus is if anything more on 
theoretical issues in critical realism than on issues for CDA. Nevertheless it is
a signiﬁcant paper for CDA, because it suggests that CDA can contribute to
addressing weaknesses hitherto in critical realism in its treatment of semiosis.
The paper addresses three main issues. First, it argues that critical realism
has tended to neglect issues of semiosis or discourse, and that this is a weak-
ness which needs to be corrected. It also argues that critical realism has the
capacity to go beyond the commonplace claim that semiosis can have real
effects on, or produce changes in, social practices, social institutions and so
forth by providing explanations of how it can have such effects. From a critical
realist perspective, semiosis can be a cause as well as having meaning, so that
the study of semiosis requires in classical sociological terms not only the per-
spective of verstehen (interpretative understanding) but also the perspective 
of erklären (causal explanation). However, this claim depends on a particular
(‘non-Humean’) view of causality, adopted within critical realism, which dis-
tinguishes causal powers or potentials (of, for example, semiosis) from actual
causal effects, which depend upon context. But so far these issues have been
addressed in critical realism mainly in the form of the claim that ‘reasons can
be causes’, which is implicitly a claim about the causal powers of semiosis, but
fails to give an adequate semiotic account of reasons, and to recognise that the
causal powers of semiosis are not limited to reasons. So if critical realism were
to attend more to semiosis, it could provide better explanations of the latter’s
‘constructive’ effects than exist elsewhere.
Second, in so recognising the importance of semiosis and its effects in
social analysis, it is vital not to ignore the extra-semiotic factors and conditions
‘that make semiosis possible and secure its effectivity’ (including bodily and
practical know-how and skills, the habitus of social actors, and the constraints
and affordances of the material world). This is a rejection of the ‘discourse-
imperialism’ that characterises much recent social theory, which collapses the
Introduction
165


distinction between semiosis and materiality, and treats semiosis as a play of
differences among signs without extra-semiotic conditions and limits. The
relationship between semiosis and various extra-semiotic factors (actors,
social relations, practical contexts etc.) is a dialectical internal relation i.e. they
are different but not discrete (see above). A distinction is drawn between 
construal (how things are construed or represented) and construction (the
material effects of construals), where the move from the former to the latter is
contingent on extra-semiotic as well as semiotic conditions.
Third, the paper gives a critical realist account of semiosis in social struc-
turation, the dialectical interconnections between social structures and 
social action, which incorporates the evolutionary mechanisms of variation,
selection and retention. Given that social life constantly produces variation
(innovation, change) in both semiotic and extra-semiotic features of social
phenomena, what factors condition which variants are selected (taken up,
adopted, widely disseminated) and retained (institutionalised, materialised,
have structural effects)? We propose a list of speciﬁcally semiotic conditioning
factors. We also discuss the nature of semiotic structures (languages, and
‘semiotic orders’ or orders of discourse) and their elements (e.g., genres, dis-
courses and styles), and analyse examples of the emergence of new semiotic
features through the texturing of interdiscursive relations (between different
discourses) in texts, and of how emergent semiotic features may ‘ﬂow’ and
‘resonate’ between social ﬁelds and across social scales.
166
Dialectics of discourse: theoretical developments


7.
Discourse, social theory, and 
social research: the discourse of
welfare reform
R
ecent social theory includes important insights into language which con-
stitute a so far underdeveloped resource for socially oriented research 
on language and discourse. But much of this theory stops short: theoretical
frameworks and categories which socially locate language are not pushed in
the direction of a theorisation of language itself, which limits their operational
value in research. Socially oriented research on language can draw upon social
theory to produce more sophisticated theorisations and analyses of language
which at the same time constitute contributions to social theory.
My aim in this paper is to explore what it means to work in a transdiscip-
linary way. I argue in particular for a transdisciplinary engagement within
social theory and analysis in which the logic of one theory is put to work in the
elaboration of others without the latter being simply reduced to the former.
My focus is upon CDA which I here take to be a part of a broadly conceived
social linguistics. I shall link this theoretical exploration to a concrete research
focus by referring to a discourse analytical study of the current British (‘New’)
Labour government, with particular reference to its ‘reform’ of social welfare.
I shall be drawing upon the theoretical framework developed in Chouliaraki
and Fairclough (1999). I have referred to some of the social theory which I ﬁnd
particularly fruitful to work with, but the paper is intended to suggest a way 
of working and in no sense offers a closed list of theorists – on the contrary, 
I believe that we should be open to a wide range of theory.
1 Sociolinguistic theory
The Editorial of the ﬁrst issue of the Journal of Sociolinguistics committed it
to promoting the ‘building of sociolinguistic theory’, arguing that on the one


hand sociolinguistics has often been only ‘weakly social’ in failing to connect
with social theory, and on the other hand language-oriented traditions in
social science have ‘shunned the technical resources that linguistics and
semantics offer’ (Bell et al. 1997). I agree with Coupland’s more recent claim
(Coupland 1998) that there is a profound interest in language in recent social
theory. This constitutes a so far undeveloped potential for socially enriching
sociolinguistics and socially oriented research on language more generally,
including CDA. At the same time, there is a pervasive failure among social the-
orists to operationalise their theorisations of language in ways of showing in
social research speciﬁcally how language ﬁgures in social life. This is partly a
matter of theory stopping short – theoretical frameworks and concepts which
centre language within social life are not pushed in the direction of theorisa-
tions of language itself. So I agree with Coupland that socially oriented
research on language can advance social theory – though I see this not as a 
simple add-on, but as a transdisciplinary relationship wherein the logic of one
theory is put to work within another (Dubiel 1985, Halliday 1993, Fairclough
1997). Coupland argues that a single integrated social theory of language is
both implausible and undesirable, I would argue that integrated theorising is
crucial: much recent social theory is committed to overcoming the unproduc-
tive divisions between ‘macro’ and ‘micro’ theories or ‘structure’ and ‘action’
theories by centering its theorising on the dialectic of structure and action
(Bhaskar 1986, Giddens 1991, Bourdieu and Wacquant 1992, Archer 1995),
and I believe that we should follow the same route.
2 The place of social linguistics in social research 
on modernity
The interest in language in recent social theory is substantially attributable to
understandings of modernity which in one way or other centre upon language
or imply an enhanced role for language in modern social life as compared with
pre-modern social life. The turn to language in recent social theory resonates
with a turn to language in recent social life. But different theoretical categories
are used to reference similar perceptions of social change within modern 
society: for some theorists it’s a ‘turn to language’ (or semiosis), a ‘narrative
turn’, an ‘argumentative turn’ and so forth; for others a ‘cultural turn’, or an
‘ideological turn’, or ‘a knowledge turn’. These are of course not simply 
different terms for the same thing, because the theoretical differences are
sometimes substantive, but they do nevertheless constitute different takes on
broadly the same sorts of social change. Part of the difﬁculty of the category of
‘discourse’ is that it slides between such different theorisations.
168
Dialectics of discourse: theoretical developments


The turn to language is evident in various narratives of modernity which 
to some degree centre on language, e.g., the narrative of modernity as time–
space compression and ‘globalisation’ (Giddens 1991, Harvey 1990, 1996).
Social systems are contrasted in terms of their properties of temporal and 
spatial distantiation, the extent to which social relations are ‘stretched’ in time
and space. Whereas social relations in pre-modern societies were centred
upon people being co-present, modern society has involved a progressive
‘stretching’ of social relations, so that in contemporary (or ‘late modern’) 
society there is a compression of time and space to the point where relations 
of power can be instantaneously enacted on a global scale, e.g., massive 
movements of capital can destabilise economies and governments in a matter
of days. Time–space compression disembeds persons and practices from 
particular local contexts, and undercuts traditions – it entails a process of
‘detraditionalisation’ and a corresponding enhancement of the reﬂexivity 
of social life, understood as living social life on the basis of knowledge about
social life. People live in ways which are increasingly mediated by discourses
which construct work, family, gender (femininity, masculinity), sexuality 
and so forth in particular ways, which emanate from experts attached to 
social systems and organisations, and which come to them through the mass
media (print, radio, television, the internet). If the ‘texts’ of early modern 
society were printed, it is this multi-semiotic discourse (combining especially
language and image) that constitutes the ‘texts’ of late modern society. We
might say that contemporary social life is ‘textually-mediated’ – we live our
practices and our identities increasingly through such texts. This implies a
more central role for discourse, for language and other forms of semiosis, 
in contemporary social life in comparison with earlier social life.1 There are
other narratives of modernity which centre discourse in different ways (for
instance, Habermas’s version of critical theory, the post-structuralist and
postmodernist theories of Foucault, Lyotard and Baudrillard, the post-
Marxism of Laclau and Mouffe, and the feminist theories of Butler, Fraser and
Haraway).
In addition to such ‘grand narratives’, the dialogue with social theory 
needs to include more middle-range and local social theory which opens up
empirical work on speciﬁc ﬁelds, such as the theories of Bourdieu (1988,
1991) and Bernstein (1990, 1996). These two theorists at once complement
the grand narratives and draw them into analysis of particular ﬁelds, and
together open up a sociological theorisation of discourse. If we develop the
categories of CDA in a transdisciplinary way through internalising the logic 
of these theories, we can operationalise this theorisation in ways of analysing
discourse (Chouliaraki and Fairclough 1999).
Discourse, social theory, and social research
169


If theories of modernity ascribe in one way or another a central place to 
language, they tend not to specify how it does the social work that is ascribed
to it. What is missing is a theoretical speciﬁcation of the social power of lan-
guage which could be operationalised as ways of showing in detail within 
particular social research projects how language and other forms of semiosis
perform the social magic which they are credited with. Smith’s work is a case
in point. It is immensely valuable in producing a feminist sociological account
of the social effectivity of texts in contemporary social life, without specifying
how texts have these effects. This is where discourse analysis (and more
broadly social linguistics) can contribute to developing social theory. But 
this should not be conceived of as simply adding existing theorisations of lan-
guage onto existing social theories. It is rather a matter of each internalising the
theoretical logic of the other, and allowing it to work within its own theorising.
It is a matter for instance of doing discourse analysis and developing the 
theoretical categories of discourse analysis in a way which tries to work with
Smith’s concept of textually mediated social life, and of doing sociological
analysis and developing sociological categories in a way which tries to work
with discourse analytical concepts such as ‘interdiscursivity’ (Fairclough
1992a) – in short, developing one theory in dialogue with another, being open
to having one theory transformed through internalising the logic of another.
What I shall speciﬁcally do in this paper is explore how discourse and text
analytical categories might be developed through internalising certain social
theoretical logics. The social theoretical logics I shall discuss relate to the the-
orisation of: (a) social practices (Althusser and Balibar 1970, Mouzelis 1990);
(b) different and competing practices (for Bernstein, ‘coding modalities’)
within a given ﬁeld (Bernstein 1990, 1996); (c) processes of classiﬁcation in
social practices as processes of differentiation and dedifferentiation (‘equi-
valence’ in Laclau and Mouffe’s (1985) terms). Let me emphasise that my aim
is not to produce a ﬁnished re-theorisation, but to explore what it means to
work in a transdisciplinary way.
3 New Labour
I shall give the theoretical concerns of the paper a particular focus by referring
to a discourse analytical study I am currently working on, on the political dis-
course of the ‘New Labour’ government in Britain (Fairclough 2000b). I shall
refer in particular to New Labour’s ‘reform’ of social welfare.
The Labour Party won the general election of May 1997 in the UK under
the leadership of Tony Blair with a substantial majority after eighteen years 
of Conservative government. Under Blair’s leadership, Labour came to the
170
Dialectics of discourse: theoretical developments


conclusion that its successive defeats indicated that it needed radically to
reposition itself. Major changes of policy took place including the revision of
‘Clause 4’ of the Party’s constitution, amounting to acceptance of capitalism 
in its new ‘global’, ‘neo-liberal’, form. Referring to the Party as ‘New’ Labour
was also seen as important in convincing the electorate that Labour really 
had changed. This went along with a shift in the focus of the Party’s appeal
towards ‘middle England’, the relatively prosperous middle class and upper
working class many of whom had supported the Conservatives. Although such
matters of interpretation are inherently controversial, the Labour Party is
widely perceived as becoming a party of the centre rather than the centre-left.
The repositioning of ‘New’ Labour has involved signiﬁcant changes in British
politics and government. It represents itself as initiating a ‘new politics’, a 
politics of the ‘Third Way’, which transcends the division in British politics
between the (‘old’) left and the (‘new’) right. There is a new political discourse
which combines elements from Thatcherite Conservative discourse with ele-
ments of communitarian and social democratic discourses (a favourite way of
summing this up is ‘enterprise as well as fairness’ – ‘enterprise’ is a Thatcherite
word, ‘fairness’ is ‘New’ Labour’s preferred alternative to the social democratic
‘equality’). There is an attempt to ‘reinvent’ (or ‘modernise’) government,
involving new forms of ‘partnership’ between the government, business, and
the voluntary sector. And there is a change in political style which is most 
obvious in the leadership style of Tony Blair. What is open to question is
whether the ‘new politics’ of ‘New’ Labour constitutes a new form of social
democracy (Giddens 1998), or is a neo-liberal politics which is essentially a
continuation of the Thatcherite ‘new right’ (Marxism Today 1998).
Given that political and governmental processes are substantively linguistic
processes, there is a clear general rationale for using the resources of language
and discourse analysis in researching politics and government. However, the
case is even stronger for New Labour, not only because there has been an
unprecedented focus on questions of language both within the government
itself and among those who have commented on it, but also because the ‘rein-
vention’ of government (Perri 6 1997, 1998) seems to entail a relative ‘turn to
discourse’ in the way government is conducted. In particular, a move towards
a more ‘networked’ form of governing involving what New Labour calls ‘part-
nerships’ with for instance business and the voluntary sector (as opposed 
to a hierarchical-bureaucratic form of governing) means that government
becomes more ‘dispersed’ among agencies whose activities cannot be directly
overlooked from the centre (though the shift towards such networking is in
tension and contradiction with New Labour’s drive for strong central con-
trol). The emphasis consequently shifts to government interventions to
Discourse, social theory, and social research
171


change ‘cultures’ (‘cultural governance’). For example, the government is
intent on introducing ‘customer-focused services’ in welfare and public ser-
vices, treating the public as customers and consumers. Changing the ‘culture’
of government agencies in that direction is very much a matter of changing the
language, getting staff to adopt and internalise a new language (e.g., renaming
claimants as ‘customers’). At the same time, the government is giving unpreced-
ented attention to how its policies and actions are represented in the media, 
to putting an advantageous media ‘spin’ on everything it does, and therefore 
to carefully designing its language (Fairclough 2000b).
4 Texts and social practices
My objective in this section is to work with the logic of a theory of social 
practice in order to specify theoretical categories for the social analysis of texts
(text, texture, genre, discourse, style, intertextuality, order of discourse), and to
show how the theoretical framework which emerges from this can be used in a
textually oriented political analysis of New Labour.
4.1 Social practices
The analysis of social practices constitutes a theoretically coherent and
methodologically effective focus for social scientiﬁc research (Bhaskar 1986,
Bourdieu and Wacquant 1992, Archer 1995, Chouliaraki and Fairclough
1999). The great strength of the concept of practice is that it allows analysis 
of social structures to be brought into connection with analysis of social
(inter)action – see further below.
All social practices involve forms of work, identiﬁcation, that is the con-
struction of social identities, and representations of the social world (this is a
reworking of Mouzelis (1990) – see also Chouliaraki and Fairclough (1999)).
All social practices are practices of production – work. In claiming that all
social practices are work, the aim is not economic reductionism, but on the
contrary to insist that people collaboratively produce their social lives in all
domains of life, so that economic production is only one special form of social
production. All social practices can be characterised in terms of the materials
they work on, and the means of production available (techniques, methods,
theories), and the social relations within which they produce (Althusser and
Balibar 1970: 41). Furthermore, all practices involve identiﬁcation, the con-
struction of social identities – every practice is associated with particular 
‘positions’ for people (Bhaskar (1986) refers to the ‘positions-and-practices
system’) in terms of which their identities and social relations are speciﬁed.
172
Dialectics of discourse: theoretical developments


However, there are different ‘performances’ in these positions depending 
on the social (class, gender, ethnicity, etc.) memberships and life histories of
those who occupy them (Archer 1995), and different identities attach to dif-
ferent performances. Finally, people also produce representations of the social
world, including representations of themselves and their productive activities
– people never simply act, their representations of their actions and domains
of action are an inherent part of action, action is reﬂexive. Different representa-
tions tend to be produced from different positions.
4.2 Texts – the dialectics of discourse
A social practice as a practice of production brings together different elements
of life into a speciﬁc local relationship – types of activity, spatial and temporal
locations, material resources, persons with particular experiences, know-
ledges and wants, semiotic resources including language. We can roughly 
distinguish four major categories of elements: physical elements, sociological
elements, cultural and psychological elements, and text (or ‘discourse’ as 
an abstract noun). I understand ‘text’ in a broad sense, including spoken as 
well as written language, and combinations of language with other forms of
semiosis including gesture and visual images. In that these diverse elements
are brought together to constitute a practice, we can call them ‘moments’ of
that practice (Harvey 1996). A focus of analysis is on processes of ‘articula-
tion’ (Laclau and Mouffe 1985) – on how elements are brought together as
moments within practices, which may achieve stabilisation as relative per-
manencies, but may also be disarticulated. In being articulated together within 
a practice, elements are transformed. The moments of a practice are in a
dialectical relationship – each moment ‘internalises’ the others without being
reducible to any of them (Harvey 1996). It is in this sense that text is physical
activity, is power, is knowledge and desire, etc., yet at the same time something
different from all of them. Each of the four categories of elements contributes
its own distinctive generative powers to the production of social life, though
the generative powers of each works through the mediation of the generative
powers of the others. From this ‘critical realist’ perspective (Bhaskar 1986,
Collier 1994, Archer 1995) it is relevant to ask, what is the distinctive genera-
tive power of text? The question of how texts ﬁgure in social practices, how 
in speciﬁc terms they are dialectically related to other moments, has to be
answered empirically practice by practice, and for each of the three major aspects
of practices distinguished above (work, identiﬁcation, representation).
What is the distinctive generative power of text? What in Hasan’s terms is
the ‘semologic’ (Hasan 2000)? It is the power to socially produce, i.e., to work,
Discourse, social theory, and social research
173


in its textual moment; the power to produce texts. I shall refer to this as 
‘texturing’, adapting the term ‘texture’ from Systemic Functional Linguistics
(Halliday and Hasan 1976). So the production of social life in social practices
is partly the production of texts. The creativity of texturing as a mode of social
production consists in generating new meanings through generating new
combinations of elements of semiotic systems (including new ‘wordings’).
Any difference of wording entails a difference of meaning, though the nature of
that difference is a matter for social negotiation and renegotiation as wordings
are repeated in shifting contexts (Derrida 1978, Hasan 2000). Is the genera-
tive power of text attributable purely to properties of language and other 
semiotic systems? Language and other semiotic systems are open systems
with an unlimited capacity to make meaning through generating syntagmatic
and paradigmatic connections. Yet there is also a social structuring of semiotic
diversity – the social order of discourse (see below) – which limits the genera-
tive capacity of language and other semiotic systems by limiting the combina-
torial possibilities of genres and discourses. What I am suggesting is that there
is a double structuring of the semiotic, the structuring of semiotic systems 
and the structuring of orders of discourse, and that the speciﬁcation of the
generative power of text needs to be in terms of both.
4.3 Genres, styles and discourses
I shall give a speciﬁc interpretation to the categories of genre, discourse, and
style in terms of the theoretical framework above.
For any particular practice, the question of genre is the question of how
texts ﬁgure (in relation to other moments) within work, the production of
social life, and therefore within the social interaction that constitutes work.
Different genres are different means of production of a speciﬁcally textual sort,
different resources for texturing. Social production, i.e., work, both produces
social life and reproduces social life; it is simultaneously creative and conser-
vative. Our theorisation of genre must capture that; Bakhtin’s (1986) theory 
of genre is indispensable in its subtle combination of the relative ﬁxities of 
genres and their openness to new articulations.
The question of styles is the question of how text ﬁgures (in relation to
other moments) in the identiﬁcation of people involved in the practice (the
construction of identities for them, and differences between them). Different
styles attach to different identities.
The question of discourses is the question of how texts ﬁgure (in relation 
to other moments) in how people represent the world, including themselves
and their productive activities. Different discourses are different ways of 
174
Dialectics of discourse: theoretical developments


representing associated with different positions. They constitute different
visions of, for instance, the ﬁeld of government and the wider conjuncture of
social ﬁelds it is a part of, and different classiﬁcation (or di-visions) of that
social world.
4.4 Field, order of discourse, intertextuality
There is one further important characteristic of social practices – they are
organised into networks. Networks are more or less stable, more or less 
ﬂuid. Networks articulate together different forms of work (social relations),
different identiﬁcations, and different representations, corresponding to the
different practices they combine. Practices are networked together within 
particular areas of social life which have a relative internal coherence and are
relatively demarcated from others (for instance, politics, or education).
Following Bourdieu, I shall call these ‘ﬁelds’ (Bourdieu and Wacquant 1992).
Both the internal organisation of ﬁelds, and the way social life is divided
between ﬁelds, are open to change. The social relations of ﬁelds are relations of
power and struggle, in which the external boundaries and internal structure 
of the ﬁeld are stakes. Since social practices are always networked within
ﬁelds, analysis of the textual moment is always concerned with specifying 
how different genres, different discourses, and different styles are articulated
together in particular sorts of relationships. We can use the term ‘order of 
discourse’ (Fairclough 1992a) to talk about ﬁelds as relative permanences
speciﬁcally in terms of these articulations within the moment of text. The term
‘intertextuality’ (or ‘interdiscursivity’, Fairclough 1992a) can be used on the
other hand to talk about shifting articulations of genres, discourses and styles
in speciﬁc texts.
4.5 Structure and action
‘Men (sic) make their own history, but not of their own free will; not under 
circumstances they themselves have chosen but under the given and inherited
circumstances with which they are directly confronted’ (Marx 1973). A pre-
occupation in recent social theory has been how to overcome the unproduc-
tive divide between theories of structure and theories of action, though the
quotation from Marx above symbolises a long tradition of dialectical thinking
about structure/action. Theorisations and analyses oriented only to structure
are incomplete because structure as well as being the precondition for action
is the outcome of action, is transformed in action. This is what Bhaskar (after
Giddens) calls the ‘duality of structure’ (Bhaskar 1986). Theorisations and
Discourse, social theory, and social research
175


analyses oriented only to action are incomplete, because action not only 
produces social life, it also reproduces structures which are its precondition.
This is what Bhaskar calls the ‘duality of praxis’. Social science should include
theories and analyses of both structure and action, and of their interconnec-
tion. Social analysis based upon social practices and positions constitutes a
theoretically coherent and methodologically effective focus for social research
precisely because it allows structure and action to be brought into connection
(Bhaskar 1986). On the structural side, positions within practices are pre-
given ‘slots’ in which people have to act, and the position–practice system 
has a relative durability over time. But, on the action side, although positions
are deﬁned abstractly for collective actors, they are occupied by individuals
who belong to diverse categories of social agent (working class, middle class;
women, men; black, white; and so forth), and who have an individual sense of
self (Archer 1995). The dynamics of the social and individual relations played
out in practices transcend and transform the position–practice system.2
Analysis of the textual moment of social practices mediates between the
perspective of action, that is the speciﬁcity of the particular text, its speciﬁc
forms of intertextuality, and the perspective of structure, i.e., the order of 
discourse. The order of discourse is seen as both a precondition for and 
constraint on textual action, texturing as a mode of work, and an effect of 
textual action, both reproduced and transformed through textual action. The
categories of genre, style and discourse are understood in a way which fac-
ilitates movement between the perspectives of structure and action. They are
categories both of the order of discourse and of the text. Genres, styles and 
discourses are on the one hand relatively permanent elements of orders of 
discourse, and on the other hand instantaneously and shiftingly constituted 
in speciﬁc texts in ways which may to a greater or lesser degree reproduce or
transform the permanences of orders of discourse. Those who favour neat-
ness may regard this tension within the categories as simply confusing, but it 
is essential to a dialectical movement between the perspectives of structure
and action in the analysis of texts and discourse.
4.6 New Labour, government and text
The ﬁeld of government can be seen from the perspective of this paper as a 
network of social practices, which changes over time and varies from place to
place. Therefore, to characterise the ﬁeld of government in a particular time
and place, one needs to look at how exactly practices are networked together.
Part of that exercise is looking at the textual moment of the ﬁeld, at how differ-
ent genres, discourses and styles are articulated together within its order of
176
Dialectics of discourse: theoretical developments


discourse. Some changes in practices and orders of discourse can be iden-
tiﬁed with speciﬁc governments, others are longer term. Although the speciﬁc
network of practices under New Labour is distinctive, some of its features are
longer term and apparent, for instance in the Conservative governments
which preceded it.
The ‘reinvention of government’ (Perri 6 1997, 1998) under New Labour
involves shifts in the ﬁeld of government. We can think of this as shifts between
the ﬁeld of government and other related ﬁelds which transform the ﬁeld of
government itself – the ‘inside’ of government is transformed through trans-
formations in its relationship to the ‘outside’. This involves shifts in the rela-
tionship between the ﬁelds of government, politics, media, market research,
business, voluntary work, and so forth. Shifts in these relationships are inter-
nalised as a new conjuncture of practices constituting the ﬁeld of government
itself (the ﬁeld of government selectively ‘takes in’, recontextualises (Bernstein
1990, 1996), practices of politics, media, market research and so forth). For
instance, the state becomes ‘managerial’, incorporating business manage-
ment practices into government (Clarke and Newman 1997). This applies
also for the textual moment: government under New Labour is a new order 
of discourse, a new articulation of genres, discourses and styles. Althusser 
and Balibar (1970) characterise practices of production in terms of the sort of
‘effects’ they produce. The work of government produces social effects (new
social practices and conjunctures of practices) through producing political
effects (groupings and alliances of people around/behind desired social
effects). Part of the analysis of a particular form of government is specifying 
the genres of government, the textual means of governing and producing the
effects of government.
New Labour has meant changes in the genres of government, including
changes in which genres are articulated together and how they are articulated
together, for instance, ‘focus group’ discussion has been incorporated into the
array of genres, and articulated with more mainstream genres through the
mediation of research reports and press releases which ‘translate’ focus group
discussions into forms which can then be incorporated into, say, ofﬁcial docu-
ments. Or again, media genres such as the press release or newspaper feature
article have taken on a more prominent role among the genres of government
and come in a sense to dominate mainstream governmental genres (Franklin
1998). At the same time, the adoption of more ‘managerial’ practices in govern-
ment means that mainstream genres such as consultation documents 
(so-called ‘Green Papers’) have also changed (see below). In broad terms, New
Labour has accentuated the longer-term shift towards achieving the effects of
government through managerial rather than political means. This means that,
Discourse, social theory, and social research
177


in terms of the textual moment, the political discourse of New Labour is a 
promotional discourse, which avoids and excludes political dialogue.
Another part of the analysis is the speciﬁcation of the range and distribu-
tion of political discourses and their relationship to positions within the 
political ﬁeld. New Labour has had a radical impact on political discourse
through the discourse of the ‘Third Way’, which has appropriated much 
of the Conservative discourse of Thatcherism (and is in that sense ‘post-
Thatcherite’ (Driver and Martell 1998)) which it has combined into a new mix
with elements of communitarian and social democratic discourses, leaving the
Conservative Party ﬂoundering in search of a distinctive political discourse 
of its own.
A third part of the analysis is specifying the distribution of political styles,
and how they ﬁgure in the constitution of identities and differences. These
include the identities of parties, tendencies and individuals. New Labour has
(especially through the person of Tony Blair) achieved a dominant political
style, a textual construction of an identity which is effective in conveying its
mix of values (youthfulness, compassion, toughness, etc.) and capturing the
cultural mood. (I am writing in the northern hemisphere spring of 1999 – this
might, of course, change.)
5 New Labour welfare ‘reform’: the textual moment
I focus now on analysis of the textual moment of a speciﬁc aspect of New
Labour in government, the ‘reform’ of social welfare. I shall pursue the theme
of working in a transdisciplinary way by drawing upon other theoretical logics
in addition to the theorisation of social practice – speciﬁcally, Bernstein’s 
sociological theory of the ﬁeld of pedagogy (1990, 1996), and Laclau and
Mouffe’s theorisation of hegemonic struggle (1985).
5.1 ‘Reform’ of social welfare
One of the major commitments of the ‘New’ Labour government is the
‘reform’ of the welfare state. I use scare quotes for ‘reform’ to indicate that it is
a contentious representation of what the government is doing – for instance, 
in the words of an Observer editorial (14 February 1999) an ‘anodyne’ term
which represents as ‘neutral, technological and essentially benign’ what can
otherwise be represented as ‘the salami slicing of welfare beneﬁts’ and ‘the
rebasing of the welfare state around means-testing rather than universalism
and income redistribution’. The government argues that ‘reform’ is necessary
because the system is increasingly expensive yet ineffective in relieving
178
Dialectics of discourse: theoretical developments


poverty and ‘tackling’ social exclusion, and encourages a ‘dependence’ on
welfare among people who could work. Welfare state reform in Britain is in
many ways analogous to reforms underway elsewhere – the US shift from 
welfare to ‘workfare’ for instance is widely recognised as having been a model
for New Labour, and there are similar attempts at reform in other EU coun-
tries. But international ‘neo-liberal’ tendencies to reduce welfare provision 
do not preclude national speciﬁcity: Clarke and Newman (1997, 1998) argue
that the post-war British welfare state was part of speciﬁc social and organisa-
tional ‘settlements’ which have been ‘unsettled’ by radical social change (e.g.,
in gender relations).
Welfare reform is a major process which is likely to extend over several
years. I shall focus on just one point in that process, the publication of the 
so-called ‘Green Paper’ on welfare reform. A Green Paper in the British system 
is a consultative document in which the government sets out options and its
own position and solicits public discussion. It is a preliminary to legislation.
The welfare Green Paper (entitled ‘New Ambitions for Our Country: A New
Contract for Welfare’) was published in March 1998. This particular point 
in the reform process itself involves a network of practices, and in its textual
moment a network of genres, discourses and styles.
5.2 Generic chaining
The production of effects within the ﬁeld of government depends upon the
constituent practices articulated together (networked) within it being ‘chained’
together in particular ways. For instance, there are two practices whose posi-
tioning in these chains seems to be regarded by commentators as distinctive
for government under New Labour. The ﬁrst is ‘experiments in democracy’
(Giddens 1998) such as using focus groups and citizens’ juries (e.g., the ‘People’s
Panel’). One view of the function of such experiments is in testing reactions to
government initiatives as part of a wider strategy for managing consent. The
strategic location of these legitimising exercises in the chaining of practices 
is important. So too is the location of enhanced forms of media management
which have been critically referred to as ‘government by media “spin”’ (Franklin
1998), which can be seen as part of the shift towards ‘cultural governance’
(which entails a preoccupation with representations and the control of repres-
entations). One feature of New Labour noted by commentators such as Franklin
is that every move by government appears to come with a prepared media
strategy, implying a chain structure punctuated by media-oriented practices.
One aspect of texturing as work (social production) in a textual mode is 
the arrangement of genres in what we can call ‘generic chains’ as part of the
Discourse, social theory, and social research
179


chaining of practices, i.e., the regular sequential ordering of different genres.
We ﬁnd generic chains of the following general form in the welfare reform 
process: . . . speech <press release> – (media reports) – document <press
release> – (media reports) – speech <press release> . . . That is, a document
such as the Green Paper on welfare reform is likely to be prepared for and fol-
lowed up by speeches on the part of important ministers, but each of these
(like the document itself ) comes with its own press release (systematically
incorporating a media ‘spin’ – see below on this term), and each subsequent
move in the chain is responsive to media reactions to earlier moves. Practices
such as focus groups may be inserted into such chains through research
reports which also come with press releases attached. On occasion press 
conferences will also ﬁgure in such chains.
The press release for the Green Paper on welfare reform is reproduced in
Appendix 1 (see pages 193–6). I shall begin the analysis of it here, but go into
more detail in Section 5.6. This is a ‘boundary’ genre which links the ﬁelds of
government and media, and it is apparently a combination of two genres: a
media genre – a press report, with the familiar beginning of headline + lead;
and a governmental (administrative) genre or rather sub-genre (i.e., occurring
as part of other genres) – a set of background notes. The latter also hybridises
the former: the date and reference number between the headline and lead
paragraph. The ‘report’ is also a resource for producing reports, and the latter
part of it consists of important elements of that resource – key principles of 
the Green Paper, key quotes from Field and Blair. It is in a sense an ofﬁcial
summary, but a summary which selects and orders what it summarises with a
partly promotional intent. In this respect too the ‘report’ hybridises media and
governmental genres. It is a sort of ‘transitional’ genre. In sum, the hybridity 
of the press release as a genre arises from its positioning in generic chains.
The process of summarising is crucially important not only in press
releases but throughout the practices of government. The Green Paper itself
includes its own internal summaries – the ﬁrst chapter is a summary of the
whole document; there is a summary of the main points in the last chapter; 
the Prime Minister’s Foreword incorporates his summary; the press release
constitutes a summary oriented to media uptake, and the document is then
summarised over and over again in speeches. It is through summarising that
media ‘spin’ is added. By media ‘spin’ I mean a particular representation of an
event or series of events (including a speech or a document) designed to man-
age the way they are perceived by the public. Differences in summaries are also
signiﬁcant in the negotiation and contestation of political differences within
the government as well as between the government and other parties and inter-
ested groups and organisations. Summarising is a form of representation and
180
Dialectics of discourse: theoretical developments


is linked to the question of discourses – the different summaries referred to
above involve differences in discourses.
5.3 Recontextualisation
Summarising can also be seen as an aspect of what Bernstein calls ‘recon-
textualisation’ (1990, 1996). Every practice (and every network of social 
practices – every ﬁeld) recontextualises other social practices according to
principles which are speciﬁc to that practice/ﬁeld, which derive from the par-
ticular form of social production (work) associated with that practice/ﬁeld.
For instance, the press release is a practice which here recontextualises
according to its own particular logic two other practices: a press conference
held by Frank Field to launch the Green paper, and the documentary practice
of the Green Paper itself (also Blair’s Foreword as a distinct genre or perhaps
sub-genre within that practice). Practices in being recontextualised are so to
speak uprooted, torn from their own social circumstances, and they appear 
in the recontextualised form of discourses.3
The concept of recontextualisation draws attention to the link between
production (work) and representation: the way other practices are repres-
ented depends on the work that is going on, as well as different positions 
occupied by people who are involved in the work. Using the concept of recon-
textualisation to think about the textual moment draws attention to links
between genres (ways of working in the textual mode) and discourses (textual
representations). It points to processual ways of analysing texts, which see
representation as an ongoing process within the social dynamics and struggles
of work. This entails a close link between analysis of genres and analysis of 
discourses (and indeed analysis of styles). But in order to move in this direc-
tion we need to look elsewhere for a perspective and categories which will
allow us to operationalise a processual view of representation. I suggest we 
can ﬁnd them in the political theory of Laclau and Mouffe (1985). But further 
categories of Bernstein’s are needed to make that connection: the categories 
of ‘framing’ and ‘classiﬁcation’. Thinking with these categories is a way of
socially enriching the text-analytical categories of ‘genre’ and ‘discourse’.
5.4 Genre and framing
‘Framing’ in Bernstein’s theory is a matter of control – in the terms I have been
using, the control and regulation of work, i.e., of social production, and there-
fore of the action and interaction which constitute work. Framing according 
to Bernstein is either ‘strong’ (where control is one-sided) or ‘weak’ (where
Discourse, social theory, and social research
181


control is shared). I want to suggest, following Chouliaraki (1998), that it is
productive to think of genres as devices for framing, i.e., as means for control-
ling work in a textual mode. Framing is a matter of both properties of individual
genres and the chaining of genres. In the case of welfare reform, the chaining
of genres constitutes a strong ‘framing’ of its process of production, i.e., one
facet of the powerful one-sided control and management of the process of
achieving political consent by the government. I shall focus in this section on
one chapter of the Green Paper itself (Chapter 3, ‘The importance of work’),
returning to the press release in Section 5.6. Readers will ﬁnd the ﬁrst 14 para-
graphs of the chapter (there are 40 in all) in Appendix 2 (see pages 196–200).
The Green Paper consists of a (signed) Preface by the Prime Minister, Tony
Blair, followed by a Summary of the whole document, Chapter 1, which sets
out the case for welfare reform, Chapter 2, which identiﬁes four ‘ages’ of wel-
fare, and eight ‘key principles’ of welfare reform which constitute the topics 
of Chapters 3–10. Chapter 11 is about the longer-term future of welfare, 
and there is an Appendix on the evolution of social security.
I have already suggested that the political effects of government in the pro-
duction of consent are sought by New Labour not through political dialogue
but through management and promotion, despite representations of the 
welfare reform process which suggest otherwise (e.g., ‘It is vital that reform 
is informed by a full debate on the proposed framework’, Summary chapter,
paragraph 31). The framing of this promotional practice of governance is
strong; that is, the government tightly and unilaterally controls the process.
Referring speciﬁcally to the Green Paper, it is characterised by a strongly
framed promotional genre.
Each of the central chapters (3–10) is structured as follows: a chapter title
(‘The importance of work’ in the case of Chapter 3) below which there is a
coloured box containing one of the eight ‘principles’ of the proposed welfare
reform. In this case ‘Principle 1’: The new welfare state should help and encour-
age people of working age to work where they are capable of doing so. There is
then an unheaded introductory section focusing on past and present welfare
practices, and the case for reform (paragraphs 1–5); a section headed ‘Policy
Direction’ taking up the bulk of the chapter (paragraphs 6–40) setting out
proposed future welfare practices; and under the heading ‘Measures for
Success’ a short list of criteria against which the success of the proposed
reforms will be judged (end of paragraph 40). Each of the chapters tells 
readers what the case is for welfare reform but above all what the government
has done, is doing and intends or aims to do in the way of welfare reform.
In these accounts, welfare reform is represented as a managerial process of
problem-solving, ﬁnding solutions to obstacles in the way of the objectives
182
Dialectics of discourse: theoretical developments


formulated in the eight ‘principles’, with the problem-solver represented as
virtually exclusively the government itself. Speciﬁcally in this chapter: work is
the means of averting poverty and welfare dependency, but there are obstacles
to people working, so the government will take certain steps to facilitate work.
This argumentative structure is repeated in places within the central ‘Policy
Direction’ part of the chapter, though its focus is heavily on the ‘solutions’ (the
predominant type of clause has an actional process with the government 
as agent – what the government has done, is doing, or will do). Representing
welfare reform as managerial problem-solving and structuring these central
chapters of the document in terms of problem-solving is part of what makes
the genre promotional: the government’s policies are sold as merely technical
solutions to an agreed problem.
Although in the nature of things there are many unanswered questions at
this consultative stage in the reform process, no questions are asked:4 the
grammatical mood is declarative. The potential for questions is indicated by
their marginal presence at the end of the Summary chapter where the reform
process is constructed as debate:
it is also vital that reform is informed by full debate on the proposed frame-
work. We are consulting widely on the content of this Green Paper and 
we want your views. For instance, how can we best deliver on our guiding
principles? Are there ways in which the policy direction can be improved?
Are our tracking measurements for success right?
Statements are categorical assertions – again, although in the nature of things
there are uncertainties about what has happened or what is the case and hesita-
tions about what should be done, there are no ‘maybes’ here. The government
is constructed as in full and solitary control. The simulation of certainty and
being in control are part of the representation of welfare reform as problem-
solving and part of the promotional rhetoric of the document.
Moreover, there is a slippage between the process of consultation over pro-
posed welfare reform and the process of implementation, between consulta-
tion document, planning document, and publicity document. This is evident
in the use of coloured boxes (eight in all) in the chapter. These boxes contain
bullet points or in one case numbered points, with or without headings. Such
boxes are widely used in planning documents. The clearest example of this
sort of use is at the end of the chapter, the ‘Success Measures’: there is no 
discussion of ‘success measures’ as part of welfare reform, just a list of four
measures, as if this were itself a planning instrument in the implementation of
welfare reform. Such boxes are also widely used in publicity. The document
Discourse, social theory, and social research
183


oscillates between describing the proposed welfare reform, and publicising it,
as it might publicise particular schemes to claimants in implementing the wel-
fare reform. Welfare reform is not simply represented as problem-solving in
the document (which would be a matter of what discourse is drawn upon), it
is enacted as problem-solving – there is an ambivalence of genre.
These boxes ﬁgure as a structuring device: they mark and signal to readers
careful authorial planning of and tight control over the text and texturing.
They are a resource for strong framing, strong unilateral control by the writer
(the government) over the texturing. For instance, the box in paragraph 5 lists
in their sequential order the main sections of the ‘Policy Direction’ part of 
the chapter which takes up 35 of its 40 paragraphs. The boxes also ﬁgure as a
pedagogical device, directing the reader to the main points and the main struc-
tures of the projected new world of welfare. These are ‘reader-friendly’ but
also thereby reader-directive features, which construct the social relations of
the document as asymmetrical relations not only between the one who tells
and the one who is told but also more speciﬁcally between teacher and learner,
with strong classiﬁcation (insulation) between the two subject positions (see
Section 5.5). The many section headings work in a similar way.
There is an oscillation between informing and persuading (‘telling’ and
‘selling’) throughout the document – correspondingly between the social rela-
tions of ‘telling’ constructed in the pedagogical way referred to above, and the
social relations of ‘selling’ (relations between the one who sells (persuades)
and the one who potentially buys (accepts)). Take paragraphs 5–7 as an 
example. One aspect of this oscillation is the shift between third person (‘the
government’, paragraph 5, the ﬁrst and third sentences of paragraph 6, the
second sentence of paragraph 7) and ﬁrst person (‘we’, the second sentence of
paragraph 6 – notice the explicit commitment to changing culture, ‘cultural
governance’, the ﬁrst sentence of paragraph 7). This oscillation between ‘the
government’ and ‘we’ occurs throughout the document in the ‘solutions’ part
of the problem–solution structure. Notice that ‘we’ is open to an ambivalence
which is an aspect of the promotional character of the genre; for instance, is the
‘we’ of ‘our ambition’ in paragraph 6 the government, or the Labour Party?
and more generally, is the Green Paper government report or party ‘propa-
ganda’? Another aspect of the oscillation between informing and persuading
is the shift in explicitness of evaluation. The two sentences with ﬁrst person
are also the two most explicitly evaluative – the ﬁrst including the noun ‘ambi-
tion’ which has a marked positive evaluation in contrast with ‘aim’ (which
occurs here twice as a verb), and ‘nothing less than’; the second including sev-
eral words/expressions which are positively (ﬁrst two) or negatively (second two)
evaluative in this context: ‘comprehensive’, ‘break the mould’, ‘old’, ‘passive’.
184
Dialectics of discourse: theoretical developments


5.5 Discourse and classiﬁcation
I referred earlier to different discourses constituting different visions (repres-
entations) of the social world which are also classiﬁications or divisions. If
genres are framing in its textual mode, i.e., forms of control, discourses are
classiﬁcation in its textual mode, i.e., forms of power. Discourses are forms of
what Bourdieu calls ‘symbolic violence’ (Bourdieu 1991). Discourses classify
people, things, places, events etc. – and indeed other discourses. The central
question is what sort of boundaries and ‘insulations’ (Bernstein 1990) are set
up between discourses. The recontextualisation of practices as I said earlier
transforms them into discourses, and imposes upon them classiﬁcations 
and divisions, variably according to different positions in the recontextualing
practice. Classiﬁcation may be strong or weak (Bernstein 1990) – entities may
be sharply or loosely divided, strongly or weakly insulated from each other.
The Green Paper selectively recontextualises social practices to constitute
a discourse of social welfare, a vision of the world of welfare. The ﬁrst division,
classiﬁcation, is between what is included and what is excluded – the analysis
of discourses has to attend to absences as well as presences. For instance, the
population of the world of welfare in this discourse of social welfare is a sparse
one, consisting essentially of the government and welfare claimants. Welfare
staff ﬁgure in a very few instances, and a claimant organisation (‘lone parent
organisations’) only once in this chapter – claimant and campaign organisa-
tions are rare in the document as a whole. On the other hand, welfare profes-
sionals such as doctors are simply absent.
The second division is among the entities (persons, things, events, dis-
courses etc.) which are included. This ‘internal’ classiﬁcation is strong – 
in the case of persons included within the world of welfare, the government
and welfare claimants are strongly divided, insulated from each other. 
Overwhelmingly, the agent in actional processes is the government – ‘the 
government’, ‘we’, or a government initiative such as one of the ‘New 
Deals’. Overwhelmingly, claimants ﬁgure as goals or beneﬁciaries in actional
processes. The government acts, claimants are acted upon. Welfare staff rarely
act, welfare professionals never, and claimants generally only where their
actions are initiated/managed by the government (e.g., in paragraph 9: it aims
to help young unemployed people . . . to ﬁnd jobs). The dominance of the
government over the process of welfare reform enacted in the strong framing 
is in a sense repeated in the strong classiﬁcation, the exclusive agency of the
government in the represented world of welfare.
Claimants (and staff ) do, however, ﬁgure if only marginally in another 
participant role: as agents in verbal processes and experiencers in mental 
Discourse, social theory, and social research
185


processes, mainly in paragraph 14. There is also a scatter of other examples
elsewhere in the chapter where claimants are subjects of mental process 
verbs (e.g., ‘the vast majority of single parents want to work’, ‘some people 
feel forced to give up their job’). These can be seen as recontextualisations 
of what people say in other practices; they take the form of reports of particu-
lar things people have said or thought (i.e., they are ‘reported speech’ and
‘reported thought’). In the reporting of speech, the practice that is being
recontextualised is sometimes explicitly identiﬁed, and sometimes not. 
Here it is not, but it is evident that the practice is market research (opinion
polls, surveys, perhaps focus groups) – that is the only practice reported in
terms of what claimants (and staff ) say or think. Notice in particular the way 
in which thought is reported, e.g., in ‘the vast majority of single parents 
want to work’: not only is the practice where these ‘wants’ were expressed
unspeciﬁed, so also is who precisely expressed them (possible alternative: 
‘in a poll of single parent opinion, the vast majority of those asked said they
wanted to work’). The government speaks for these people. Part of the
classiﬁcation which divides the government from claimants is that the latter do
not act (without government management) but do react (verbally, mentally),
though both the ways in which they react and how reactions are represented
are controlled by government (van Leeuwen 1995). One might say that this
‘reinvented’ form of government includes market research as a technology 
for legitimising the government speaking for the public. Apart from these ex-
amples, what others (including relevant others such as welfare professionals,
claimant groups) say is not reported. The Green Paper is monological, 
univocal, dominated by the voice of the government and excluding other
voices.
The government’s welfare reform policy is summed up as ‘welfare to work’,
getting people off welfare and into work, so the practice of work is heavily but
again very selectively recontextualised. A key issue is what is seen as included
within the practice of work – what ‘work’ is. Work is overwhelmingly con-
structed in the document as ‘jobs’ in the traditional sense – relatively stable
and regular work providing enough to live on. The fact that an increasing pro-
portion of work is casual, part-time, and poorly paid, is not focused upon in
the document. Nor is the question of whether, for example, women’s work in
households counts as ‘work’. Recent debate over what should count as ‘work’
does not ﬁgure – whether e.g., governments should deliberately stimulate 
the ‘third’ (e.g., voluntary) sector and legitimise it as ‘work’ (Giddens 1998).
This is an aspect of the ﬁrst division, between what is included and what is
excluded: these other discourses of work are not explicitly included, though
they do have an implicit presence.
186
Dialectics of discourse: theoretical developments


For the most part, the word ‘work’ is used without modiﬁcation to mean
‘jobs’ in the sense above. However, there is a shift to the expression ‘paid work’
twice in the document, once in paragraph 1 of Chapter 3. Why this shift? It is
signiﬁcant that it occurs here, at the beginning of the chapter dealing centrally
with work. The shift is informationally backgrounded – ‘paid work’ in sen-
tence 3 is the unmarked theme and is thus constructed as simply a repetition
of ‘work’ in sentence 1. There is no explicit contrast between paid and other
sorts of work. Nevertheless, the shift does implicitly signal a contrast – the
speciﬁcation of ‘work’ as ‘paid work’ is an implicit acknowledgement that
there are other understandings (and discourses) of work. There is also a 
trace of an alternative discourse of ‘work’ later in the chapter in Paragraph 9
which is the only such case in the document. A list of ‘opportunities’ for 
young unemployed people includes: ‘work with an employer who will receive
a job subsidy’, ‘work with a voluntary sector organisation’, and ‘work on 
the Environmental Taskforce’. Only the ﬁrst is a ‘job’ in the usual sense. On 
the other hand, when the document refers to what parents do in caring for 
children, it does not refer to that activity as ‘work’. As with reported speech 
so with discourses, an important variable is whether they are attributed (to
voices) and located (in practices). What we have here is a covert recontextual-
isation of what people say about work in other practices (not of speciﬁc things
they say – not reported speech as above – but more abstractly of their dis-
course) which neither attributes nor locates this discourse.
The Green Paper is cut off from debates over the nature and future of work,
through strong classiﬁcation which is manifested in the exclusion of relevant
other voices, and in the dominance of one discourse of work over an alterna-
tive which is only covert. Yet one might think that these debates are crucial for
a policy which depends entirely on moving people from welfare into work,
given that the number of ‘jobs’ in the traditional sense is shrinking. Without
some fundamental rethinking of the nature of work, the policy looks at best
incoherent, at worst dishonest.
By contrast with the representation of work, there is a diversity of dis-
courses in the representation of the social relations of welfare within the 
document, and that diversity is evident to a degree in the introductory section of
this chapter, speciﬁcally in paragraph 5, which includes the following repres-
entations of the practices of the new world of welfare: ‘promote work’, ‘help
people move from welfare to work’ (and in Principle 1, ‘help and encourage
people to work’), ‘develop ﬂexible . . . services’, ‘responsibilities and rights
are fairly matched’. The construction of the social relations of welfare as 
‘helping’ relations has been central to the British welfare state, but ‘helping’ is
mainly focused in this document on getting people off welfare and into work.
Discourse, social theory, and social research
187


‘Promoting’ and ‘developing ﬂexible . . . services’ by contrast belong to a
managerial discourse, and the former connotes cultural intervention. There is
also legal/contractual discourse in ‘responsibilities and rights’. But the main
feature of the construction of the social relations of welfare is the mixture of
bureaucratic/professional welfare discourse (‘helping’ etc.) and managerial/
cultural (‘promoting’ etc.), with the latter predominant. An example of the 
latter is in paragraph 21 of Chapter 3: ‘personalised’, ‘ﬂexible’ services are
‘delivered’, through a single ‘gateway’ for ‘customers’ by ‘personal advisers’
who develop ‘tailor-made action plans’ for individuals. There is a new dis-
course here which ‘relexicalises’ (Fowler, Hodge, Kress and Trew 1979) wel-
fare services. Cultural effects can be achieved in so far as the government can
win acceptance for such shifts in discourse and the new identities and values
they entail. In so far as this document represents (as it is claimed to) a ‘third
way’ between traditional social democracy and neo-liberalism, it would seem
to lie in this discoursal diversity in the recontextualisation of (the social 
relations of ) the new world of welfare – a point at which the classiﬁcation and
division between subjects is relatively open.
5.6 Equivalence and difference
If we use Bernstein’s categories of framing and classiﬁcation to think about
genre and discourse, we can analyse the Green Paper as simultaneously regu-
lating the work and social relations of government, and representing the world
of welfare (producing a vision of that world through division). But we still
need a way of showing how regulation and representation are bound together
in the process of texturing; that is, we still need a way of analysing representa-
tion processually. Classiﬁcations are not simply imposed through the generic
framing of interaction, they are ongoingly produced but also subverted in the
course of interaction.
We can draw upon the political theory of Laclau and Mouffe (1985) to ﬁnd
a way of theorising and operationalising this perspective. They theorise the
political process (and ‘hegemony’) in terms of the simultaneous working of
two different ‘logics’, a logic of ‘difference’ which creates differences and 
divisions, and a logic of ‘equivalence’ which subverts existing differences 
and divisions. I want to suggest ﬁrst that this can usefully be seen as a general
characterisation of social processes of classiﬁcation: people in all social prac-
tices are continuously dividing and combining – producing (also reproducing)
and subverting divisions and differences. Social practice, as Laclau and
Mouffe suggest, is an ongoing work of articulation and disarticulation. My sec-
ond suggestion is that this can be applied speciﬁcally to the textual moment of
188
Dialectics of discourse: theoretical developments


social practices. Elements (words, phrases etc.) are constantly being com-
bined and divided in texts; prior combinations and separations are constantly
being subverted. The point that texts are constantly combining some ele-
ments and dividing others is a rather obvious one. But what I am suggesting is
that we see these processes as part of the textual moment of the social process
of classiﬁcation, and that by doing so we can see the integration of that textual
process with the textual work of controlling and regulating social relations and
interactions. That is, we can see the integration of discourses with genres.
It is easier within the limits of an article to show this process in a short text
than in a long one, so I shall refer again to the Green Paper press release
(Appendix 1). The press release is a recontextualisation of a press conference
given by Frank Field and of the Green Paper itself including the Prime
Minister’s foreword. It is a recontextualisation which is shaped by the genre 
of the press release, the work it is doing (the effects it is trying to produce) and
the way the work is regulated and controlled.
As I said in Section 5.2, the press release is a combination of two genres,
‘report’ and background notes. I am only concerned here with the former. 
The headline and lead (which I take to include the ﬁrst three paragraphs – i.e.,
sections separated by spaces) give a summary of the Green Paper and press
conference which is elaborated in the rest of the ‘report’. The logic of the
report genre is an additive and elaborative one favouring repetition and expan-
sion. The ‘report’ is also a promotion, and the summary in the headline and
lead also incorporates a particular ‘spin’ which needs to be subsequently sus-
tained and developed. The direct reproduction of the eight ‘principles’ which
constitute the Green Paper’s self-summary falls outside these reporting and
promotional logics – the press release is also a sort of ofﬁcial summary which
is expected to give the ‘complete picture’.
Turning to discourse and classiﬁcation, the headline and lead selectively
focus certain aspects of the vision of the ‘reformed’ world of welfare in the
Green Paper: the reform as a ‘contract’, ‘promoting opportunity instead of
dependence’, ‘work for those who can, security for those who can’t’. This
selective focus constitutes the ‘spin’. There is actually internal evidence of 
differences of position and focus between Field and Blair (Field takes a more 
ethical stance towards welfare reform, Blair sees it more in terms of a contract
– see further below). There is also internal evidence in the press release of the
selectivity of the focus – compare the eight principles with the rest of the
report. For instance the construction of welfare as a ‘contract’ is not included
in the principles, and is not prominent in the Green Paper until Chapter 11,
which deals with the long-term future rather than the immediate reform. The
section selected from Blair’s foreword is the last four paragraphs which are the
Discourse, social theory, and social research
189


only ones in which he refers to the new welfare ‘contract’. This focus is there-
fore a signiﬁcant one, and it had an effect on media coverage of the Green
Paper – several national newspapers, for instance, reproduced a table from
Chapter 11 summarising the vision of a ‘new welfare contract’ for 2020 as if it
were a summary of the proposed more immediate reform.
Let me come to division and combination – the logics of difference and
equivalence. The second paragraph of the lead incorporates two divisions
taken from the Green Paper – ‘opportunity instead of dependence’, and ‘work
for those who can, and security for those who can’t’. The latter is a double divi-
sion: the division between those who work and those who can’t is mapped
onto the division between ‘work’ and ‘security’, restricting by implication the
social security offered by the welfare system to those who are unable to work.
These divisions condense important features of the New Labour welfare
‘reform’: an acceptance of the New Right construction of welfare as morally
objectionable in promoting ‘welfare dependency’, the commitment to ‘equal-
ity of opportunity’ as an alternative to ‘welfare dependency’, shifting the focus
of welfare towards getting people off welfare and into work (which gives the
division between those who can work and those who can’t primacy over the
division between those who have work and those who haven’t).
These divisions are repeated and elaborated in the quotations from Field.
The ﬁrst paragraph of those quotations contains in addition to a repetition 
of ‘work for those who can; security for those who cannot’ a division between
‘a cycle of dependency and insecurity’ and ‘an ethic of work and savings’.
Although the various elements put together here can be found in the Green
Paper, this particular division is Field’s; it is ‘spin’ as creative elaboration, a
process of representational work. It is combination as well as division: ‘depend-
ency’ combined with ‘insecurity’, ‘work’ with ‘savings’. The division is again
a double one – ‘dependency and insecurity’ as against ‘work and savings’, but
also ‘cycle’ as against ‘ethic’. The latter seems somewhat incoherent. Field’s
speciﬁc position and difference from others within New Labour is evident
both in the foregrounding of the ethical aspect of welfare ‘reform’ – which is
present in the Green Paper, but marginal – and more subtly in the rewording
of ‘dependence’ as ‘dependency’, which is a more direct evocation of the New
Right theories of ‘welfare dependency’ referred to above and again fore-
grounds the moral dimension. The two instances of ‘genuine’ in the third and
fourth paragraphs of the Field quotation also accentuate the moral dimension,
and also show that division can be covert – ‘those in genuine need’ are covertly
set off from those not in genuine need (those whose claimed needs are not 
genuine). The moral division between the deserving and undeserving poor 
is echoed here.
190
Dialectics of discourse: theoretical developments


At the same time, the division between those who can and those who 
cannot work is elaborated and developed in the third and fourth paragraphs,
into a division (among the disabled) between ‘people who want to work’ and
‘those who cannot work’, and ‘those of working age’ and ‘those in genuine
need who can’t work’. The former hybridises two divisions, ‘can/cannot’ and
‘want to/don’t want to’, formulating the shift in New Labour thinking from
seeing work as an option for the disabled to expecting those who are able to
work to do so. The latter generalises the category of those who can work to
those of working age – the message is that if you are of working age you work
unless you are too severely disabled to do so, a message which is underscored
by the combination of ‘work’ and ‘welfare’ which subverts the division
between them – ‘work is the best form of welfare’.
Summing up the quotation from Field, the vision of welfare which is 
summarised in the divisions of paragraph two of the lead is further worked 
up through the divisions and combinations of the quoted material. This is a
localised instance of how the politics of New Labour, the ‘Third Way’, is con-
stantly in process as its elements are worked (textured) together in texts – in
this case for instance in a way which foregrounds ethical and moral aspects of
welfare ‘reform’. The process of working up the discourse takes place accord-
ing to the logic of the genre, involving in this case a movement from summaris-
ing gist in the headlines and lead, to repetition and elaboration in the rest of 
the ‘report’. The genre is, of course, a relatively simple one, and the interplay
between discourse/classiﬁcation/division and genre/interaction/regulation is
much more complex, for instance, in the Green Paper itself.
Differences of position and perspective between Field and other New
Labour leaders which are well known and can be extensively documented
elsewhere are also evident here. The ethical focus is Field’s rather than Blair’s
– which does not mean that it is absent from Blair’s political discourse, just 
that it is not worked into the same salience. Conversely, it is the Blair quota-
tions which elaborate the construction of welfare as a ‘contract’ – though again
it is also part of Field’s political discourse. In the ﬁrst paragraph of the Blair
quotation there is a three-way division which sets the ‘third way’ against 
‘dismantling welfare’ and ‘keeping it unreformed’, and constructs the former
as a ‘new contract between citizen and state’, and in terms of a marked form 
of combination which is pervasive in New Labour discourse – the ‘but also’
relation.
I use this term for combinations which can be paraphrased with ‘x but also
y’ (or ‘not only x, y’). The example here is: ‘we keep a welfare state from which
we all beneﬁt, but on terms which are fair and clear’ (or: ‘but we also make the
terms fair and clear’). Other instances of the ‘but also’ relation are: ‘. . . the vast
Discourse, social theory, and social research
191


majority of us beneﬁt . . . But we all contribute . . .’, ‘We beneﬁt but we pay’,
‘fair not just for the existing generation, but fair between generations’. The
pervasiveness of the ‘but also’ relation in New Labour is a part of the politics of
the ‘Third Way’ – the ‘Third Way’ is all about transcending divisions, recon-
ciling what had been seen as unreconcilable, combining themes from the ‘old’
left and ‘new right’. There is a very prominent New Labour ‘but also’ relation
which is alluded to here and most directly formulated in the lead as ‘reciprocal
duties between government and the individual’ but interestingly not formu-
lated in its usual form – ‘rights and responsibilities’. By developing the focus
on ‘contract’ through the ‘but also’ relation, Blair is linking it to the core logic
of the politics of the ‘Third Way’. Also, by combining universality (‘we all
beneﬁt’) with the everyday concept of ‘fairness’, and constructing the contract
as a ‘fair deal’, Blair connects the ‘reform’ with everyday values and criticisms
of the existing system (in terms of ‘unfair’ abuses of it). This everyday and 
one might say populist construction stands in contrast with the austere, 
theoretical, and moral construction of the lead: ‘reciprocal duties between
government and the individual’ – one might see this as part of a difference in
style between Field and Blair.
6 Conclusion
In addressing the question of sociolinguistic and social linguistic theory
which I raised in the opening section, I have drawn upon several social the-
ories in a transdisciplinary way, using them to think theoretically about lan-
guage within the operational context of research on the political discourse 
of New Labour, trying to enhance the capacity of the particular area of social
linguistics I have been concerned with (discourse analysis) to advance social
theory in the direction of language. There are gains, I am suggesting, both for
the social linguist and for the social theorist. The gains for the social linguist
from thinking with theories of social practice are more explicit and coherent
speciﬁcations of how the semiotic (language, discourse in the abstract sense,
text) ﬁgures as an element of the social. What I have speciﬁcally argued is that
there is a textual moment in any social practice, and that the textual moment
has three facets for which we can use the categories of genre, discourse (as a
count noun), and style. The category of intertextuality can be speciﬁed as the
textual aspect of the articulatory character of social practice. Other categories
such as dialect and register could also be grounded and differentiated in theor-
isations of social practice. I argued that theories of practice can be enhanced
with theories of ﬁelds as networks of practices whose textual aspect is orders
192
Dialectics of discourse: theoretical developments


of discourse. I also argued that a socially grounded theorisation of texts as 
processes involving the interplay of genre and discourse (as a count noun)
could be developed through thinking with the categories of recontextualisa-
tion, classiﬁcation and framing, and the logics of difference and equivalence.
What this gives is a way of specifying the process of texturing as work – the pro-
duction of social life in its textual moment. My concern has been to discuss 
a particular way of working, in a transdisciplinary mode, and again this could
be pushed in different directions, for instance towards the concern of many
sociolinguists with linguistic constructions of identity.
The gains for the social theorist are in pushing social theory in the direction
of language so that social research ﬂows into language research rather than
stopping (as so often) on the threshold of language.5 These gains come from
the incorporation of social theories into theorisations and eventually analyses
of language so that the latter become more fruitful for social theorists to think,
theorise and analyse with. The key issue is textual analysis, and the place of
textual analysis in social research. The concept of ‘texturing’ claims that there
is always a textual moment to the work, the production of social life, in any
social practice, and this entails that textual analysis is an inescapable part of
social analysis. The challenge for social linguists is to develop forms of tex-
tual analysis (including, of course, interactional analysis) which are socially 
compelling, and I am suggesting that the way to do this is by drawing social
thought into our theorisation and analysis of texts.
APPENDIX 1 Frank Field launches new 
contract for welfare
Date: 26 March 1988
Ref: 98/077
Frank Field, Minister for Welfare Reform, today unveiled the Government’s
Green Paper on Welfare Reform ‘New Ambitions for Our Country – A New
Contract for Welfare’.
Mr Field said the Government’s programme for welfare reform would 
promote opportunity instead of dependence, and would be based on work for
those who can, and security for those who can’t.
The Green Paper, for the ﬁrst time, sets out a series of success measures 
to be achieved over the next 10–20 years. It presents a new welfare contract,
based on reciprocal duties between government and the individual.
Discourse, social theory, and social research
193


The Green Paper sets out eight key principles guiding welfare reform:
• The new welfare state should help and encourage people of working age to
work where they are capable of doing so.
• The public and private sectors should work in partnership to ensure that
wherever possible, people are insured against foreseeable risks, and make
provision for their retirement.
• The new welfare state should provide public services of high quality to the
whole community, as well as cash beneﬁts.
• Those who are disabled should get the support they need to lead a fulﬁlling
life with dignity.
• The system should support families and children as well as tackling the
scourge of child poverty.
• There should be speciﬁc action to tackle social exclusion and help those in
poverty.
• The system should encourage openness and honesty and the gateways to
beneﬁt should be clear and enforceable.
• The system of delivering modern welfare should be ﬂexible, efﬁcient and
easy for people to use.
Mr Field said:
This Green Paper has a central aim: work for those who can; security for
those who cannot. We want to replace a cycle of dependency and insecurity
with an ethic for work and savings.
The document builds on the £3.5 billion New Deal for the young 
and long term unemployed and the Budget that made work pay, raised
Child Beneﬁt and put quality childcare within reach of all families. At 
the same time we are modernising and putting money into schools and 
hospitals and will soon have the ﬁrst ever national minimum wage to help
the low paid.
The arguments for reform are clear, society has changed and the state has
not kept pace with it. As such, spending on Social Security has doubled yet
more people live in poverty and insecurity.
The Green Paper offers pensioners a decent income in retirement and a new
beginning for disabled people. Those disabled people who want to work
will get help to do so, while those who cannot work will get genuine support.
Work is the best form of Welfare. To those of working age we offer greater
help to get into work, and a modern system to provide help for those in 
genuine need who can’t work.
194
Dialectics of discourse: theoretical developments


In a foreword to the Green Paper, the Prime Minister said:
We must return to ﬁrst principles and ask what we want the welfare state to
achieve. This is the question this Green paper seeks to answer. In essence,
it describes a third way: not dismantling welfare, leaving it simply as a 
low-grade safety net for the destitute; nor keeping it unreformed and under-
performing; but reforming on the basis of a new contract between citizen
and state, where we keep a welfare state from which we all beneﬁt, but on
terms that are fair and clear.
There is a very simple reason why we need such a contract more than ever
today. The welfare state we have is one from which the vast majority of us
beneﬁt through a state pension or Child Beneﬁt or use of the NHS. The
welfare state isn’t just about a few beneﬁts paid to the most needy.
But we all contribute through taxes and charges. We beneﬁt but we 
pay. It is a contract between us as citizens. As such, it needs to be a fair 
deal, within a system that is clearer, more relevant for the modern world,
efﬁciently run and where costs are manageable. One that is fair not just for
the existing generation, but fair between the generations.
That is the fundamental reason for reform. It will take time. Frank 
Field has started the process in this Green Paper. Now that the process is
underway, we want all the nation to be part of it. There will be consultation
and time for discussion at every stage. Our objective is to build a genuine
national consensus behind change. The welfare state belongs to us all. It is
part of our inheritance. We must now all work together to re-build it for the
new century that awaits.
Notes to editors
1. The Green paper New ambitions for our country: A NEW CONTRACT
FOR WELFARE is available from Stationery Ofﬁce bookshops. It is also
available in Braille, audio cassette and in Welsh (Cmd 3805, price £11.50).
2. A summary version of the Green paper has also been produced and is avail-
able free of charge from the following address:
Welfare Reform
Freepost (HA4441)
Hayes
UB3 1BR
Tel: 0181 867 3201
Fax: 0181 867 3264
The lines are open Monday to Friday from 9am–5pm
Discourse, social theory, and social research
195


3. Consultation
Feedback on the content of the Green Paper should be addressed to:
The Welfare Reform Green Paper Consultation Team
Department of Social Security
7th Floor, The Adelphi
1–11 John Adam Street
London WC2 6HT
People are also invited to respond using the following email address:
welfarereform@ade001.dss.gov.uk
Comments should reach DSS by 31 July 1998.
Press enquiries: 0171 238 0866
(Out of hours: 0171 238 0761)
Public enquiries: 01717 712 2171
Internet Address: http://www.dss.gov.uk
APPENDIX 2 Excerpt from Green Paper 
on welfare reform
Chapter Three The importance of work
Principle 1
The new welfare state should help and encourage people of working age to
work where they are capable of doing so.
1. The Government’s aim is to rebuild the welfare state around work. The
skills and energies of the workforce are the UK’s biggest economic asset.
And for both individuals and families, paid work is the most secure means
of averting poverty and dependence except, of course, for those who are
retired or so sick or disabled, or so heavily engaged in caring activities, that
they cannot realistically support themselves.
2. For many people the absence of paid work is a guarantee of a life on low
income. One of the reasons children make up a higher proportion of those
at the bottom of the income distribution is that a growing number of par-
ents, especially lone parents, are out of work. Paid work also allows people
to save for their retirement.
196
Dialectics of discourse: theoretical developments


3. For too long, governments have abandoned people to a life on beneﬁts. Far
too many individuals and families are penalised, or gain too little, if they
move from beneﬁt to work.
4. Chapter One described how work has changed over the last 50 years. The
rewards for skills have grown, widening the wage gap. Some people reap
the rewards of fairly paid work, while others are either stuck on beneﬁt or
switching between beneﬁt dependency and short-term, low-skilled jobs.
There has also been a shift in balance from full-time manual jobs to part-
time and service-sector posts. In households with two working adults, the
loss of a job for one can mean that the other would be better off giving up
work too.
5. The Government aims to promote work by:
• helping people move from welfare to work through the New Deals
and Employment Zones;
• developing ﬂexible personalised services to help people into work;
• lowering the barriers to work for those who can and want to work;
• making work pay, by reforming the tax and beneﬁt system, includ-
ing a Working Families Tax Credit, reforming National Insurance
and income tax, and introducing the national minimum wage; and
• ensuring that responsibilities and rights are fairly matched.
Policy direction
Welfare to Work – The New Deals
6. The Government’s biggest investment since taking ofﬁce has been in a
large-scale welfare to work programme. Our ambition is nothing less than
a change of culture among beneﬁt claimants, employers and public ser-
vants – with rights and responsibilities on all sides. Those making the shift
from welfare into work will be provided with positive assistance, not just 
a beneﬁt payment.
7. Our comprehensive welfare to work programme aims to break the mould
of the old, passive beneﬁt system. It is centred on the ﬁve aspects of the
New Deal for:
• young unemployed people;
• long-term unemployed people;
• lone parents;
• people with a disability or long-term illness; and
• partners of the unemployed.
Discourse, social theory, and social research
197


8. Alongside these national programmes, we are also piloting targeted help
for areas of high long-term unemployment through the new Employment
Zones.
Young unemployed people
9. For young people, entering the labour market is a critical rite of passage to
adulthood. One of the factors causing social exclusion is an unacceptably
high level of youth unemployment. The New Deal for Young People is a
radical step forward because it emphasises quality, choice and above all
meeting the needs of individuals. It will address all the barriers to work that
young people face, including homelessness and drug dependency. It aims
to help young unemployed people, aged 18 to 24, to ﬁnd jobs and remain
in employment. In the Budget, the Chancellor also announced that partners
of young unemployed people who have no children would be included in
the New Deal, and given access to the same opportunities for work.
The New Deal for young people
• Is being piloted in 12 pathﬁnder areas.
• Will go nationwide in April 1998.
• Is an investment of £2.6 billion.
• Will offer participants, aged 18 to 24, four opportunities:
– work with an employer who will receive a job subsidy of up to £60 
a week;
– full-time education or training;
– work with a voluntary sector organisation; or
– work on the Environmental Taskforce.
All these options involve training.
• Support will also be given to those young people who see self-
employment as the best route out of beneﬁt dependency.
• Includes a special £750 grant to employers to provide their New Deal
employees with training towards a recognised qualiﬁcation.
• For those who do not wish to take up offers of help there will be no ‘ﬁfth
option’ of simply remaining on beneﬁt.
10. Every young person who receives Jobseeker’s Allowance (JSA) for six
months without securing work will enter the New Deal Gateway – an
exercise in promoting job-readiness and providing a tailor-made package
198
Dialectics of discourse: theoretical developments


of help. People with particular disadvantages may enter earlier. For those
with adequate skills and appropriate work experience – the ‘job-ready’ –
the immediate focus will be on securing an unsubsidised job. For those
young people less equipped to enter the job market, the Gateway will pro-
vide careers advice and guidance, assessment of training needs, work 
trials with employers and tasters of other options. This Gateway period
may last for up to four months.
Long-term unemployed people
11. For those who lack skills and become unemployed, the risks of remaining
out of work for a long period are high. So prevention is better than cure.
The Government’s plans for lifelong learning, described in Chapter Five,
are designed to raise skills in the adult population and promote employ-
ability, so that people ﬁnd it easier to get and keep jobs.
12. There is already a sizeable group of long-term unemployed people who
may need additional help to overcome barriers to work. Employers are
often sceptical of the job-readiness of a person who has been out of the
labour market for long periods. And, over time, skills, conﬁdence and
health can deteriorate. The New Deal for the Long-Term Unemployed
represents the ﬁrst serious attack on the waste of talents and resources
represented by long-term unemployment.
The New Deal for the long-term unemployed
• Due to start in June 1998.
• Initial investment of £350 million.
• For those aged over 25 who have been out of work for more than two years.
• Substantial job subsidy of £75 a week for employers for six months.
• Changes to beneﬁt rules to improve access to full-time education or 
training. Additional pilots are due to start in November 1998:
– Pilots of an intensive approach for 70,000 people, providing indi-
vidualised advice, counselling and help, which may include training
and work experience, at a cost of £100 million.
– Special assistance tailored to the needs of those aged over 50.
Lone parents
13. The twin challenges of raising children alone and holding down a job are
considerable. The vast majority of single parents want to work, to gain a
Discourse, social theory, and social research
199


decent wage and a foothold on the ladder out of poverty. But the old wel-
fare system did little to help, simply handing out beneﬁts rather than
offering active support in ﬁnding and securing work, training or child-
care. The New Deal for Lone Parents will provide a more active service.
The New Deal for lone parents
– Piloted in eight areas since July 1997, offering help to 40,000 lone 
parent households.
– Available nationwide to lone parents making a new or repeat claim for
Income Support from April 1998.
– Available to all lone parents on Income Support from October 1998.
– The service is aimed at lone parents whose youngest child is at school,
but is also available to those with pre-school children.
14. There will be a full, independent evaluation of the ﬁrst phase of the New
Deal for Lone Parents, available in autumn 1999. Early indications are
encouraging. Lone parent organisations, employers and lone parents
themselves have all welcomed this New Deal, and the staff responsible for
delivering the service have been particularly enthusiastic. The staff have
welcomed the opportunity to become involved in providing practical
help and advice. The ﬁrst phase of this New Deal has aroused consider-
able interest: lone parents in other parts of the country are asking if they
can join in.
Notes
1. In policy terms, the recent emphasis on the ‘learning age’, the need (especially
the economic need) for ‘lifelong learning’, can be construed as a recognition of
this (Department of Education and Employment1998).
2. With respect to the social dynamics, Bourdieu (Bourdieu and Wacquant
1992) gives a different account, in terms of the dual inscription of the social in
places/institutions (ﬁelds and their positions) and in bodies (and habitus), and
tensions between position and habitus as a source of transformation.
3. They appear in an ‘imaginary’ form according to Bernstein, and it is the trans-
formation from real to imaginary, that is the space in which the play of ideology
takes place. I do not develop the point here, but this strikes me as an interest-
ing basis for thinking about discourse and text ideologically. See Chouliaraki
and Fairclough (1999), and also Paper 3 of this collection.
4. The Green Paper on Learning (Department of Education and Employ-
ment 1998) makes an interesting contrast in this respect, and shows what is
200
Dialectics of discourse: theoretical developments


possible. Questions are directed to the reader throughout the document, and
gathered together over four pages in the ﬁnal chapter.
5. Let me give one example of social theory stopping on the threshold of lan-
guage, where the rubicon of text analysis really needs to be crossed. According
to Bernstein (1990, 1996), although the symbolic violence of classiﬁcation
imposes ‘voices’ on subjects which limit their ‘messages’ in social interaction,
‘message’ can subvert ‘voice’ – what is repressed in classiﬁcation can re-emerge
in social interaction. There is, in other words, a voice–message dialectic.
Bernstein does not acknowledge the need for text analysis in formulating 
this important position, yet it is through close analysis of texturing, of textual
processes, that this dialectic can be shown in practice (Chouliaraki and
Fairclough 1999).
Discourse, social theory, and social research
201


8.
Critical realism and semiosis
Norman Fairclough, Bob Jessop and 
Andrew Sayer
T
his paper explores the mutual implication of critical realism and semiosis.
At least three major sets of questions can be posed in this regard.1
First, we argue that critical realism cannot afford to ignore semiosis, provi-
sionally deﬁned as the intersubjective production of meaning,2 in its more
general approach to social relations, their reproduction and transformation
(see Section 1). In discussing this issue we interpret social relations broadly to
include individual actions, the relations between these interactions, and the
emergent properties of institutional orders and the domain of the lifeworld.
Apart from addressing the closely related, controversial, but nonetheless ana-
lytically distinct, issue of whether reasons can also be causes, critical realists have
paid little attention to the nature and signiﬁcance of semiosis. Prioritising the
former at the expense of the latter is quite unjustiﬁed because reasons are merely
one (albeit important) aspect of the causal efﬁcacy of semiosis. In addition, their
effectiveness can only be understood in and through the operation of semiosis.
Second, and equally important for our purposes, we inquire into the social
preconditions and broader social context of semiosis. This set of problems is
well suited to the application of critical discourse analysis (CDA) because the
latter can provide explanatory contextualisations of the production, commun-
ication, and reception of semiosis and therefore provide a means of thinking
about the articulation of the semiotic and extra-semiotic in social transforma-
tion (see Chouliaraki and Fairclough 1999). But we also show that, depending
on the explicandum, it may be necessary or appropriate to supplement CDA
through more concrete, complex analyses of extra-discursive domains. This
implies that, in so far as semiosis has been studied in isolation from its context,
this is bound to lead to an incomplete account of social causation and therefore
risks committing one or more kinds of reductionism (see Section 2).


Finally, we turn to a third set of questions. These concern the nature of
semiotic structures, the dialectics of their constitutive role in and emergence
from texts and textual practices, and their role in social structuration (see
Section 3). We exemplify these issues by drawing on critical semiotic analysis
(especially CDA), which is a form of text analysis that is not only compatible
with critical realism but also provides major insights into the role of semiosis
in social structuration (see Section 4). Overall, Sections 3 and 4 seek to show
that semiosis involves mechanisms that are intelligible from a critical realist
point of view. Our concluding section draws these different themes together 
to argue that semiotic analysis might beneﬁt from paying attention to other
aspects of critical realism and that critical realism might beneﬁt from paying
more attention to semiosis when exploring the social world.
Addressing these three sets of questions involves identifying and exploring
the real mechanisms of semiosis as a ﬁrst step towards making progress on the
larger problem of mind–body–semiosis–sociality–materiality. This is clearly
an ambitious project and we do not expect to produce a solution in this paper.
Moreover, since critical realism qua philosophy does not entail commitments
to any particular substantive social or psychological theory, alternative critical
realist accounts of semiosis could also be advanced. If so, we hope our own
proposals will stimulate fellow critical realists to present them.
1 Why critical realism must address semiosis
Critical realism has tended to take semiosis for granted. For example, its practi-
tioners often defend the claim that reasons can be causes without making 
any substantial reference to semiosis as such. Our ﬁrst objective is to oppose
this neglect. We will then demonstrate how a critical realist approach might 
be used to illuminate semiosis.
Social theorists and discourse analysts routinely defend semiotic analysis
on the grounds that semiosis has real effects on social practice, social institu-
tions, and the social order more generally. They argue, in short, that semiosis
is performative. Though it is certainly possible for us to communicate 
unintentionally, we normally speak or write in order to produce some kind of
response. Yet answers to the question of how semiosis produces effects are
generally conspicuous by their absence in much social science analysis. This
could well be due to the many uncertainties and/or controversies over the
nature of explanation in the social sciences. For some social theorists, explain-
ing how semiosis produces effects would require a causal explanation that 
ﬁrst identiﬁes the social entities that produce observed effects and then
attributes causal responsibility to these entities in terms of an underlying
Critical realism and semiosis
203


causal mechanism (or mechanisms). But many other theorists reject causal
explanation as being wholly inappropriate to the study of semiosis. For ex-
ample, hermeneutics is generally taken to reject causal explanation (erklären)
in favour of interpretive understanding (verstehen). Its advocates deny that
semiosis and its effects can be explained in the same way as the production of
chemical reactions and their effects; all that is possible (and all that is required)
is to elucidate what a speciﬁc text ‘means’. This rejection of erklären in favour
of verstehen is often (but not always) tied to a Humean account of causal 
explanation in terms of ‘constant conjunctions’ between causes and effects.3
Thus advocates of verstehen typically argue either that such regularities do 
not characterise communication and are therefore totally excluded; or that
causal explanation is simply redundant in so far as it adds nothing to our 
understanding. Given the semiotic character of reasons (see below), this argu-
ment is linked to their conclusion that reasons are not to be treated as causes 
of behaviour. Instead, according to advocates of verstehen, reasons are proposi-
tions that precede or accompany behaviour and must simply be ‘understood’.
If this line of reasoning were to be accepted, however, it would be meaningless
and/or pointless to inquire into the causal efﬁcacy of semiosis.
In contrast, we argue that semiosis is both meaningful and causally efﬁ-
cacious, and we therefore need to demonstrate, using critical realist concepts,
how it produces effects. To do this we need to recall some key features of 
critical realist philosophy.
First, critical realists distinguish the real from the actual and the empirical.
The ‘real’ refers to objects, their structures or natures and their causal powers
and liabilities. The ‘actual’ refers to what happens when these powers and 
liabilities are activated and produce change. The ‘empirical’ is the subset of
the real and the actual that is experienced by actors.4 Although changes at the
level of the actual (e.g., political debates) may change the nature of objects
(e.g., political institutions), the latter are not reducible to the former, any more
than a car can be reduced to its movement. Moreover, while empirical experi-
ences can inﬂuence behaviour and hence what happens, much of the social
and physical worlds can exist regardless of whether researchers, and in some
cases other actors, are observing or experiencing them. Though languages
and other semiotic structures/systems are dependent on actors for their repro-
duction, they always already pre-exist any given actor (or subset of actors), and
have a relative autonomy from them as real objects, even when not actualised.5
Second, critical realism views objects as structured and as having par-
ticular causal powers or liabilities. That is, they are able to act in certain ways
and/or suffer certain changes. Thus a person who has learned a language has 
a rich set of (causal) powers to communicate, and she has these powers even
204
Dialectics of discourse: theoretical developments


though she does not use them all the time.6 These powers exist (often, of
course, in latent form) but they can be activated in certain situations. If and
when they are activated, the effects depend on the context. Thus if we ask
someone the way to the Town Hall, the effects of the question will depend 
on whether she speaks the same language, whether she knows the area, and so
on. But regardless of whether the answer is ‘round the corner’, ‘I’m sorry I
don’t know’, or ‘why do you want to know?’, it is at least co-produced by the
question, and this is true irrespective of whether the relationship between the
question and answer is regular or irregular. Causation is about what produces
change (the activation of causal powers) not about (whether observers have
registered) a regular conjunction of cause events and effect events. Hence, 
regularities are not necessary for explanation, whether of physical or social
phenomena. Even where we do ﬁnd regularities they still have to be explained
in terms of what produces them. Thus critical realism rejects the Humean,
constant conjunction view of causation.
Third, as the preceding example suggests, critical realists argue that reasons
can operate as causes, that is, can be responsible for producing a change.
Indeed, when someone tries to persuade us that we are wrong to make this
argument by giving us reasons, they in turn presuppose that offering reasons
can be causative in at least some circumstances. This applies irrespective of
whether there are regularities for us to record, for the general absence of regu-
larities between giving or recognising reasons and subsequent behaviour is
not fatal to causal explanation. On the contrary, as we have seen, regularities
are not essential for causal explanation even in the physical sciences. The
effects produced by semiosis certainly depend on texts being understood7 in
some fashion but not necessarily just in one, and only one, fashion. Thus a
speech made during an election campaign may offer people strong reasons for
voting in a certain way. The fact that the speech might be construed differently
by different individuals (even leading them to vote contrary to the reasons
adduced) and hence does not form part of a constant conjunction or event 
regularity does not mean that it can have no inﬂuence on voting (Bhaskar
1979, Collier 1994).8 Understanding (verstehen) and explanation (erklären)
are therefore not antithetical.
Crucial though this issue of reasons as causes has been in the philosophy 
of social science, it fails to address the speciﬁc nature of ‘reasons’ and how 
they come to motivate action. In particular, it ignores the semiotic character of
reasons and, in the most extreme cases, treats them as simple, singular triggers
of action. Yet reasons are diffuse and hard to identify unambiguously. Indeed,
it would be better be think of them as emergent elements in more extensive 
networks of concepts, beliefs, symbols and texts. As we show in Section 2,
Critical realism and semiosis
205


they presuppose languages, intentionality, particular concepts and prior
understandings and interests, intertextuality, conventions of inference and
evidence, and so on. Even a brief reﬂection on the implications of this semiotic
and social embedding of reasons is enough to bring home the inadequacy of a
simplistic treatment of reasons. What matters is the resonance of the reasons
offered to the partners in a social interaction and this depends on more than
their formal content. In addition, if we reﬂect more broadly upon what kinds
of semiotic features and events can bring about changes in behaviour (if only at
the level of how people think or feel), we notice that it is not only reasons that
change what we do. We may be inﬂuenced more by the tone (e.g., warmth, hos-
tility) or imagery of a speech than by any reasons for action that it might 
present. Consideration of these expressive qualities of communication exposes
the narrowly rationalist character of the reasons-as-causes answer to the ques-
tion of how texts produce effects. We therefore need to go beyond the reasons-
as-causes argument, important though it is, to examine the nature of semiosis
more generally and its place within the overall logic of the social.
2 The social preconditions and context of semiosis
Social scientists who have shown interest in semiosis have tended to ignore 
its broader social context. We aim to correct this bias in the semiotic turn by
putting semiotic processes into context. This means locating them within
their necessary dialectical relations with persons (hence minds, intentions,
desires, bodies), social relations, and the material world – locating them
within the practical engagement of embodied and socially organised persons
with the material world.
Semiosis – the making of meaning – is a crucial part of social life but it does
not exhaust the latter. Thus, because texts are both socially-structuring and
socially-structured, we must examine not only how texts generate meaning
and thereby help to generate social structure but also how the production of
meaning is itself constrained by emergent, non-semiotic features of social
structure. For example, an interview is a particular form of communication (a
‘genre’ in the terminology we introduce below) that both creates a particular
kind of social encounter and is itself socially-structured, for example by con-
ventions of propriety, privacy and disclosure, by particular distributions of
resources, material and cognitive. In short, although semiosis is an aspect 
of any social practice (in so far as practices entail meaning), no social practice
(let alone all behaviours) is reducible to semiosis alone. This means that
semiosis cannot be reduced to the play of differences among networks of signs
(as if semiosis were always purely an intra-semiotic matter with no external 
206
Dialectics of discourse: theoretical developments


reference) and that it cannot be understood without identifying and exploring
the extra-semiotic conditions that make semiosis possible and secure its effec-
tivity.9 We therefore reject the Foucauldian-inspired conﬂation of discourses
and material practices as one more instance of the ‘discourse-imperialism’ that
has infected social theory for the last two decades. This conﬂation also elimin-
ates the distinction – so crucial for critical realism – between the transitive and
intransitive dimensions of scientiﬁc inquiry. It thereby produces the epistemic
fallacies associated with strong social constructionism (Sayer 2000).
The intersubjective production of meaning and other semiotic effects is
exceptionally difﬁcult to explain, not least because it involves more or less
inaccessible mental processes. Thus, although we offer a way of explaining the
power of semiosis to generate meaning, and even though semiosis involves 
the listener/reception as much as speaker/production, we will leave open the
question of how minds make sense of texts. While meaning and motive are
emergent phenomena of semiosis, they need minds with certain capabilities to
co-construct social action and interaction (and bodies to enact them).
Accordingly, our approach to semiosis goes beyond semiotic systems
(including languages) and texts. Language acquisition itself is both pre-
ceded by, and ongoingly presupposes, various bodily and practical forms of
non-linguistic knowledge or know-how, skills and sense. Regarding language
acquisition, we acknowledge Margaret Archer’s demonstration of the import-
ance of the embodied, practical and non-semiotic, indeed non-social (in the
sense of intersubjective) dimensions of human practice, and their status as
preconditions of language-learning and use (Archer 2000). Thus infants have
to learn a considerable amount without the aid of semiotic systems before 
they are able to acquire the latter. In addition, text producers and interpreters 
subsequently continue to rely heavily upon non-semiotic knowledge, bodily
awareness or know-how in order to carry out both simple and complex tasks.
Once these linguistic and non-linguistic skills have been acquired, further
issues arise. First, we are often only more or less subliminally aware of ‘events’
at the margins of our ﬁelds of perception. Second, we may also respond more
or less subconsciously to ‘events’. And, third, if we were not intentional, desir-
ing beings with needs, semiosis would be redundant, for it would simply not
matter what existed in reality or actuality (which provides part of the overall
basis for the referential function of semiosis), there would be no performa-
tivity, and no affect or expressive communication. More generally, semiosis
presupposes embodied, intentional, practically-skilled social actors, social
relations, material objects and spatio-temporality.
Semiosis is also inﬂuenced by the habitus, i.e., by the semi-conscious 
dispositions that people, particularly in their early lives, acquire through
Critical realism and semiosis
207


social/material interaction with their habitat and through the social relations
in their part of the social ﬁeld (Bourdieu 2000). Habitus and the feel for par-
ticular games that it provides can include different degrees of facility with
respect to language use, for example, differing capacities to deal with and learn
new discourses or genres or styles (see below) (Bourdieu 1991).
The relationship between these elements – actors, language, texts, social
relations, practical contexts – is one of dialectical internal relations, i.e.,
although distinct, they are not discrete (Laclau and Mouffe 1985, Ollman
1993, Harvey 1996). Nonetheless the relative weight of these different ele-
ments within the overall conﬁguration of a social action is bound to vary from
case to case. In this regard it is worth noting that there is a range of ‘semio-
ticity’ in so far as different social actions, events, or social orders may be more
or less semioticised. For example, whereas a football match is an event that is
not primarily semiotic in character, though it has semiotic aspects, a lecture 
is a primarily semiotic event, even though it has material aspects. Indeed, one
might be able to construct a continuum ranging from technological systems
through to religion in terms of the relative weight of semiosis and materiality 
in their overall.
No account of semiosis can evade the issues of what Habermas terms truth,
truthfulness and appropriateness. Thus the production and interpretation of
any text rests upon generally implicit (and often counterfactual) validity claims
with respect to what is the case (the ‘truth’), the intentions, beliefs, integrity,
etc., of agents (‘truthfulness’), and the relation of the text to its social context
(‘appropriateness’). In addition, the interpretation of texts by social agents in
the course of social events may also involve the attempt to arrive at explanatory
accounts of the motives of other social agents for speaking or writing as they
have, and of less immediate social causes. This does not mean that under-
standing implies agreement, though some disagreements (and agreements)
may be based on misunderstanding. Of course, such interpretative effort is
applied very selectively to texts and many receive scant attention, and the
interpretability of texts (and even their comprehensibility) depends upon a
measure of shared assumptions between social agents about what is the case,
intentions and beliefs, and social relations. (For instance, religious or various
types of expert [e.g., technical] texts may be incomprehensible to certain
social agents because of radical disparities in assumptions about what is 
the case.)
Semiosis has a dual presence in the production and identiﬁcation of social
events. On the one hand, social action and social processes may be more 
or less semiotic in character. Thus, referentially, expressively and in terms of
social relations, such action and processes will typically engage the ways of
208
Dialectics of discourse: theoretical developments


thinking, speciﬁc identities, emotional responses or commentaries, vocabu-
laries of motives, goals, and reasons for action that are available to the various
actors and frame the situation in which the actors ‘ﬁnd’ themselves. Whether
these semiotic features of social action and social processes come from public
communication or inner conversations, they can be related to real semiotic
causal powers and thus one of our main tasks is to try to illuminate semiotic
causal powers and how they might be actualised (their mechanisms). And, on
the other hand, the identiﬁcation of an ‘event’ and its constitutive elements
(persons, objects, places etc.) from the ongoing ﬂow of social action and social
processes necessarily requires some act of semiotic interpretation, even if
what happens is totally non-semiotic (i.e., purely material, physical action).
This holds true even though (and, perhaps, precisely because) much of social
life escapes the notice of any particular observer and, perhaps, all possible
observers.
Semiosis is multi-functional ( Jakobson 1990, Halliday 1994). It is simul-
taneously referential (or propositional, or ideational), social-relational (or
interpersonal) and expressive. Thus, in the Habermasian terms intro-
duced earlier, semiosis raises validity claims of truth, truthfulness/sincerity
and appropriateness. Though it should hardly need saying, we insist on the
importance of all three, including, contra Saussureans, the role of reference:
there are not only signiﬁers (e.g., ‘book’ as a phonic or visual form) and
signiﬁeds (concepts) but also referents.10 The ‘play of difference’ among the
former could not be sustained without extensive embedding of semiosis in
material practice, in the constraints and affordances of the material world. Just
because the relation of reference between individual words or phrases and
objects to which they refer is not one-to-one or self-sufﬁcient, it does not 
follow that language and ways of thinking are unconstrained by the world. Not
just anything can be constructed.11 This does not mean that the differentia-
tions and qualities of the world dictate the content of knowledge – for the 
latter is a fallible construction and to assume otherwise is to commit the ontic
fallacy. But nor is the world or being dependent on knowledge – if one assumes
that it is, one commits the epistemic fallacy. This pair of arguments is import-
ant in helping us to disambiguate ‘construction’ into its two moments of 
construal (the fallible ideas that inform it) and construction (in the sense of the
material processes, if any, that follow from it) (cf. Sayer 2000). Indeed, even 
in the case of social constructions such as institutions, what gets constructed 
is different from how it is construed; and the relative success or failure of 
this construal depends on how both it and the construction respond to the
properties of the materials (including social phenomena such as actors and
institutions) used to construct social reality. Of course, the construal need not
Critical realism and semiosis
209


refer to the material world: it could also refer to other semiotic phenomena, to
images, smells, sounds or feelings and states of mind.
3 The role of semiosis in social structuration
A critical realist account of social structuration must be sensitive to the com-
plex dialectic that is entailed in the emergence, reproduction and transforma-
tion of social structures from social actions and the reciprocal inﬂuence of
these emergent structures on ongoing social action (see Bhaskar 1979, Archer
1982, Jessop 2001). An important aspect of this dialectic is the operation of
the evolutionary mechanisms of variation, selection and retention that shape
the relationships between semiosis and social structuration. These mech-
anisms are common to natural and social evolution12 (a distinction that itself
becomes less distinct, of course, as human action acquires an increasing role
in natural evolution) but, as suggested earlier, their operation in the social
world is bound to involve semiotic as well as extra-semiotic factors.
Accordingly, we now want to highlight three interrelated semiotic aspects
of social structuration. First, semiotic conditions affect the differential repro-
duction and transformation of social groups, organisations, institutions and
other social phenomena. Second, these mechanisms are reﬂexive in the sense
that semiotic conditions affect the variation, selection and retention of the
semiotic features of social phenomena. And, third, semiotic innovation and
emergence is itself a source of variation that feeds into the process of social
transformation. Overall, then, semiosis can generate variation, have selective
effects, and contribute to the differential retention and/or institutionalisation
of social phenomena.
We can elaborate these arguments by listing some semiotic conditions
involved in the selection and retention of the semiotic and extra-semiotic 
features of any social phenomenon in the face of the continuing variation in
behaviour as social actors wittingly or unwittingly innovate in the conduct of
their lives and new consequences, intended or unintended, arise:
(a) The selection of particular discourses (the privileging of particular 
discourses over others available internally and/or externally) for inter-
preting events, legitimising actions, and (perhaps self-reﬂexively) repres-
enting social phenomena. Semiotic factors operate here by inﬂuencing
the differential resonance of discourses. Some resonant discourses will
subsequently become retained (e.g., through their inclusion into widely
accepted hegemonic projects or their inclusion into an actor’s habitus)
(see (d) below).
210
Dialectics of discourse: theoretical developments


(b) The enactment of these selected discourses as modes of conduct, 
both semiotically (in genres) and non-semiotically (e.g., in organisational 
procedures).
(c) The inculcation of these discourses in the ways of being/identities of
social agents both semiotically (e.g., ways of talking) and somatically
(bodily dispositions).
(d) The objectiﬁcation of these discourses in the built environment, techno-
logy etc., in organisational practices, and in the form and function of the
body/bodies (hexis).
(e) The development of ﬁltering devices within procedures for selecting
these discourses and ﬁltering out others, including genre chains. For
instance, chains of genres in policy formation that might include policy
proposals, consultations in meetings of stakeholders, and reports recom-
mending policy decisions. A variety of different and potentially conﬂict-
ing discourses may ﬁgure (e.g., within stakeholder meetings) but in so far
as the genre chain is legitimised these may be unproblematically ﬁltered to
favour selected discourses in a report.
(f ) The selection of strategies for agents (strategies for acting and for inter-
preting) which privilege these discourses (genres, styles).
(g) The resonance of these discourses (genres, styles, strategies) within the
broader ensemble of social phenomena to which the relevant social 
phenomenon belongs as well as the complementarity of these discourses
(etc.) with others within the network.
(h) The capacity of the relevant social groups, organisations, institutions etc.,
to selectively ‘recruit’ and retain social agents whose predispositions ﬁt
maximally with requirements (a)–(g).
While the preceding list has been phrased to emphasise the role of semiosis
in securing social reproduction, semiotic conditions may also militate against
this. For example, relationships of contestation between discourses (i.e., rela-
tionships of contestation within a social practice in their semiotic aspect,
and/or relations of contestation between the social practices in question and
other practices in their semiotic aspect) may impede the selection/privileging
of particular discourses for interpreting events, legitimising actions, and 
(perhaps self-reﬂexively) representing the phenomenon and associated phe-
nomena. Where such contestation occurs, factors (b)–(g) in the preceding list
will either be absent or, at least, limited in their overall operation.13 This will
create in turn conditions favourable to successful innovation in the semiotic
and extra-semiotic dimensions of the social world in the sense that signiﬁcant
variations are selected and retained to produce a durable transformation in
Critical realism and semiosis
211


that world. Among the relevant semiotic conditions here are the internal 
relations between discourses and the external relations that obtain between
discourses concerned with associated social practices. Both are germane 
to questions of intertextuality. For their relations should be such that a new
selection/privileging of discourses is possible, allowing the development of
factors favouring the retention of selected discourses (b)–(g). Examples of this
would include the absence/weakening of competing discourses internally or
the development of new relations between such phenomena of a (partially)
semiotic character favouring the recontextualisation of external discourses
with regard to that phenomenon. Rather than pursue such arguments in the
abstract, however, we will illustrate how these mechanisms actually operate.
4 Semiotic formations and their emergent properties: 
from abstract to concrete
It is precisely because semiosis is the making of meaning through recourse to
language and other semiotic systems that, as critical realists, we need the tools
and skills of critical semiotic analysis (linguistic analysis, discourse analysis
etc.) to reﬂect (critically) on any text. Competent language users typically get
by on a day-to-day basis, of course, without knowing about the arcana of 
critical semiotic analysis (hereafter CSA); but, if, as critical realists, we are
interested in how actual semiotic effects are generated, we must focus on the
complexities of the real mechanisms that, according to semantic content and
overall context, produce effects that tend to escape the attention of lay persons
and non-specialist social scientists alike. This is the semiotic aspect of critical
semiotic analysis. As regards its critical aspect, CSA (e.g., CDA) is concerned
with the truth, truthfulness and appropriateness of texts, their production,
and their interpretation. That is, it is concerned with the relationship between
semiosis and the material and social world; persons and their intentions,
beliefs, desires etc.; and social relations. It is concerned with the description
of texts, the interpretation of how people produce and interpret texts, 
judgements of texts in terms of truth, truthfulness and appropriateness, and
explanation of the social causes and effects of texts.
Thus a CR approach to the explanation of concrete phenomena such as
semiosis analyses them as conjunctions of structures and causal powers 
co-producing speciﬁc effects. To do this it abstracts these structures, identify-
ing them and considering their respective causal powers and liabilities. Having
done this, it then moves back towards the concrete, combining the abstracted
constituent elements, noting how they combine, with what consequences.
While, for the sake of simplicity of exposition of critical realist method, it is
212
Dialectics of discourse: theoretical developments


usual to consider simple cases involving discrete structures and mechanisms,
semiosis is an extreme case where concrete phenomena are the product of
dialectically related elements, and hence whose interaction is non-additive.
Hence the abstractions made by CDA are analytical distinctions that have to
be used in a way which acknowledges their dialectical interdependence.
Concrete events have a more or less semiotic (‘textual’) character but even 
primarily semiotic events are co-produced by mental, social and material as
well as speciﬁcally semiotic structures.
Semiotic structures include semiotic systems – most obviously languages 
– which have distinctive properties (e.g., the properties formulated in gram-
matical rules) not found in other structures. Nevertheless, even languages
show the dialectical interpenetration of otherwise operationally autonomous
structures, i.e., they are overdetermined by other structures. Thus there is a
differentiation of major components of grammatical systems corresponding 
to the referential and social relational functions of language (Halliday 1994b).
But semiotic systems can only partially account for texts (semiotic facets of
events). In CR terms the gap between the productive potential (‘real’) of semi-
otic systems and the ‘actual’ of semiotic facets of events is such that other 
structures need to be postulated at lower (i.e., closer to the concrete) levels of
abstraction. We call these ‘semiotic orders’.
Semiotic orders (or orders of discourse, Fairclough 1992a) comprise the
forms of social structuring of semiotic variation. Their main elements are 
genres, discourses and styles. Genres are ways of acting and interacting in
their speciﬁcally semiotic aspect; they are ways of regulating (inter)action. An
example would be (a speciﬁc form of) interview. Discourses are positioned
ways of representing – representing other social practices as well as the 
material world, and reﬂexively representing this social practice, from particular
positions in social practices. An example would be a particular political dis-
course – let us say the political discourse of the ‘third way’ (New Labour).
Styles are ways of being, identities in their speciﬁcally semiotic (as opposed 
to bodily/material) aspect. An example would be the ‘new’ managerial style
described by Boltanski and Chiapello (1999). A semiotic order is a speciﬁc
conﬁguration of genres, discourses and styles, which constitutes the semiotic
moment of a network of social practices (e.g., a ﬁeld in Bourdieu’s sense, for
instance the political ﬁeld).
The relationship between genres, discourses and styles is dialectical. Thus
discourses may become enacted as genres and inculcated as styles. What
enters a practice as a discourse such as the discourse of ‘new public manage-
ment’ may become enacted as new ways of (inter)acting, which will in part be
new genres (new ways of (inter)acting discursively). And such a discourse 
Critical realism and semiosis
213


may become inculcated as new ways of being, new identities, including both
new styles and new bodily dispositions. Moreover, in addition to the intra-
semiotic ﬂows between discourses, genres and styles, there are also ﬂows
between semiosis and other elements/moments of social practices. For example,
discourses may become materialised in new buildings, new technologies etc.
It is important to stress again ‘may’: there is nothing inevitable about these
‘socially constructive’ effects of discourse; they are conditional upon the
speciﬁcity of the practice.
Elements of semiotic orders such as genres are overdetermined to a greater
extent than semiotic systems through their dialectical articulation with other
structures. For this reason, whereas semiotic systems can be studied in 
relatively abstract-simple terms, semiotic orders are best studied in relatively
concrete-complex terms. The categories of semiotic systems are abstract-
simple (i.e., relatively autonomous from other structures, e.g., ‘noun’, ‘sentence’)
whereas those of semiotic orders are more concrete and complex (i.e., over-
determined by the categories of other structures, e.g., ‘discourse’, ‘genre’,
‘dialect’).
Thus, while critical semiotic analysis attributes causal effectivity to semiotic/
linguistic forms, it does so without falling into a semiotic/linguistic formalism.
The effectivity of forms depends upon their semantic content and their social
context. For example, processes in the material world may be semiotically 
represented as events or as objects, in the linguistic form of ﬁnite clauses (e.g.,
‘Multinational corporations are changing the ways in which different coun-
tries trade with each other’) or of nominalisations (e.g., ‘The modern world is
swept by change’). But the social effectivity of nominalisation depends upon
what is nominalised (reducing processes to their effectivity and thus conceal-
ing details of both process and agency) and on the speciﬁc social context in
which it occurs (for more extended examples, see below). Attending to nomin-
alisation as a linguistic form is germane to the critical analysis of the social
effectivity of semiosis but this attention must be combined with an account 
of meaning and how meaning is mediated in and through textual interpreta-
tion. It would make a difference, for example, whether or not there were
widespread critical awareness of such features of texts. This lack of one-to-one
relations between formal features of texts, interpretations, and social effects
implies that generalisations about semiosis are difﬁcult. However, there is
nothing exceptional about this. Social systems – and, indeed, most physical
systems – are open and hence unpredictable. As critical realists have 
emphasised, the contingent emergence of new phenomena in and through the
complex interactions between systems and their environments makes con-
stant conjunctions rare.
214
Dialectics of discourse: theoretical developments


Semiosis is an instance of emergence par excellence and in moving back
towards the concrete we attempt to register how meanings emerge in texts.
When post-structuralists emphasise the endless possibilities for meanings to
emerge from the play of difference, they are referring in CR terms to emer-
gence. Intertextuality is a crucial property of semiosis in terms of emergence.
It has more concrete and more abstract aspects. Concretely, particular texts
report, echo etc., particular other texts for both speaker and listener. More
abstractly, texts may stand in complex relationships to semiotic orders – they
may articulate the discourses, genres and styles of different semiotic orders
together in complex ways.
The objection to post-structuralist accounts of emergence is that they 
idealise semiosis – they ignore reference and truth conditions and attribute
properties to semiosis as such in a way that ignores the dialectical inter-
penetration of semiotic and non-semiotic facets of social events. The ‘play’ of
difference is materially, socially and psychologically constrained. This is clear
if we think about intertextuality. Texts may and do articulate different dis-
courses, genres and styles together in innovative ways, but these semiotic
articulations are at the same time articulations of social ﬁelds, social groups,
social activities, space–times, desires etc.
Semiotic emergence is tied not only to shifting articulations of discourses,
genres and styles as such, but also to texts as processes, the ‘texturing’ of texts,
the working together of diverse elements in texts over time and in space.
Texturing manifests the causal powers of agents in texts. The following texts
illustrate the processes at work here. The ﬁrst text is an extract from a meeting
of (mainly) supervisors in an Australian subsidiary of an American multi-
national company, discussing the introduction of team management (the data
was collected by Lesley Farrell):
Ben
we thought you know maybe maybe I should be the facilitator for
Grace’s group or something where I’m away from the people a bit and um
Sally
yeah
Ben
just have a background in what’s going on but just sort of keep
them on the right track and let them they’ve got to really then rely on each
other instead of relying on the supervisor to do the work
Grace
well I think kind of in the groups that are gonna come along
that’s what’s gonna have to happen. I mean I know the the ﬁrst ones that
start off I think we have to go down this path to try to direct people onto the
path and therefore we kind of will be in charge of the meeting but then we
have to get people to start their own teams and us sort of just being a facilit-
ator rather than
James
the team leader
Critical realism and semiosis
215


[. .]
yeah
Grace
I mean it’s hard to get started I think that’s where people are 
having trouble and that’s why they’re kind of looking to you Ben and you
know things like that
Peter
I’m not the only one I’m having trouble maintaining the thing
[. .]
yeah
Peter
I just can’t maintain it at the moment you know a couple of days
you know a couple of days crook there and you know just the amount of
work that builds up it just goes to the back of the queue sort of thing it’s
shocking
James
so what you really want is the um you’ve got a a group you 
start a group and you want one of those people to sort of come out and [. .]
facilitate the group
Peter
just to maintain the group you know like just to keep it just keep
the work ﬂowing
Ben
what I’m trying to get across
Peter
cause
Ben
is I’m too close to those people because I
[. .]
yeah
Ben
already go outside of the group and then I’m their supervisor 
outside on the on the ﬂoor where maybe if I was facilitating another group
where I’m not I’m not above them you know I’m not their supervisor or
whatever um I can go back to my job they can go back to theirs and they still
um you know it’s this their more their team than
Sally
yours
This extract shows an element of the (new) ‘global’ discourse of team 
management (‘facilitating’) being locally appropriated by being worked in the
course of the interaction into a relationship of equivalence with elements of
existing discourses (e.g., ‘keep them on the right track’, ‘they’ve got to really
rely on each other’, ‘people . . . start their own teams’), and into a relationship
of difference from other elements of existing discourses (e.g., ‘(being) the 
team leader’, ‘direct people onto the path’, ‘be in charge of the meeting’). The
‘work’ of texturing these relations of equivalence and difference is evidenced
in the high incidence and the distribution of ‘hedging’ expressions such as ‘or
something’, ‘just’, ‘kind of’, ‘sort of’, and ‘modalising’ expressions such as
‘maybe’, ‘we thought’, ‘I think’, which mitigate in various ways degrees of
commitment to propositions and proposals. The texturing of such relations 
of equivalence and difference can cumulatively produce new conﬁgurations 
of discourses and, in so far as they are enacted and inculcated, of genres and
styles (in this case, the meeting itself can be seen as a generic enactment of the
new discourse which it is locally appropriating). If we assume a social theory
216
Dialectics of discourse: theoretical developments


of learning as active participation in the innovative meaning-making practices
of a community (Lave 1998, Wenger 1998), such examples can be seen as
instances in cumulative processes of organisational learning that can produce
changes in knowledge, social relations and social identities (semiotically: in
discourses, genres and styles).
To show how instances of semiotic emergence ﬁgure in processes of social
transformation we must also consider the resonance of emergent semiotic
properties within orders of discourse. The second example is a foreword by
Tony Blair to a White Paper on competition produced by the Department of
Trade and Industry (1998).
The modern world is swept by change. New technologies emerge con-
stantly, new markets are opening up. There are new competitors but also
great new opportunities.
Our success depends on how well we exploit our most valuable assets:
our knowledge, skills and creativity. These are the key to designing high-
value goods and services and advanced business practices. They are at the
heart of a modern, knowledge-driven economy.
This new world challenges business to be innovative and creative, to
improve performance continuously, to build new alliances and ventures.
But it also challenges Government: to create and execute a new approach to
industrial policy.
That is the purpose of this White Paper. Old-fashioned state interven-
tion did not and cannot work. But neither does naïve reliance on markets.
The Government must promote competition, stimulating enterprise,
ﬂexibility and innovation by opening markets. But we must also invest in
British capabilities when companies alone cannot: in education, in science
and in the creation of a culture of enterprise. And we must promote creative
partnerships which help companies: to collaborate for competitive advant-
age; to promote a long-term vision in a world of short-term pressures; to
benchmark their performance against the best in the world; and to forge
alliances with other businesses and employees. All this is the DTI’s role.
We will not meet our objectives overnight. The White Paper creates a
policy framework for the next ten years. We must compete more effectively
in today’s tough markets if we are to prosper in the markets of tomorrow.
In Government, in business, in our universities and throughout society
we must do much more to foster a new entrepreneurial spirit: equipping
ourselves for the long term, prepared to seize opportunities, committed 
to constant innovation and enhanced performance. That is the route to
commercial success and prosperity for all. We must put the future on
Britain’s side.
The Rt Hon Tony Blair MP, Prime Minister
Critical realism and semiosis
217


This example shows the texturing together of the space-time of ‘global’
economic change and the space–time of national policy formation. The text is
organised on a problem–solution model: the problem is deﬁned in ‘global’
space–time in terms of irresistible processes without social agents (e.g., ‘new
markets are opening up’, not for instance ‘business corporations are opening
up new markets’) in a timeless present and an undifferentiated ‘universal’
space; the solution is deﬁned in a national space–time in terms of what national
agencies (‘we’, ‘[the] government’, ‘business’) ‘must’ do. We can relate this to
the general problems that face any social formation (indeed, any social inter-
action short of ﬂeeting contacts) in articulating different space–times (Harvey
1996, Jessop 2000). At one level this articulation tends to become a banal
accomplishment of everyday life events, and a banal accomplishment in 
texturing but there is also a problem around securing relative compatibility
among different spatio-temporal horizons in different contexts, different insti-
tutional orders, and on different scales. One aspect of contemporary social
transformation associated with neo-liberalism is the sort of articulation of
global and more local space–times illustrated here, and now a pervasive feature
of neo-liberal discourse in business, government, education etc., and at inter-
national (e.g., agencies like the OECD), national, regional and local levels.
Unlike the ﬁrst example, the Blair text does not show semiotic emergence in
process, but is rather one of many possible illustrations of the extraordinary
resonance and ‘ﬂow’ between ﬁelds and across scales of a recently emergent
semiotic re-articulation of space-times.
5 Conclusions
We wish to draw three main conclusions from this ﬁrst cut at promoting a
debate between critical realists and critical discourse analysts. First, we have
argued that the study of semiosis would beneﬁt from articulation with critical
realism. This has already occurred in critical discourse analysis, of course,
with its even-handed concern with context as well as text. But we suggest that
it should be extended to other forms of semiotic analysis. This does not mean
that we reject the hermeneutic approach; rather, we argue that hermeneutics
by itself cannot provide an adequate explanation of social phenomena even 
at the level of face-to-face communication and interaction. There is always 
an extra-semiotic context to the operation of hermeneutics (especially if this 
is extended to the notion of the ‘double hermeneutic’ practised by social 
scientists) and any serious explanation of social phenomena must be adequate
both at the level of meaning and at the level of social (extra-semiotic) causa-
tion. Once we reject a Humean account of causation in terms of constant 
218
Dialectics of discourse: theoretical developments


conjunction, verstehen and erklären are not so much antithetic as comple-
mentary. Given the proliﬁc nature of semiosis with its inﬁnity of possible
meaningful communications, understandings and misunderstandings, it is
important to explore the various extra-semiotic mechanisms that contribute to
the variation, selection and retention of semiosis as well as the contribution 
of semiosis to the reproduction and transformation of social structures.
Second, we have argued that critical realism would beneﬁt from sustained
engagement with semiotic analysis. For critical realism has tended to operate
with an insufﬁciently concrete and complex analysis of semiosis. It has tended
to take symbol systems, language, orders of discourse, and so on for granted,
thereby excluding central features of the social world from its analysis. One
consequence of this is that critical realism cannot give an adequate account of
the complex semiotic, social and material overdetermination of that world.
Semiosis has its own distinctive elements, necessary properties and emergent
effects and, even though (and precisely because) these qualities and their 
associated causal powers and liabilities interpenetrate, interfere with, and
overdetermine other types of social relations and institutional orders, they
must be integrated into a more comprehensive critical realist analysis of the
social world. In this way we can move to provide explanations that are ‘soci-
ally (or semiotically) adequate’ as well as ‘objectively probable’ in the sense
that they establish the discursive as well as extra-discursive conditions of 
existence of the explicandum at an appropriate level of concretisation and 
complexiﬁcation.
And, third, in exploring the distinctive features of semiosis, we began by
emphasising how semiosis frames social interaction and contributes to the
construction of social relations. Within this context we then discussed the
construction of identities, modes of calculation, vocabularies of motives etc.,
and their role in providing the motivational force behind actions. At the same
time we took pains to argue that semiosis works in conjunction with extra-
semiotic (or extra-discursive) elements. By mapping some key aspects of
semiosis, especially its extra-discursive conditions of existence and effectivity,
we attempted to block off a purely rationalist or ideologist view of social rela-
tions. In developing this argument, we oppose theorists such as Laclau and
Mouffe (1985), who, in a manner reminiscent of the analysis of the production
of commodities by means of commodities offered by Sraffa (1960), one-
sidedly emphasise the discursive production of discourse from discourse.
This leads them to neglect the extra-discursive as well as the discursive factors
that shape the resonance of semiosis and the willingness and capacity of actors
(and other social forces) to respond to interpellations, appeals to their iden-
tities and interests, hegemonic projects etc. Against this, we argue for at least
Critical realism and semiosis
219


equal weight to be given to the consumption of semiosis as well as its produc-
tion. In particular, we have stressed that both the production and the con-
sumption of symbolic systems (orders of discourse etc.) are overdetermined
by a range of factors that are more or less extra-semiotic.
Notes
1. A fourth question that some may want to raise is that of naturalism and, more
speciﬁcally, whether semiotic analysis can be assimilated to the methodo-
logy of the natural sciences. We regard this question as misguided. What 
is important is not whether their methods of analysis match those of the 
natural sciences but whether they are appropriate for their subject matter.
Answering the former question incidentally supplies a response to the latter,
of course; our paper answers yes and no to the latter question, for the study 
of semiosis requires both similar and different methods from those of natural
science.
2. We use the term ‘semiosis’ throughout this paper. Although we initially gloss
it as the inter-subjective making of meaning, our understanding of semiosis as
an element/moment of ‘the social’ is necessarily relational and will therefore
emerge more fully during the paper. We prefer ‘semiosis’ to ‘language’ and
‘discourse’ (used as abstract nouns) for two reasons. First, semiosis involves
more than (verbal) language – it also involves, for example, ‘visual lan-
guage’ (photographs, pictures, diagrams etc.). And, second, ‘discourse’ as an
abstract noun is a notoriously problematic and confusing term. In any case,
we later use ‘discourse’ as a count noun for particular positioned ways of 
representing aspects of the world. Likewise, we shall later use ‘languages’
(count noun) for particular language systems (e.g., English). When referring
to concrete social events from a semiotic perspective, we use the term ‘texts’
(count noun) in an extended sense to include not only written texts but 
also spoken conversations, ‘multi-semiotic’ texts such as TV ads (which mix
words, images, sound effects etc.), and so on. This extended use of ‘texts’ is
common in certain areas of linguistics, though we recognise that it is not a
very satisfactory term.
3. For example, in her critique of Bourdieu, Judith Butler (2000) assumes a
Humean concept of causation. Unsurprisingly, then, she fails to note that to
acknowledge performativity is to concede the causal efﬁcacity of discourses.
4. Empirical is not an ontological category counterposed to the ‘real’ or the
‘actual’ but an epistemological one. Parts of the real as well as the actual may
be observable.
5. Critical realists have debated whether social structures, such as those of 
language, exist independently of their enactment (Bhaskar 1979, 1989,
Benton 1981, Collier 1994).
220
Dialectics of discourse: theoretical developments


6. This is an example of a set of powers that needs a certain amount of use if they
are to be sustained but, at least in the short run, we have these powers even
though they are only activated intermittently.
7. ‘Felt’ or ‘sensed’ might better describe some of the less articulated responses.
8. Interestingly, according to Ringer (2000), this view was shared by Max
Weber, one of the founders of interpretive sociology. While Weber is widely
associated with an allegedly unsuccessful attempt to unite explanatory
(causal) and interpretive (hermeneutic) analysis, this negative judgement
arises because most interpreters have assumed that Weber followed a Humean
model of causation based on constant conjunctions. However, Ringer shows
that Weber rejected this model as well as related arguments that anticipated
Hempel’s neo-positivist, deductive nomological ‘covering law’ model of
causal analysis. Weber came to appreciate that ‘reasons’ could be causes. He
concluded that an adequate explanation of a speciﬁc historical, cultural or
social phenomenon must be adequate both in terms of motivational intellig-
ibility (i.e., its social meaning for the relevant actors) and its production
through the contingent interaction of causal processes in speciﬁc circum-
stances. Bhaskar’s ﬁrst critical realist defence of the possibility of naturalism
incorrectly cites Weber as seeing constant conjunctions as necessary for an
adequate explanation (1989: 2, 137–8). He presents Weber as combining 
a neo-Kantian methodology with methodological individualism and con-
trasts this approach with Marx’s realist methodology and relational ontology
(1989: 31). He also argues that there are two key differences between
Weberian sociology and transcendental realism: (a) whereas Weber accepts,
realism rejects constant conjunctions; (b) whereas Weber denies, realism
accepts that correction of agents’ perceptions may be a necessary part of 
a social scientiﬁc investigation (1989: 135–8). Bhaskar is wrong on both
counts since Weber also discussed ‘wrong thinking’ and other forms of 
irrationality. Another problem that is directly relevant to our own analysis
below is that Weber does not adequately distinguish between the actual and
the real. In using terms such as ‘pressing toward’, ‘developmental tend-
encies’, ‘moving forces’, and ‘impeding’ factors, Weber supported a dynamic
conception of causal analysis. But he also argued that such notions do not 
constitute ‘real causal interconnections’ at an ‘elementary’ level but involve
no more than tactically useful constructs in the practice of historical reason-
ing (Ringer 2000: 76).
9. For an interesting discussion of semiosis and its conditions in relation to 
realism and pragmatism, see Nellhaus (1998).
10. The signiﬁer/signiﬁed relationship is often mistakenly interpreted as one of
text to referent. It is part of a threefold relation among signiﬁer/signiﬁed/
referent. See Thibalt.
11. See Archer (2000) for an interesting argument on the pre-linguistic and
material bases of logic.
Critical realism and semiosis
221


12. On the role of variation, selection, and retention in evolution, see Campbell
(1969).
13. Long-term critical engagement with a contested discourse can, of course,
serve to reproduce the terms of a given debate at the expense of moving
beyond it (e.g., the relationship between base and superstructure in Marxism
or the primacy of structure or agency in sociology).
222
Dialectics of discourse: theoretical developments


S e c t i o n  D
Methodology in CDA 
research


This page intentionally left blank


Introduction
I
use methodology in preference to method. Settling on a methodology for a
particular research project is not just a matter of selecting from an existing
repertoire of methods. It is a theoretical process which constructs an object 
of research (a researchable object, a set of researchable questions) for the
research topic by bringing to bear on it relevant theoretical perspectives 
and frameworks. Methods (e.g., of data collection and analysis) are selected
according to how the research object is constructed. So one cannot neatly 
separate and oppose theory and method in the conventional way. This is 
more fully explained and illustrated in the ﬁrst paper (‘A dialectical–relational
approach to critical discourse analysis in social research’).
The ﬁve papers in this section were published between 2002 and 2009.
They are all concerned with issues of methodology in CDA research, but they
differ in how they approach these issues. The ﬁrst is a systematic presentation
and illustration of a methodology for the version of CDA I am working with at
the time of writing (2008). The second (‘Understanding the new management
ideology. A transdisciplinary contribution from critical discourse analysis and
the new sociology of capitalism’) is an exploration of how a transdisciplinary
research methodology might be developed between CDA and an approach 
to analysing changes in capitalism developed by French sociologists, ‘New
Sociology of Capitalism’. It was written with Eve Chiapello, the co-author of 
a major study using that approach. The third (‘Critical discourse analysis in
researching language in the new capitalism: overdetermination, transdiscip-
linarity and textual analysis’) focuses on the implications of a transdiscip-
linary research methodology for methods of analysing texts, and discusses
common ground and differences between CDA and systemic functional 
linguistics. The fourth (‘Marx as a critical discourse analyst: the genesis of a


critical method and its relevance to the critique of global capital’) is a study
with Phil Graham of Marx’s analytical method, focusing on the ways in 
which it foreshadowed and might inform CDA. The ﬁfth (‘Critical discourse 
analysis, organisational discourse and organisational change’) is an invited 
contribution to the journal Organization Studieson developments in research
on organisational discourse, which advocates a CDA methodology based
upon critical realism in preference to the postmodernist and extreme social
constructivist approaches often adopted.
The ﬁrst paper (‘A dialectical–relational approach to critical discourse
analysis in social research’) presents a methodology which is a form of what
Bhaskar (1986) calls ‘explanatory critique’. The same methodology in essence
was proposed in the book I co-authored with Lilie Chouliaraki, Discourse 
in Late Modernity (1999), though I have modiﬁed it here. The methodology
can be formulated in four ‘stages’ (which can be further elaborated into a 
number of ‘steps’):
Stage 1: Focus upon a social wrong, in its semiotic aspect.
Stage 2: Identify obstacles to addressing the social wrong.
Stage 3: Consider whether the social order ‘needs’ the social wrong.
Stage 4: Identify possible ways past the obstacles.
The methodology follows the practice in critical research of focusing research
on wrongs, a term I use here in preference to problems, which Chouliaraki and
I used, for reasons explained in the paper. Wrongs include injustices and
inequalities which people experience, but which are not necessary wrongs in
the sense that, given certain social conditions, they could be righted or at least
mitigated. These might be, for instance, matters of inequalities in access to
material resources, lack of political rights, inequalities before the law or on the
basis of differences in ethnic or cultural identity. Stage 1 also indicates a focus
on wrongs which can be productively researched in terms of relations between
semiotic and extra-semiotic elements, and one ‘step’ within Stage 1 is con-
structing a research object for researching the wrong in a transdisciplinary
way. Stage 2 asks: what is it about the nature of the social order in which this
wrong exists that makes it difﬁcult to right it? Since the ‘point of entry’ in CDA
research is semiotic, we need to consider particularly semiotic aspects of the
obstacles, and to answer this question we need to analyse dialectical relations
between semiotic and extra-semiotic elements in relevant practices, institu-
tions and events, which entails collecting and analysing relevant texts. Stage 3
asks: is this social wrong inherent to the social order so that it can’t be righted
without changing the social order (though perhaps it can be mitigated), or
226
Methodology in CDA research


something that can be righted without such radical change? Stage 4 asks 
how the obstacles identiﬁed in Stage 2 might be overcome, and since these
obstacles are partly semiotic in character, it focuses on how people actually
deal or might deal with the obstacles in part by contesting and changing dis-
course. The social wrong I take as an example to illustrate this methodology 
is a political one: suppression of political differences over how to respond
nationally to major international economic changes (‘the global economy’, as
many construe it) in favour of creating a consensus, which is a social wrong in
that it undermines democracy but also poses the danger that dissent which
cannot be politically articulated may emerge in nationalist or xenophobic
forms. The problem is one of depoliticisation, keeping issues and people out
of political debate and dialogue, and the research object is: semiotic aspects 
of depoliticisation and politicisation (the latter because we are also concerned
– Stage 4 – in how they may be brought back in).
This paper appeared in a collection of papers which presented a variety 
of ‘methods’ in CDA (Wodak and Meyer 2001). Labelling different
approaches to CDA (as ‘dialectical–relational’, ‘discourse–historical’ etc.) has
the advantage of showing that there are in indeed differences in approach, but 
also the substantial disadvantage of potentially ossifying different tendencies
and emphases into mutually exclusive territories. I think it is misleading to
overemphasise, and especially to institutionalise, these differences – which
amounts to advising readers not to make too much of the title of this paper. For
instance, my approach to CDA is, like the approach labelled ‘discourse–
historical’ in the collection of papers, discourse–historical, and dialectical
relations are a focus for all the approaches in the book, though my treatment of
both these facets of CDA is different and sometimes markedly different from
others.
The second paper (‘Understanding the new management ideology. A
transdisciplinary contribution from critical discourse analysis and the new
sociology of capitalism’) begins from the concept of and analysis of the ‘spirit
of capitalism’ in the book of that title by Luc Boltanski and my co-author, Eve
Chiapello (Boltanski and Chiapello 1999). The book offers an account of
changes in capitalism since 1960, focusing upon one aspect of the new ‘spirit
of capitalism’ associated with the new form of capitalism which began to
emerge in the 1980s, an ideology which justiﬁes people’s commitment to this
form of capitalism: new management ideology. The book includes analysis 
of two bodies of texts, management literature from the 1960s and from the
1990s. Given this textual dimension of the book’s analytical method, our paper
seeks to develop a transdisciplinary methodology which brings together the
new sociology of capitalism and my version of CDA, and to assess what it can
Introduction
227


add to research on transformations in capitalism. To make this methodo-
logical endeavour more concrete we include an analysis of part of a book by an
inﬂuential management ‘guru’ Rosabeth Moss Kanter who was one of the
authors included in Boltanski and Chiapello’s corpus of texts from the 1990s.
The third paper (‘Critical discourse analysis in researching language in the
new capitalism: overdetermination, transdisciplinarity and textual analysis’)
focuses upon textual analysis, and how discourse analysts and linguists can
make a strong case to social scientists for textual analysis as a signiﬁcant 
element in social research, speciﬁcally research on current transformations 
of capitalism. This is a theme I addressed in an earlier paper in the journal
Discourse & Society (Fairclough 1992e) and more extensively in my book
Analyzing Discourse: Textual Analysis for Social Research (2003). A central
claim both of that book and of this paper is that although there is much in exist-
ing forms of textual analysis which can be drawn upon in this regard (and 
I emphasise particularly the contribution of systemic functional linguistics
(SFL)), working in the transdisciplinary way I am proposing for CDA also
entails developing a transdisciplinary way of approaching textual analysis.
This means seeking to operationalise categories and perspectives in other 
theories in ways of analysing texts, as I also sought to do for categories from
Bernstein’s sociological theory and Laclau and Mouffe’s political theory in the
paper ‘Discourse, social theory and social research: the discourse of welfare
reform’ in Section C (pages 167–201). The paper also takes up what I see to be
the main difference between my version of CDA and SFL with respect to tex-
tual analysis: for CDA, textual analysis includes interdiscursive analysis of
how genres, discourses and styles are articulated in texts, for SFL it does not.
The fourth paper (‘Marx as a critical discourse analyst: the genesis of a crit-
ical method and its relevance to the critique of global capital’), co-authored
with Phil Graham, is a study of the development of Marx’s method in a range
of his economic, political and historical texts. We show that it was based upon
a view of language as an element of material social processes which is dia-
lectically related to other elements, that critique of language was therefore 
part of Marx’s critical method, that one can see the latter as in part a form 
of CDA avant la lettre, and that applications of CDA in transdisciplinary 
critical research on contemporary capitalism may gain from a study of 
Marx’s method. The paper argues that his method drew not only from the 
philosophy of his day and especially from Hegel but also from the classical 
tradition, Aristotle in particular. We trace these inﬂuences and the ways in
which he transformed them with respect to the theory of abstraction, the dialec-
tical method, and ideology. We then analyse extracts from six texts (Critique 
of Hegel’s Doctrine of the State, Economic and Philosophic Manuscripts,
228
Methodology in CDA research


Capital, Critique of the Gotha Programme, The Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis
Napoleon, and the Grundrisse). We suggest that critique of texts (the texts of
the political economists, of Hegel, and of others) was a crucial element and
stage in Marx’s method, and that the central focus of this critique, and the
basis for the development of his own analyses, was, as he put it in the Economic
and Philosophic Manuscripts, failure ‘to grasp the interconnections within the
movement’ of social history and social reality. It is a critique of relations, or 
of what we call ‘connectivity’, in texts. We suggest that what it points to for
CDA is ‘a critical analysis of the whole formal and conceptual architecture of
texts’ (e.g., the texts of political economy – or the texts produced around and
in relation to what is emerging at the time of writing (winter 2008) as a major
economic crisis) ‘focusing on texts as relational work . . . as producing certain
relations and not producing others . . . as well as . . . being produced from
within certain relations and not from within others’.
The ﬁfth paper (‘Critical discourse analysis, organisational discourse 
and organisational change’) is a polemical comment piece on the analysis of
organisational discourse within the ﬁeld of organisation studies, which takes
issue with postmodernist and extreme social constructivist positions. I argue
against the reductions that characterise the latter: the reduction of organisa-
tions to organisational discourse, and the reduction of organisational analysis
to the ‘organising’ that goes on in organisational processes. I suggest by con-
trast that discourse analysis is consistent with a realist approach to organisa-
tional research which distinguishes organisational process and agency from
organisational structures, and focuses research on the relations and tensions
between them. Incorporating discourse analysis into a realist approach both
ensures that questions of discourse are properly attended to in organisational
studies, and avoids these forms of reduction. Within such a realist approach,
discourse analysis can make a signiﬁcant contribution to researching organisa-
tional change, and addressing such general concerns as the following: When
organisations change, what is it that changes? What makes organisations
resilient in the face of change, resistant to change, or open to change? How are
external pressures for organisational change internalised in organisations,
how may organisational members respond to them, and what outcomes are
possible? Such questions cannot, of course, be addressed by discourse 
analysts alone, but my argument is that effectively researching them does
depend on a substantive element of discourse analysis in transdisciplinary
research on organisational change.
Introduction
229


9.
A dialectical–relational approach to
critical discourse analysis in social
research1
I
n this paper, I introduce and illustrate a methodology for using a dialectical–
relational version of CDA in transdisciplinary social research (Chouliaraki
and Fairclough 1999, Fairclough 2003, 2006). I begin with a theoretical 
section explaining the dialectical–relational approach, including my view of
discourse, of critical analysis, and of transdisciplinary research. In the second
section, I explain the methodology, presenting it as a series of stages and steps,
and identify a number of core analytical categories. In the third section, I pre-
sent an example, showing the application of this methodology in researching
a political topic, and I illustrate the approach to political analysis in the fourth
section with respect to particular texts. The sixth section summarises what
can be achieved with this methodology and discusses possible limitations.
1 Theory and concepts
First, a terminological point. Discourse is commonly used in various senses
including (a) meaning-making as an element of the social process, (b) the 
language associated with a particular social ﬁeld or practice (e.g., ‘political
discourse’), and (c) a way of construing aspects of the world associated with a
particular social perspective (e.g., a ‘neo-liberal discourse of globalisation’). It
is easy to confuse them, so to at least partially reduce the scope for confusion,
I prefer to use semiosis for the ﬁrst, most abstract and general sense (following
Fairclough, Jessop and Sayer 2004), which has the further advantage of sug-
gesting that discourse analysis is concerned with various ‘semiotic modalities’
of which language is only one (others are visual images and ‘body language’).
Semiosis is viewed here as an element of the social process which is dialect-
ically related to others – hence a ‘dialectical–relational’ approach. Relations
Semiosis : 9% (How
to use
or
produce


between elements are dialectical in the sense of being different but not ‘dis-
crete’, i.e., not fully separate. We might say that each ‘internalises’ the others
without being reducible to them (Harvey 1996) – e.g., social relations, power,
institutions, beliefs and cultural values are in part semiotic; they ‘internalise’
semiosis without being reducible to it. For example, although we should ana-
lyse political institutions or business organisations as partly semiotic objects,
it would be a mistake to treat them as purely semiotic, because then we couldn’t
ask the key question: what is the relationship between semiotic and other 
elements? CDA focuses not just upon semiosis as such, but on the relations
between semiotic and other social elements. The nature of this relationship
varies between institutions and organisations, and according to time and
place, and it needs to be established through analysis.
This requires CDA to be integrated within frameworks for transdiscip-
linary research, such as the framework I have used in recent publications, 
cultural political economy, which combines elements from three disciplines: 
a form of economic analysis (the ‘Regulation Approach’), a neo-Gramscian
theory of the state, and a form of CDA ( Jessop 2004, Fairclough 2006).
Transdisciplinary research is a particular form of interdisciplinary research
(Fairclough 2005b). What distinguishes it is that in bringing disciplines and
theories together to address research issues, it sees ‘dialogue’ between them as
a source for the theoretical and methodological development of each of them.
For example, recontextualisation was introduced as a concept and category
within CDA through a dialogue with Basil Bernstein’s sociology of pedagogy,
where it originated (Chouliaraki and Fairclough 1999).
In what sense is CDA critical? Critical social research aims to contribute 
to addressing the social ‘wrongs’ of the day (in a broad sense – injustice,
inequality, lack of freedom etc.) by analysing their sources and causes, resist-
ance to them and possibilities of overcoming them. We can say that it has both
a ‘negative’ and a ‘positive’ character. On the one hand, it analyses and seeks 
to explain dialectical relations between semiosis and other social elements to
clarify how semiosis ﬁgures in the establishment, reproduction and change 
of unequal power relations (domination, marginalisation, exclusion of some
people by others) and in ideological processes, and how in more general terms
it bears upon human ‘well-being’. These relations require analysis because
there are no societies whose logic and dynamic, including how semiosis
ﬁgures within them, are fully transparent to all: the forms in which they appear
to people are often partial and in part misleading. On the other hand, critique
is oriented to analysing and explaining, with a focus on these dialectical rela-
tions, the many ways in which the dominant logic and dynamic are tested,
challenged and disrupted by people, and to identifying possibilities which
A dialectical–relational approach to critical discourse analysis
231
internalizes
: At TE


these suggest for overcoming obstacles to addressing ‘wrongs’ and improving
well-being.
The social process can be seen as the interplay between three levels 
of social reality: social structures, practices and events (Chouliaraki and
Fairclough 1999). Social practices ‘mediate’ the relationship between social
structures at the most general and abstract level and particular, concrete 
social events; social ﬁelds, institutions and organisations are constituted as
networks of social practices (see Bourdieu on social practices and ﬁelds –
Bourdieu and Wacquant 1992). In this approach to CDA, analysis is focused
on two dialectical relations: between structure (especially social practices as
an intermediate level of structuring) and events (or between structure and
action, structure and strategy) and, within each, between semiotic and other
elements. There are three major ways in which semiosis relates to other 
elements of social practices and of social events – as a facet of action; in the 
construal (representation) of aspects of the world; and in the constitution of
identities. And there are three semiotic (or discourse–analytical) categories
corresponding to these: genre, discourse and style.
Genres are semiotic ways of acting and interacting, such as news or job
interviews, reports or editorials in newspapers, or advertisements on TV or
the internet. Part of doing a job, or running a country, is interacting semi-
otically or communicatively in certain ways, and such activities have distinc-
tive sets of genres associated with them. Discourses are semiotic ways of 
construing aspects of the world (physical, social or mental) which can gener-
ally be identiﬁed with different positions or perspectives of different groups 
of social actors. For instance, the lives of poor people are not only construed
through different discourses associated with different social practices (in 
politics, medicine, social welfare, academic sociology) but through different
discourses within each practice which correspond to differences of position
and perspective. I use ‘construe’ in preference to ‘represent’ to emphasise an
active and often difﬁcult process of ‘grasping’ the world from a particular per-
spective (Fairclough 2009). Styles are identities, or ‘ways of being’, in their
semiotic aspect – for instance, being a ‘manager’ in the currently fashionable
way in business or in universities is partly a matter of developing the right
semiotic style.
The semiotic dimension of (networks of ) social practices which constitute
social ﬁelds, institutions, organisations etc. is orders of discourse (Fairclough
1992a); the semiotic dimension of events is texts. Orders of discourse are 
particular conﬁgurations of different genres, different discourses and differ-
ent styles. An order of discourse is a social structuring of semiotic differ-
ence, a particular social ordering of relationships between different ways of 
232
Methodology in CDA research


meaning-making – different genres, discourses and styles. So, for example, 
the network of social practices which constitutes the ﬁeld of education, or a
particular educational organisation such as a university, is constituted semio-
tically as an order of discourse. Texts are to be understood in an inclusive
sense, not only written texts but also conversations and interviews, as well as
the ‘multi-modal’ texts (mixing language and visual images) of television and
the internet. Some events consist almost entirely of texts (e.g., a lecture or an
interview), while in others, texts have a relatively small part (e.g., a game of
chess).
Discourses which originate in some particular social ﬁeld or institution
(e.g., to anticipate the example, neo-liberal economic discourse, which origin-
ated within academic economics and business) may be recontextualised in
others (e.g., in the political ﬁeld or the educational ﬁeld). Recontextualisation
has an ambivalent character (Chouliaraki and Fairclough 1999): it can be 
seen as the ‘colonisation’ of one ﬁeld or institution by another, but also as 
the ‘appropriation’ of ‘external’ discourses, often the incorporation of dis-
courses into strategies pursued by particular groups of social agents within 
the recontextualising ﬁeld. For example, the ‘transition’ to a market economy
and western-style democratic government in the formerly socialist countries
of Europe (e.g., Poland, Romania) has involved a ‘colonising’ recontextualisa-
tion of discourses (e.g., discourses of ‘privatisation’) which were, however,
incorporated differently into the strategies of new entrepreneurs, government
ofﬁcials, managers of state industries, etc. (Fairclough 2006).
Discourses may under certain conditions be operationalised or ‘put into
practice’, which is a dialectical process with three aspects: they may be 
enacted as new ways of (inter)acting, they may be inculcated as new ways of
being (identities), and they may be physically materialised, e.g., as new ways 
of organising space, for example in architecture. Enactment and inculca-
tion may themselves take semiotic forms: a new management discourse (e.g., 
the discourse of marketised ‘new public management’ which has invaded 
public sector ﬁelds like education and health) may be enacted as management
procedures which include new genres of interaction between managers and
workers, or it may be inculcated as identities which semiotically include the
styles of the new type of managers.
CDA oscillates, as I have indicated, between a focus on structures (espe-
cially the intermediate level of the structuring of social practices) and a focus
on the strategiesof social agents, i.e., the ways in which they try to achieve out-
comes or objectives within existing structures and practices, or to change
them in particular ways. This includes a focus on shifts in the structuring of
semiotic difference (i.e., shifts in orders of discourse) which constitute a part
A dialectical–relational approach to critical discourse analysis
233


of social change, and on how social agents pursue their strategies semiotically
in texts. In both perspectives, a central concern is shifting relations between
genres, discourses and styles, and between different genres, between different
discourses and between different styles: change in the social structuring of
relations between them which achieves relative permanence and stability in
orders of discourse, and the ongoing working and reworking of relations
between them which is regarded in this approach to CDA as a normal feature
of texts.
The term interdiscursivity is reserved for the latter: the interdiscursiv-
ity of a text is an aspect of its intertextuality (Fairclough 1992a), a question 
of which genres, discourses and styles it draws upon, and how it works 
them into particular articulations. Textual analysis also includes linguistic
analysis, and analysis where appropriate of visual images and ‘body lan-
guage’, and these features of texts can be seen as realising its interdiscursive 
features.
2 Methodology
I have referred to a ‘methodology’ for using a dialectical–relational version of
CDA in transdisciplinary social research rather than a ‘method’, because I also
see the process as a theoretical one in which methods are selected according 
to how the object of research (Bourdieu and Wacquant 1992) is theoret-
ically constructed. So it is not just a matter of ‘applying methods’ in the usual
sense – we cannot so sharply separate theory and method. This version of
CDA is associated with a general method, which I discuss below, but the 
speciﬁc methods used for a particular piece of research arise from the theore-
tical process of constructing its object.
We can identify ‘stages’ or ‘steps’ in the methodology only on condition
that these are not interpreted in a mechanical way: these are essential parts of
the methodology (a matter of its ‘theoretical order’), and while it does make
partial sense to proceed from one to the next (a matter of the ‘procedural
order’), the relationship between them in doing research is not simply that 
of sequential order. For instance, the ‘step’ I refer to below of constructing 
the object of research does need to precede subsequent steps, but it also 
makes sense to ‘loop’ back to it in the light of subsequent steps, seeing the 
formulation of the object of research as a preoccupation throughout. It is also
helpful to distinguish the ‘theoretical’ and ‘procedural’ from the ‘presenta-
tional’ order one chooses to follow in, for instance, writing a paper – other 
generally rhetorical factors will affect the order in which one presents one’s
analysis.
234
Methodology in CDA research


The methodology can be seen as a variant of Bhaskar’s ‘explanatory 
critique’ (Bhaskar 1986, Chouliaraki and Fairclough 1999) and can be for-
mulated initially as four ‘stages’:
Stage 1: Focus upon a social wrong, in its semiotic aspect.
Stage 2: Identify obstacles to addressing the social wrong.
Stage 3: Consider whether the social order ‘needs’ the social wrong.
Stage 4: Identify possible ways past the obstacles.
Stage 1: Focus upon a social wrong, in its semiotic aspect
CDA is a form of critical social science geared to a better understanding of 
the nature and sources of social wrongs, the obstacles to addressing them 
and possible ways of overcoming those obstacles. ‘Social wrongs’ can be
understood in broad terms as aspects of social systems, forms or orders 
which are detrimental to human well-being, and which could in principle be
ameliorated if not eliminated, though perhaps only through major changes 
in these systems, forms or orders. Examples might be poverty, forms of
inequality, lack of freedom or racism. Of course, what constitutes a ‘social
wrong’ is a controversial matter, and CDA is inevitably involved in debates 
and arguments about this which go on all the time.2 We can elaborate Stage 1
in two steps:
Step 1: Select a research topic which relates to or points up a social wrong
and which can productively be approached in a transdisciplinary way with 
a particular focus on dialectical relations between semiotic and other
‘moments’
We might, for instance, conclude that such an approach is potentially ‘pro-
ductive’ because there are signiﬁcant semiotic features of the topic which have
not been sufﬁciently attended to in existing social research. A topic might
attract our interest because it has been prominent in the relevant academic 
literature, or is a focus of practical attention in the domain or ﬁeld at issue (in
political debate or debates over questions of management or ‘leadership’, in
media commentary and so forth). Topics are often ‘given’, and they sometimes
virtually select themselves – who could doubt for instance that ‘immigration’,
‘terrorism’, ‘globalisation’ or ‘security’ are important contemporary topics,
with signiﬁcant implications for human well-being, which researchers should
attend to? Selecting such topics has the advantage of ensuring that research 
is relevant to the issues, problems and wrongs of the day, but also the danger
A dialectical–relational approach to critical discourse analysis
235


that their very obviousness can lead us to take them too much at face value. We
cannot assume that such topics are coherent research objects; to ‘translate’
topics into objects, we need to theorise them.
Step 2: Construct objects of research for initially identiﬁed research topics
by theorising them in a transdisciplinary way
Anticipating the example I shall discuss below, let us assume that the selected
research topic is the relationship between national strategies and policies and
the ‘global economy’: strategies and policies which are developed for the
global economy, or the adaptation of national strategies and policies for the
global economy. We might pin this down by focusing, for instance, on strat-
egies and policies to enhance ‘competitiveness’ in particular countries (the
example I discuss relates to competitiveness policies in the UK). As a topic for
critical research, this seems plausible enough: a preoccupation of contempor-
ary governments is indeed adapting to the ‘global economy’, and this process
does indeed have implications for human well-being (it is widely presented 
as a way towards greater prosperity and opportunity, but as entailing suffer-
ing and insecurity for some people). One – controversial – formulation of the
social wrong in this case might be that the well-being (material prosperity,
security, political freedom etc.) of some people – arguably the majority – is
being unfairly or unjustly sacriﬁced for the interests of others. I shall focus
below on one particular political aspect of the social wrong: the suppression 
of political differences in favour of a national consensus on strategies and 
policies.
Constructing an object of research for this topic involves drawing upon 
relevant bodies of theory in various disciplines to go beyond and beneath the
obviousness of the topic, and since the focus is on a speciﬁcally semiotic ‘point
of entry’ into researching it, these should include theories of semiosis and 
discourse. There are no ‘right answers’ to the question of which theoretical
perspectives to draw upon: it is a matter of researchers’ judgements about
which perspectives can provide a rich theorisation as a basis for deﬁning
coherent objects for critical research which can deepen understanding of 
the processes at issue, their implications for human well-being and the pos-
sibilities for improving well-being. One must work in a transdisciplinary 
way, either in research teams which bring together specialists in relevant 
disciplines, or by engaging with literature in such disciplines.
What theoretical perspectives might be drawn upon in this case? These
might include (political) economic theories which theorise and analyse the
‘global economy’ and take positions on whether and how it constitutes a
236
Methodology in CDA research


‘realm of necessity’, a fact of life; state and political theories which probe the
character and functioning of the state and of national and international politics
in the era of ‘globalisation’; theories of ‘global ethnography’ which address
how local groups and individuals seek to adapt to but also sometimes test and
challenge the ‘global economy’ as a claimed realm of necessity. The import-
ance of discourse theory is indicated by this implicit questioning of the ‘global
economy’: a central issue in both the academic literature and practical
responses to the ‘global economy’ in politics, workplaces and everyday life is
the relationship between reality and discourse – the reality and the discourses
of the ‘global economy’ and of its impact, implications and ramiﬁcations. We
can initially identify analysis of the complex relationship between reality and
discourse as a general formulation of the object of research for a semiotic
‘point of entry’ into this topic, but I shall suggest a more speciﬁc formulation,
linked to the example I shall discuss, in the section below on political dis-
course analysis.
Stage 2: Identify obstacles to addressing the social wrong
Stage 2 approaches the social wrong in a rather indirect way by asking what it
is about the way in which social life is structured and organised that prevents
it from being addressed. This requires bringing in analyses of the social order,
and one ‘point of entry’ into this analysis can be semiotic, which entails select-
ing and analysing relevant ‘texts’ and addressing the dialectical relations
between semiosis and other social elements. Steps 1–3 can be formulated as
follows:
1. Analyse dialectical relations between semiosis and other social elements:
between orders of discourse and other elements of social practices,
between texts and other elements of events.
2. Select texts, and focuses and categories for their analysis, in the light of and
appropriate to the constitution of the object of research.
3. Carry out analyses of texts, both interdiscursive analysis and linguistic/
semiotic analysis.
Taken together, these three steps indicate an important feature of this version
of CDA: textual analysis is only a part of semiotic analysis (discourse ana-
lysis), and the former must be adequately framed within the latter. The aim is
to develop a speciﬁcally semiotic ‘point of entry’ into objects of research which
are constituted in a transdisciplinary way, through dialogue between different
theories and disciplines. The analysis of texts can effectively contribute to this
A dialectical–relational approach to critical discourse analysis
237


only in so far as it is located within a wider analysis of the object of research 
in terms of dialectical relations between semiotic and other elements which
comprehend relations between the level of social practices and the level of
events (and between orders of discourse and texts).
I shall not elaborate much on the three steps at this stage, because I think
they will be clearer when I work through them using the example below. There
is one point about Step 3, however. I said above that although the particular
methods of textual analysis used in a speciﬁc case depend upon the object of
research, this version of CDA does have a general method of analysis. I alluded
to this in the ﬁrst section: textual analysis includes both linguistic analysis (and,
if relevant, analysis of other semiotic forms, such as visual images) and inter-
discursive analysis (analysis of which genres, discourses and styles are drawn
upon, and how they are articulated together). Moreover, interdiscursive 
analysis has the crucial effect of constituting a mediating ‘interlevel’ which
connects both linguistic analysis with relevant forms of social analysis, and the
analysis of the text as part of an event with the analysis of social practices – in
more general terms, the analysis of event (action, strategy) with the analysis of
structure. Why so? Because interdiscursive analysis compares how genres,
discourses and styles are articulated together in a text as part of a speciﬁc
event, and in more stable and durable orders of discourses as part of networks
of practices, which (qua social practices) are objects of various forms of social
analysis.
Stage 3: Consider whether the social order ‘needs’ the social wrong
It is not awfully obvious what this means, and I shall try to clarify it by again
anticipating the example. I indicated above that the social wrong I shall focus
on when I get to the example is the suppression of political differences over the
global economy and national responses to it in favour of seeking to create a
national consensus, which is substantively realised in discourse. In what sense
might the social order ‘need’ this? Perhaps in the sense – again anticipating the
discussion below – that the internationally dominant strategy for globalising
an economic order based upon neo-liberal principles requires that states be
able to operate in support of this strategy without being encumbered by the
‘old’ adversarial politics. Stage 3 leads us to consider whether the social wrong
in focus is inherent to the social order, whether it can be addressed within it,
or only by changing it. It is a way of linking ‘is’ to ‘ought’: if a social order can
be shown to inherently give rise to major social wrongs, then that is a reason for
thinking that perhaps it should be changed. (Which leads to the question of
whether it can be changed – whether the contradictions of the social order are
238
Methodology in CDA research


such, and the forces and resources which might be deployed against it are such,
that change is feasible as well as desirable.) It also connects with questions 
of ideology: discourse is ideological in so far as it contributes to sustaining 
particular relations of power and domination.
Stage 4: Identify possible ways past the obstacles
Stage 4 moves the analysis from negative to positive critique: identifying, with
a focus on dialectical relations between semiosis and other elements, possibil-
ities within the existing social process for overcoming obstacles to addressing
the social wrong in question. This includes developing a semiotic ‘point of
entry’ into research on the ways in which these obstacles are actually tested,
challenged and resisted, be it within organised political or social groups 
or movements, or more informally by people in the course of their ordinary
working, social and domestic lives. A speciﬁcally semiotic focus would
include ways in which dominant discourse is reacted to, contested, criticised
and opposed (in its argumentation, its construal of the world, its construal of
social identities and so forth).
3 An example: political discourse analysis
The texts I shall discuss below are political texts: the foreword to a govern-
ment document written by former British Prime Minister Tony Blair, and a
critique of Blair’s ‘New Labour’ government by two former members of the
Labour Party. As I have said, how a research topic is constituted as an object of
research determines both the selection of texts for analysis and the nature of
the analysis. In this section, I shall suggest a more speciﬁc formulation of the
object of research for the research topic anticipated above (‘adapting national
strategy and policy for the global economy’), which entails some discussion of
political theories of the contemporary ‘political condition’, and the main
issues and priorities it suggests for analysis of politics and political discourse.
I shall discuss theoretical perspectives on the character of contemporary 
politics and the State especially in advanced capitalist countries like Britain,
but I should emphasise that this discussion is necessarily partial given limita-
tions of space. The material in this section will also help with Step 1 of Stage 2
of the methodology when we get to the texts – analysing dialectical relations
between semiosis and other elements, especially at the level of social practices
and orders of discourse.
Let me begin with a highly condensed summary analysis of the contem-
porary ‘political condition’, in the form of four major claims:
A dialectical–relational approach to critical discourse analysis
239


• Globalisation in its dominant neo-liberal form has been associated with
changes in the state and national (as well as international) politics (Harvey
2003, Pieterse 2004).
• There is a tendency of the state to become a ‘competition state’ with the 
primary objective of securing competitive advantage for the capital based
within its borders (Jessop 2002).
• There is an associated tendency within mainstream politics for the political
division and contestation (e.g., between political parties) characteristic of
the previous period to weaken, and for consensus to emerge on the main
strategy and policy issues (Rancière 2006).
• This tendency constitutes a fundamental political danger; not only is it a
threat to democracy, it also creates a vacuum which can be ﬁlled by nation-
alism and xenophobia (Rancière 1995, Mouffe 2005).
The fourth point is based upon particular views of the general character of
(democratic) politics and of politics in modern democracies. I shall refer
speciﬁcally to Rancière’s view. He argues that democracies, both ancient and
modern, are mixed forms, as anticipated by Aristotle when he characterised 
‘a good regime’ as a ‘mixture of constitutions . . . there should appear to be
elements of both (oligarchy and democracy) yet at the same time of neither
. . . the oligarch sees oligarchy and the democrat democracy’ (see Aristotle,
Politics IV: 1294b). This follows from the fact that ‘the question of politics
begins in every city with the existence of the mass of the aporoi, those who
have no means, and the small number of the euporoi, those who have them’
(Rancière 1995: 13). The task of politics is to calm and control the irreducible
conﬂict between rich and poor, which means curbing the excesses of demo-
cracy. What we now call ‘democracies’ are actually oligarchies in which 
government is exercised by the minority over the majority. What makes them
speciﬁcally democratic is that the power of oligarchies rests upon the power 
of the people, most obviously because governments are elected. In demo-
cracies, oligarchy and democracy are opposing principles in tension, and any
regime is an unstable compromise between them. The public sphere is the
sphere of encounters and conﬂicts between these principles: governments
tend to reduce and appropriate the public sphere, relegating non-state actors
to the private sphere; democracy is the struggle against this privatisation, to
enlarge the public sphere and oppose the public/private division imposed by
government.
In contemporary democracies, the ‘conﬂictual equilibrium’ associated
with popular sovereignty is being undermined. The oligarchic system is being
combined with a ‘consensual vision’ on the claim that contemporary reality,
240
Methodology in CDA research


the global economy and the prospect of endless ‘growth’ which it promises,
do not leave us with a choice. Government is the business of ‘managing the
local effects of global necessity’, which requires consensus and an end to 
the ‘archaic’ indulgence of political division. Oligarchies are tempted by the
vision of governing without the people, i.e., without the division of the people,
which means effectively without politics, rendering popular sovereignty 
problematic. But the suppressed division inevitably returns, both in the form
of mobilisation outside the political system (e.g., against the negative effects 
of neo-liberal globalisation or the Iraq war) and in the dangerous form of
extreme-right nationalism and xenophobia.
A priority for political analysis is consequently contemporary processes of
depoliticisation, which is by no means a new strategy (according to Rancière
1995, it is ‘the oldest task of politics’) but is now emerging in a particularly
profound and threatening form. Depoliticisation is the exclusion of issues
and/or of people from processes of political deliberation and decision – plac-
ing them outside politics. But politicisation is equally a priority if we are to
analyse the tension between the principles of oligarchy and democracy, the
democratic response to depoliticisation, and how responses might develop a
momentum capable of contesting the push towards depoliticisation. Others
have also identiﬁed depoliticisation and politicisation as priorities (Palonen
1993, Sondermann 1997, Muntigl 2002, Hay 2007), but from different 
theoretical perspectives.
This prioritisation provides a basis for questioning the centrality which 
has been attributed to other problems and issues. Let me brieﬂy mention 
two. First, the centrality attributed to ‘sub-politics’ or ‘life politics’ by theorists
of ‘reﬂexive modernity’, which is linked to the recent prominence of ‘iden-
tity politics’. This accords with the perspective above in giving prominence 
to ‘grassroots’ political action, but clashes with it in construing such politics 
as an alternative to adversarial politics centred around the political system.
The ‘grassroots’ politics of politicisation is both deﬁned and limited by the
opposing logic of depoliticisation, which means that state- and government-
focused adversarial politics is by no means outdated. Second, the centrality
attributed by, for instance, those inﬂuenced by Habermas to ‘deliberative
democracy’ also tends to be associated with the assumption that adversarial
politics can be superseded and to construe political dialogue as a rational 
process of consensus-formation, rather than a process which allows divisions,
differences and conﬂicts to be contained within a shared political community
without the assumption that these are just ‘problems’ waiting to be ‘solved’. 
In different theoretical terms, we could say: these are contradictions, and
although they can be managed, they cannot be solved within the parameters 
A dialectical–relational approach to critical discourse analysis
241


of the existing system (Jessop 2002). This does not diminish or ignore 
cooperation in politics: conﬂict in political dialogue requires cooperation
(only those who are cooperating at a certain level can stage a conﬂict), and
adversarial politics necessarily includes cooperative moments (e.g., the forma-
tion of alliances).
We can fruitfully develop a speciﬁcally semiotic ‘point of entry’ into
analysing the processes of depoliticisation and politicisation. I shall illustrate
this below in my analysis of the texts. This does not exclude other issues and
associated categories which have tended to receive more attention in political
discourse analysis, and indeed I shall refer to some (legitimation, manipula-
tion, ideology, cooperation and identity). But it does imply a different ‘map-
ping’ of the relations between categories which may lead to reconceptualising
or changing some of them.
Politicisation and depoliticisation are high-level strategies or ‘macro-
strategies’; so are legitimation and delegitimation. Strategies combine goals
and means, and these macro-strategies are both means for achieving oligarchic
or democratic goals (e.g., governing with minimal interference from political
divisions, or pushing political differences into the public sphere), and goals in
their own right associated with further strategies as means. We can identify
strategies for (de)politicisation and (de)legitimation – for instance, ‘authorisa-
tion’ and ‘rationalisation’ have been suggested as legitimation strategies 
(van Leeuwen and Wodak 1999, van Leeuwen 2007). All of these are political
strategies, not semiotic (or ‘discourse’) strategies, though they are generally
realised semiotically. I suggested above that the object of research could be
broadly formulated as the complex relationship between discourse and 
reality in adapting national strategy and policy for the global economy. We 
can now reformulate it more precisely: semiotic realisations of strategies of
depoliticisation and politicisation in national responses to the ‘global eco-
nomy’, focusing on the competitiveness policy in the UK.
4 An illustration: analysing political texts
I come now to the analysis of two sample texts. The one I shall begin with is the
foreword written by the former British Prime Minister Tony Blair to the
Department of Trade and Industry’s White Paper, Our Competitive Future:
Building the Knowledge-Driven Economy (1998) – see Appendix 1, page 253.
I shall organise my comments according to the stages and steps listed in the
Methodology section, but I have just been effectively discussing aspects of
Stage 1 so I shall keep my comments on it brief.
242
Methodology in CDA research


Stage 1: Focus upon a social wrong, in its semiotic aspect
The social wrong I shall focus upon is the suppression or marginalisation 
of political differences over important issues of strategy and policy – how to
respond nationally to radical international economic changes (and the prior
question of what the changes actually are) – in favour of creating a consensus,
which is, as I indicated above, a social wrong in that it undermines democracy
but also poses the danger that dissent which cannot be politically articulated
may emerge in nationalist or xenophobic forms. A semiotic point of entry 
is possible and fruitful, focusing upon semiotic realisations of the macro-
strategy of depoliticisation, in accordance with the construction of the object
of research which I have discussed above. The second text, an extract from a
book (Brown and Coates 1996) written by former members of the Labour
Party criticising Blair’s ‘New Labour’ government, exempliﬁes semiotic 
realisations of the macro-strategy of politicisation. (Note that both macro-
strategies may, however, be at work in the same text.) Blair’s text is representa-
tive of the dominant tendency of the times towards depoliticisation; but this
tendency coexists with politicising responses such as that of the second text,
even if the latter often have a relatively marginal effect on government strategy
and policy. I have already discussed steps 1 and 2 above, on the construction
of an object of research for the research topic, in anticipation of the illustra-
tion, so we can move on to Stage 2.
Stage 2: Identify obstacles to addressing the social wrong
I shall discuss Stage 2 by taking each of the three steps it includes in turn.
Step 1: Analyse dialectical relations between semiosis and other social
elements (orders of discourse and elements of social practices, texts and
elements of events)
Step 1 also implicitly includes the dialectic between structures (at the inter-
mediate level of social practices) and events (and strategies). I have already (in
the previous section) given an indication of the social practices and orders of
discourse at issue here, but let me ﬁll this out a little with respect to the restruc-
turingand re-scaling ( Jessop 2002) tendencies associated with contemporary
capitalism, and a brief note on New Labour in Britain. Restructuring is
changes in structural relations, notably between economic and non-economic
ﬁelds, which include extensive ‘colonisation’ of the latter (including politics
and the state) by the former; re-scaling is changing relations between global,
A dialectical–relational approach to critical discourse analysis
243


regional, national and local scales of social life, including changes in govern-
ment and governance. Analysing these tendencies would help contextualise
the UK strategies and policies which are in focus, i.e., help determine what
they are a part of. National governments are increasingly incorporated within
larger networks which include not only other governments but also interna-
tional agencies (e.g., the European Union, the World Bank, the IMF), busi-
ness networks and so forth. Governments, according to Castells (1996), are
increasingly coming to function as ‘nodes’ within a transnational network
based upon a business–government complex, whose central ‘functions’ are
focused upon creating the conditions (ﬁnancial, ﬁscal, legal, ‘human capital’
etc.) for successful competition in the ‘global economy’. If the government
strategies and policies in focus here are locked into this powerful network, this
in itself constitutes a substantial obstacle to addressing the social wrong.
But these processes of restructuring and re-scaling have an important 
semiotic dimension: the networks of social practices which they entail are 
also orders of discourse which themselves cut across structural and scalar
boundaries. For example, the dominant neo-liberal discourse of globalisation
illustrated in the ﬁrst text is dominant in education as well as politics, and in
the European Union, the World Bank and many other countries apart from
Britain. There are also genres and styles which are disseminated structurally
and in scale in a similar way (Fairclough 2006). Moreover, the semiotic dimen-
sion is fundamental to restructuring and re-scaling, in the sense that these 
processes are ‘semiotically driven’. They begin as discourses which constitute
‘imaginaries’ ( Jessop 2004, 2008) – imaginary projections – for new relations
of structure and scale in economies, government, education and so forth;
these may become hegemonic, or dominant, and may be widely recontextu-
alised; in so far as they do become hegemonic, they may be ‘operationalised’
in new structures, practices, relations and institutions; and the operationalisa-
tion itself has a partly semiotic aspect in the emergence and dissemination of
genres and ‘genre networks’ (see below), which enable the governance of these
complex new networks, as well as styles. The semiotic dimension, deeply
embedded within and constitutive of the new structural and scalar relations, is
itself a part of the obstacles to addressing the social wrong.
With respect to the dialectic between texts and other elements of social
events, the general point is that political texts are not some superﬁcial em-
broidery upon political events but a fundamental, constitutive part of them. In 
this case, for example, the strategies and policies of the Blair government for
building British ‘competitiveness’ in adapting to the ‘global economy’ have 
a clearly textual character. They are formed, disseminated and legitimised
within complex chains and networks of events (committee meetings, reports,
244
Methodology in CDA research


parliamentary debates, press statements and press conferences etc.) which 
are largely chains and networks of texts, i.e., different types of texts which are
regularly and systematically linked together. They are linked, for instance, in
accordance with the ‘genre networks’ I referred to above – systematically linked
genres (e.g., discussion, report, debate) which semiotically constitute proce-
dures – in this case, procedures of governance (on ‘chains’ of events, texts and
genres, see Fairclough 2003). These strategy and policy processes thus have a
largely textual character, and require textual analysis. The illustrative examples
are just two small samples from the complex networks of texts involved.
The analysis would need to go into some detail about politics and social
change in Britain. I have no space for such detail here, but let me make a couple
of points (see further Fairclough 2000b). First, ‘New Labour’ abandoned 
the traditional social democracy of the British Labour Party to embrace the
neo-liberalism of preceding Conservative governments (those of Margaret
Thatcher and John Major). The effect was to produce a neo-liberal consensus
on major policy issues within mainstream politics and a common political dis-
course – the associated tendency to exclude opposition is precisely the ‘social
wrong’ I am addressing. Second, the infamous preoccupation of New Labour
with media ‘spin’ (close management and manipulation of the presentation of
policies and events in the media) indicates the growing importance of semiotic
processes (political ‘communication’) in government. Thus, the form of 
politics which has developed with New Labour poses speciﬁcally semiotic
obstacles to addressing the social wrong at issue.
Step 2: Select texts and categories for analysis
With respect to Step 2, the constitution of the object of research indicates 
the selection of texts in which the macro-strategies of depoliticisation and
politicisation are semiotically realised. My examples here are both written
texts, but one would also want to include, for instance, not only discussions,
debates and interviews on TV and radio, and websites, but also material from
campaigns, protests and demonstrations centred upon ‘the global economy’
and government strategy and policy oriented towards it, and material repres-
enting how people experience and react to the drive for ‘competitiveness’ in a
variety of situated contexts (e.g., conversations and discussions within work-
places). Appropriate focuses and categories for the analysis include semiotic
strategies which realise de/politicisation, including argumentation and
rhetorical strategies, as well as semiotic aspects and realisations of legitima-
tion, manipulation, ideology, cooperation and identity. I shall be more speciﬁc
about some of these in discussing the texts.
A dialectical–relational approach to critical discourse analysis
245


Step 3: Carry out analyses of texts
The ﬁrst text is structured as an argument whose structure we can schemat-
ically reconstruct as follows:
Premises: The modern world is changing. There are opportunities to suc-
ceed and prosper in the modern world. If we want to succeed and prosper,
we must compete effectively.
Implicit premise: (We do want to succeed and prosper.)
Conclusion: Therefore, we must compete (more) effectively.
The argumentation realises semiotically the macro-strategy of legitimation,
and speciﬁcally the strategy of rationalisation: it is an example of the govern-
ment’s attempt to legitimise its political strategy and the policies associated
with it as necessary responses to the situation. The argument is formally valid,
but whether it is sound or not (i.e., whether it is a reasonable argument)
depends upon the truth of its premises. We can challenge the argument, argue
that it is fallacious, by challenging the truth of its premises (Ieocu 2006). I want
speciﬁcally to question the premises on the grounds that they (a) predicate the
possible success of a problematic identity category as subject (‘we’), and (b)
falsely claim that the change attributed to the modern world is simply an
inevitable fact of life which ‘we’ must accept.
Both of these ﬂaws in the premises can be associated with the macro-
strategy of depoliticisation. With respect to the ﬁrst ﬂaw, the identity category
‘we’ is problematic in that it is based upon a false equation between ‘we’ =
‘Britain’ and ‘we’ = all the citizens of Britain: if Britain achieves ‘success’ or
‘prosperity’, it does not follow that all of its citizens do. This is the ‘fallacy of
division’, when a general category has properties which are mistakenly attri-
buted to each of its parts. One sentence clearly implies that this does follow:
‘That is the route to commercial success and prosperity for all’. This fallacy is
a banal feature of governmental discourse, but it is fundamental to the macro-
strategy of depoliticisation, whose basic strategic goal is to dedifferentiate
potentially antagonistic identities – the internal division of the political com-
munity into ‘us’ and ‘them’. In this sense, identity and the semiotic construal
of identities are a major focus in analysis which prioritises depoliticisation.
The issue in semiotic terms is personal deixis. There are two personal
‘deictic centres’, or positionings of the author (Blair) with respect to identity:
he positions himself within two group identities – ‘we’ = the government, and
‘we’ = the country. It is commonplace in the literature on identity that identity
entails difference – ‘we’ entails ‘they’ (Connolly 1991). We might say that ‘we’
= the government is implicitly construed in opposition to ‘they’ = previous
246
Methodology in CDA research


governments which pursued strategies which are rejected because they ‘did
not and cannot work’: ‘old-fashioned state intervention’ and ‘naive reliance on
markets’; whereas ‘we’ =the country is construed in opposition to ‘competitors’.
But notice that the construal of personal deixis excludes a ‘we/they’ division
both within the political community (‘Britain’) and within the contemporary
political ﬁeld (political system), where no contemporaneous political ‘opposi-
tion’ is construed. The implication is that there is consensus within both the
political community and the political ﬁeld. This is depoliticisation.
Texts semiotically construe identities and simultaneously seek to make these
construals persuasive. The fact that we can show fallacies in Blair’s argument
does not mean that it will be widely perceived as fallacious, and we must con-
sider what might make the argument and construal of identities persuasive.
This brings us to the second ﬂaw, in the construal of world change. Dominant
construals of ‘the new global order’ have certain predictable linguistic charac-
teristics (on the linguistic categories I mention below, see Fairclough (2003)):
processes of change are construed without responsible social agents; they are
construed in a timeless, ahistorical present; statements about the new eco-
nomy (which are often very familiar truisms) are construed categorically and
authoritatively as unmodalised truths, and there is a movement from the ‘is’ of
the economic to the ‘ought’ of the political – from what is categorically the case
to what ‘we’ ought to do in response; the new economic reality is construed as
indifferent to place; and series of evidences or appearances in the new eco-
nomy are construed paratactically as lists. I have shown elsewhere (Fairclough
2000b) that these features are sustained through recontextualisation, appear-
ing in economic texts (e.g., texts of the World Bank), political texts, educa-
tional texts and so forth, as well as on different scales. They are also evident 
in Blair’s text, and they can be seen as aspects of the semiotic realisation of
depoliticisation. In the construal of economic change in the ‘modern world’,
there is an absence of responsible social agents. Agents of material processes
are abstract or inanimate. In the ﬁrst paragraph, ‘change’ is the agent in the ﬁrst
(passive) sentence, and ‘new technologies’ and ‘new markets’ are agents in the
second sentence – agents, notice, of intransitive verbs (‘emerge’, ‘open up’)
which construe change as happenings or processes without agents. The third
sentence is existential – ‘new competitors’ and ‘new opportunities’ are merely
claimed to exist, not located within processes of change. Notice also that in the
third paragraph, the inanimate ‘this new world’ is the agent of ‘challenges’,
construing change itself as articulating what responses to it are necessary. By
contrast, when it comes to national responses to these implacable and imper-
sonal processes of world change, social agents are fully present – business, the
government, the DTI and especially ‘we’.
A dialectical–relational approach to critical discourse analysis
247


Turning to time, tense and modality, world change is construed in the 
ahistorical ‘timeless’ present tense, as indeed are national responses, and, 
in terms of modality, through authoritative categorical assertions of truisms
(e.g., ‘The modern world is swept by change’, and indeed all ﬁve statements 
in the ﬁrst paragraph). The only historical reference is to the ‘old-fashioned’
strategies in paragraph 4. There is a movement from ‘is’ to ‘ought’. ‘Ought’ 
is implicit in paragraphs 2 and 3: ‘our success depends on how well we 
exploit our most valuable assets’ implies that we should exploit them; 
‘this new world challenges business to be innovative’ and ‘government to 
create’ imply that business and government should do these things. From
paragraph 5 onwards, ‘ought’ is explicit and recurrent – the modal verb ‘must’
occurs six times. The domain of ‘is’ is world change; the domain of ‘ought’ 
is national responses: a divide is textually constructed between economics 
and politics (there is an ‘industrial policy’, but focused on enabling the 
economic process rather than radically shaping it), fact and value, which
excludes the former from the latter. This differs from the social democratic 
tradition from which New Labour has come; earlier Labour governments
used political power to change the economy, for example by nationalising 
private industries, taking them into state control. In contrast with economic
processes, political processes do have responsible social agents: the agent 
in processes modalised with ‘must’ is in ﬁve cases ‘we’ and in one case ‘the 
government’. Summing up, world change is a process without a history 
which ‘we’ must respond to. Moreover, world change is implicitly construed
as indifferent to place – there are no place expressions in the ﬁrst or third 
paragraphs.
The syntax is paratactic,3 in relations between both sentences and phrases
within sentences. The ﬁrst paragraph, for instance, consists of three paratact-
ically related sentences (the second and third contain paratactically related
clauses), listing evidences of world change. The same is true of the second
paragraph. Notice that the sequencing of these sentences is not signiﬁcant 
and is changeable (with minor rewording) without any substantive meaning
change. Indeed, what is included in this list of evidences is somewhat arbi-
trary; for instance, the second sentence of the ﬁrst paragraph might have been
‘Huge amounts of money move across the globe in a fraction of a second, 
and even our family cat, Socks, has his own homepage on the World Wide
Web’. The second clause is fanciful only in that Blair does not have a cat called
Socks. It was actually included in a very similar list in a book by Bill Clinton.
What is signiﬁcant, rhetorically, is the relentless accumulation of evidences 
of change – what Clarke and Newman (1998) call ‘the cascade of change’ –
which persuasively (and manipulatively) establishes the new economy as 
simple fact, what we must live with and respond to.
248
Methodology in CDA research


Summing up, change is authoritatively construed as lists of known appear-
ances (and truisms) in the present which are indifferent to place and whose
social agency is effaced, and which must be responded to in certain ways.
These features together construe the new economy as a simple fact to which
there is no alternative. They locate the ‘global economy’ within the ‘realm of
necessity’, and therefore outside the ‘realm of contingency and deliberation’,
i.e., outside the realm of politics, semiotically realising the macro-strategy of
depoliticisation (Hay 2007). We can say that in so far as this sort of discourse
achieves signiﬁcant public acceptance, which it has, it is part of the obstacles
to addressing the social wrong.
Let me brieﬂy comment on interdiscursive analysis. One can see Blair’s text
as recontextualising analyses of the ‘global economy’ more fully elaborated in
texts produced for instance by the World Bank, and their particular discourse
(construals of, narratives of and arguments about the ‘global economy’).
Blair’s text is not primarily an analytical text but an advocative text, arguing 
for ‘necessary’ policies. But it is interdiscursively complex in grounding this
advocative argument in the recontextualised analysis, combining analytical
and advocative genres (as well as economic and political discourses). This
type of recontextualisation and interdiscursive hybridity is common as a semi-
otic realisation of a favoured legitimation strategy: legitimising by appeal to
expert knowledge. Notice that the expert discourse is not the same here as 
it might be in specialist economic texts. For instance, in the ﬁrst paragraph, 
the construal of change in the global economy is stripped down to three short
sentences which furthermore incorporate characteristic features of political
rhetoric (the dramatic metaphor ‘swept by change’, the antithesis of ‘new
competitors but also great new opportunities’), and which constitute dramatic
and potentially persuasive formulations of premises in the argument. Recon-
textualisation involves transformation to suit the new context, which affects
forms of interdiscursive hybridity.
In discussing Stage 2, I have identiﬁed a number of obstacles to addressing
the social wrong at issue, and shown that they are partly semiotic in nature. 
Let me summarise them: the national and international networks that govern-
ment strategies and policies are embedded within; the consensual character 
of mainstream politics in Britain; and an inﬂuential political discourse, 
exempliﬁed in the Blair text, which in various ways contributes to depoliticis-
ing the global economy and national responses to it.
Stage 3: Consider whether the social order ‘needs’ the social wrong
I anticipated this example in discussing Stage 3 in the Methodology sec-
tion, where I suggested how the suppression of political differences in favour
A dialectical–relational approach to critical discourse analysis
249


of consensus might be interpreted as necessary for states to operate effect-
ively within the hegemonic, neo-liberal strategy. We might add that achieving
a broad consensus within the political system depends upon semiotic 
conditions – achieving semiotic hegemony, or broad acceptance of the sort 
of discourse we have here. And as I noted above, this can be interpreted in
terms of ideology as the naturalisation of meanings which sustain relations 
of power and domination. So it seems plausible that the social order does 
‘need’ the social wrong in this case – addressing it might require wider 
changes in the social order – and that, since the wrong has a partly semiotic
character, it also ‘needs’ certain characteristics of contemporary political 
discourse.
Stage 4: Identify possible ways past the obstacles
At this point, I shall introduce the second text (see Appendix 2, page 254), an
extract from a book (Brown and Coates 1996) written by two long-standing
members of the Labour Party about New Labour’s view of what they call 
‘capitalist globalisation’. This will allow some necessarily brief, partial and
sketchy comments on the other main macro-strategy – politicisation.
I mentioned one adversarial feature in the ﬁrst text: a rejection of the ‘old
fashioned state intervention’ and the ‘naive reliance on markets’ of previous
governments, while implying that there were no contemporaneous divisions
on the nature of ‘world change’ or the national strategies needed to adjust to it.
The second text, by contrast, enters into adversarial dialogue with contem-
poraries, speciﬁcally Blairites. The macro-strategy of politicisation is semio-
tically realised in the text’s dialogicality. Speciﬁcally, there are claims which
are denials of claims made ‘elsewhere’, by New Labour politicians among 
others: ‘What has changed is not that capital is more mobile’ and ‘it is not true
that national governments – and by extension the European Union – are totally
lacking in powers to employ against the arbitrary actions of transnational 
capital’. In this respect, the strategy is to politicise by construing the nature of
‘world change’ and government responses as controversial matters, subject to
political difference and division.
The second text also politicises by counterposing to the New Labour 
narrative of collaboration between government and business a narrative of
conﬂict between government and business, capital and labour. Notice that
both texts construe the global(ised) economy as a reality which countries need
to adjust to, but in radically different ways. In the second but not the ﬁrst, the
construal of the global(ised) economy does include responsible social agents:
the companies, whose actions are construed in general and negative terms
250
Methodology in CDA research


(‘moving internationally from bases . . .’, ‘the arbitrary actions of transnational
capital’, ‘divide and conquer’). The text also construes relations between the
companies and national governments, contrasting the ‘clientelist’ relations
which tend to exist and which New Labour advocates (‘nation-states . . .
clients of transnational companies’) with adversarial relations which could
and by implication should exist (‘employing’ their ‘powers . . . against the
arbitrary actions of transnational capital’, ‘making or withholding tax conces-
sions’, ‘bargaining’). The same contrast between what is and what could/
should be is construed in relations between the EU and national governments
(‘reinforcing’ the status of nation states as ‘clients’ of the companies, versus
‘offering a lead and challenge to the nation-states’).
In sum, whereas the ﬁrst text depoliticises by construing a consensus 
on the global economy as an inevitable fact of life and building national com-
petitiveness as a necessary response, the second text politicises by construing
the globalised economy as a stake in struggles between governments and
transnationals, and capital and labour, and by opposing that construal to the
government’s consensualist construal.
But the mere existence of texts which politicise in this way does not amount
to ‘ways past the obstacles’. This text offers an imaginary for a different, polit-
icising strategy in response to a differently conceived global(ised) economy; it
shows that different imaginaries are possible and indeed exist, but we would
also need to consider how feasible it would be to operationalise this or some
other imaginary in a strategy which could actually succeed and be imple-
mented in the face of the sort of obstacles I have begun to indicate. It’s not
impossible, but it’s difﬁcult to see how at present: there are abundant alterna-
tive imaginaries, but there is currently no clear counter-hegemonic strategy. 
A fuller treatment than I have space for would include an analysis of attempts
to develop oppositional strategies and their semiotic dimensions.
5 Discussion
The theoretical claim that relations between semiosis and other social 
elements are dialectical in character, and the methodological focus on these
relations rather than on semiosis as such, mean that this approach to CDA is
particularly attuned to transdisciplinary research, to working with the grain of
various bodies of social theory and research, but at the same time bringing to
them an enhancement of their capacity to address often neglected semiotic
dimensions of their research objects, as well as taking from them perspectives
and research logics which can contribute to the further development of the
dialectical–relational approach itself.
A dialectical–relational approach to critical discourse analysis
251


As with any approach, there are things about which the dialectical–
relational approach has little to say. We should distinguish, however, between
issues and problems it has not got around to because others seemed more
pressing or more interesting or simply because life is short, and issues and
problems which fall outside its remit and are thus not issues and problems for
it (though they may be for other approaches). An example of the former is a 
relative emphasis on the workings of power rather than the workings of recep-
tion, reaction and resistance to power – I stress relative because the latter have
not been entirely neglected (see, for instance, Fairclough (2006)). Critics
might reasonably say that I have ‘done it again’ in this chapter, spending more
time on depoliticisation than politicisation. This has been a bias in my work,
perhaps partly because of the sort of left-wing politics I was involved with 
in the 1970s, but it is not in my opinion a limitation of the approach as such.
An example of the latter is a lack of attention to psychological and cognitive
matters. I would agree that cognitively oriented research on discourse can
complement the dialectical–relational approach, but I would not accept that
an absence of attention to cognitive issues is a ‘blindspot’ in the approach, still
less that it in some sense invalidates the approach.
Chilton, for example, has suggested that a proper understanding of the
cognitive capacities of humans may lead to the conclusion that CDA is trying
to teach people what they already know. ‘Put bluntly, if people have a natural
ability to treat verbal input critically, in what sense can CDA either reveal in
discourse what people can . . . already detect for themselves or educate them
to detect it for themselves?’ (Chilton 2005). Yet the closing sentences of
Chilton (2004) note that ‘if people are indeed political animals . . . then they
are also in principle capable of doing their own political critique. The import-
ant question is whether they are free to do so’. I agree. Chilton (2005) argues
that although there are various conditions under which people are not free, 
‘it is doubtful that any of them can be elucidated by purely linguistic or 
discourse-analytical means. For they would seem to have to do with economic
forces or socio-political institutions’. The main problem with this argument is
indicated by the contrast between ‘purely’ linguistic or discourse-analytical
factors and economic forces or socio-political institutions. From a dialectical–
relational perspective, economic forces and socio-political institutions are in
part semiotic, and analysis has to be in part semiotic analysis. The fact that
people have cognitive capacities which make them in principle capable of 
seeing through manipulative intentions and even doing their own political 
critique (which CDA, far from discounting, presupposes) does not mean 
that they are generally capable in practice of seeing through the complex
252
Methodology in CDA research


dialectical relations between semiotic and non-semiotic elements which con-
stitute the social, political and economic conditions of their lives.
APPENDIX 1 Building the knowledge-driven economy
Foreword by the Prime Minister
The modern world is swept by change. New technologies emerge constantly,
new markets are opening up. There are new competitors but also great new
opportunities.
Our success depends on how well we exploit our most valuable assets: our
knowledge, skills and creativity. These are the key to designing high-value
goods and services and advanced business practices. They are at the heart of 
a modern, knowledge-driven economy.
This new world challenges business to be innovative and creative, to
improve performance continuously, to build new alliances and ventures. But it
also challenges Government: to create and execute a new approach to indus-
trial policy.
This is the purpose of this White Paper. Old-fashioned state intervention
did not and cannot work. But neither does naïve reliance on markets.
The Government must promote competition, stimulating enterprise, ﬂex-
ibility and innovation by opening markets. But we must also invest in British
capabilities when companies alone cannot: in education, in science and in the
creation of a culture of enterprise. And we must promote creative partnerships
which help companies: to collaborate for competitive advantage; to promote 
a long-term vision in a world of short-term pressures; to benchmark their 
performance against the best in the world; and to forge alliances with other
businesses and employees. All this is the DTI’s role.
We will not meet our objectives overnight. The White Paper creates a 
policy framework for the next ten years. We must compete effectively in
today’s tough markets if we are to prosper in the markets of tomorrow.
In Government, in business, in our universities and throughout society, we
must do much more to foster an entrepreneurial spirit: equipping ourselves
for the long term, prepared to seize opportunities, committed to constant
innovation and enhanced performance. That is the route to commercial suc-
cess and prosperity for all. We must put the future on Britain’s side.
The Rt Hon Tony Blair MP, Prime Minister
A dialectical–relational approach to critical discourse analysis
253


APPENDIX 2
Capital has always been global, moving internationally from bases in the
industrialised countries. What has changed is not that capital is more mobile
. . . but that the national bases are less important as markets and production
centres. In other words, the big transnational companies are not only bigger
but more free-standing . . . The European Union, far from offering a lead and
a challenge to the nation-states of Europe, reinforces their status as clients of
the transnational companies. Indeed, this clientism applies not only to com-
panies based in Europe . . . While it is true that a national capitalism is no
longer possible in a globalised economy, it is not true that national govern-
ments – and by extension the European Union – are totally lacking in powers
to employ against the arbitrary actions of transnational capital. There is much
that governments can do in bargaining – in making or withholding tax con-
cessions, for example . . . But such bargaining has to have an international
dimension or the transnational companies can simply continue to divide and
conquer . . . New Labour appears to have abandoned what remained of
Labour’s internationalist traditions . . . Yet the ICTFU, the European TUC
and the Geneva trade groups all offer potential allies for strengthening the
response of British labour to international capital (Brown and Coates 1996:
172–4).
Notes
1. I am grateful to Isabela Ieocu, Michael Meyer and Ruth Wodak for comment-
ing on a draft version of the chapter.
2. In the ﬁrst edition of this book and in other publications, I referred to social
‘problems’ rather than ‘wrongs’. I have changed this because I think that 
construing all wrongs as ‘problems’ which need ‘solutions’ – which can in
principle be provided even if they have not been so far in practice – is part of 
the self-justifying (and one might say ideological) discourse of contemporary
social systems in countries like Britain. The objection to it is that some wrongs
are produced by systems and are not resolvable within them.
3. Paratactic–syntactic relations are relations between sentences, clauses or
phrases which are grammatically equal, and are coordinated; they contrast
with hypotactic relations, where there is one main sentence, clause or phrase,
and others are subordinated.
254
Methodology in CDA research


10. Understanding the new management
ideology. A transdisciplinary
contribution from critical discourse
analysis and the new sociology 
of capitalism
Eve Chiapello and Norman Fairclough
O
ur aim in this paper is to explore how one might approach the language
of new capitalism working in a transdisciplinary way. We come from dif-
ferent disciplinary and theoretical traditions, Economic Sociology and ‘new
sociology of capitalism’ (Eve Chiapello) and a form of CDA developed within
Linguistics (Norman Fairclough). We shall focus upon ‘new management ideo-
logy’, and in particular on a recent book of a highly inﬂuential management
‘guru’, Rosabeth Moss Kanter, who is Professor of Business Administration 
at Harvard Business School (Kanter 2001). To ﬁt the scope of our analysis
within the conﬁnes of a single paper, we concentrate on one chapter of the
book, Chapter 9, ‘Leadership for change’.
CDA is analysis of the dialectical relationships between discourse (includ-
ing language but also other forms of semiosis, e.g., body language or visual
images) and other elements of social practices. Its particular concern (in this
approach) is with the radical changes that are taking place in contempor-
ary social life, with how discourse ﬁgures within processes of change, and 
with shifts in the relationship between discourse/semiosis and other social 
elements within networks of practices. We cannot take the role of discourse 
in social practices for granted, it has to be established through analysis. 
And discourse may be more or less important and salient in one practice or 
set of practices than in another, and may change in importance over time. 
The new sociology of capitalism offers an account of the changes in the devel-
oped capitalist societies since the 1960s, using as pivotal the concept of 


‘spirit of capitalism’ which comes from Weberian sociology but which has
been reworked to ﬁt analysis of contemporary capitalism. An alliance of the
two approaches can, we believe, be productive for the study of language of
new capitalism.
We see transdisciplinary research as a particular form of interdisciplinary
research. Our concern is not simply to bring together different disciplines and
theoretical–analytical frameworks in the hope of thereby producing richer
insights into new management ideology. We are also concerned with how a
dialogue between two disciplines and frameworks may lead to a development
of both through a process of each internally appropriating the logic of the
other as a resource for its own development.
We begin with a discussion of new management ideology based par-
ticularly upon the work of Boltanski and Chiapello (1999), followed by a brief
outline of the version of Critical Discourse Analysis we draw upon, and an
analysis of Chapter 9, focusing upon a number of extracts, which brings these
two perspectives together. In the conclusion we consider the implications of
the analysis for transdisciplinary research.
1 The theoretical framework of the ‘new spirit of capitalism’
New management ideology is part of the broader ideological system of ‘the
new spirit of capitalism’. It is the part addressed to managers and people 
occupying intermediate levels in big companies. It focuses on explaining 
and justifying the way the companies are organised, or should be organised.
1.1 The notion of the ‘spirit of capitalism’
The ‘spirit of capitalism’ is the ideology that justiﬁes people’s commitment to
capitalism, and which renders this commitment attractive. It is a necessary
construct because in many ways capitalism is an absurd system: wage-earners
have lost ownership of the fruits of their labour as well as any hope of ever
working other than as someone else’s subordinate. As for capitalists, they ﬁnd
themselves chained to a never-ending and insatiable process. For both of these
protagonists, being part of the process of capitalism is remarkably lacking in
justiﬁcation. Capitalistic accumulation requires commitment from many people,
although few have any real chances of making a substantial proﬁt. Many will 
be scarcely tempted to get involved in this system, and might even develop
decidedly adverse feelings. This is an especially thorny problem in modern
economies that require a high level of commitment from their employees, in
particular from managers. The quality of the commitment that one can expect
256
Methodology in CDA research


depends not only on economic stimuli, but also on the possibility that the 
collective advantages that derive from capitalism can be enhanced.
The ‘spirit of capitalism’ is the ideology which brings together these 
reasons for commitment to the system. The term ‘ideology’ is used here in 
a different sense from common conceptions which deﬁne it in terms of truth
and falsehood. The ‘spirit of capitalism’ does not just legitimise the process of
accumulation, it also constrains it – indeed it can only legitimise it in so far 
as it constrains it, for people are endowed in this neo-Weberian sociological
perspective with real critical capacities with effects on the world. If one were to
take the explanations contained in the spirit of capitalism to their logical con-
clusion, then not all proﬁt would be legitimate, nor all enrichment fair, nor all
accumulation legal. Actors’ internalisation of a particular spirit of capitalism
thus serves in the real world as a constraint on the process of accumulation. A
spirit of capitalism approach thus provides a justiﬁcation both for capitalism
and for the criticisms that denounce the gap between the actual forms of 
accumulation and the normative conceptions of social order.
An ideology is a system of ideas, values and beliefs oriented to explaining 
a given political order, legitimising existing hierarchies and power relations
and preserving group identities. Ideology explains both the horizontal 
structure (the division of labour) of a society and its vertical structure (the 
separation of rulers and ruled), producing ideas which legitimise the latter,
explaining in particular why one group is dominant and another dominated,
one why person gives orders in a particular enterprise while another takes
orders. Ideology is thus closely linked to Weber’s concept of legitimacy, for
according to Weber domination and compliance require the belief of the 
dominated in the legitimacy of the dominant. Ideology is one of the central
vectors of this legitimacy, even though Weber lacked a concept of ideology
(Ricoeur 1997).
As Schumpeter and Marx realised perfectly well, one of the main charac-
teristics of capitalism as a social order is that it constantly transforms itself.
Capitalism in the general sense is capable of assuming highly variable histor-
ical forms, which continue to be capitalist through the continuity of a number
of central features (wage-labour, competition, private property, orientation to
capital accumulation, technical progress, the rampant commodiﬁcation of 
all social activities). The ‘spirit of capitalism’ is therefore an ideology which
serves to sustain the capitalist process in its historical dynamism while being
in phase with the historically speciﬁc and variable forms that it takes. Thus
there are in a sense two levels within the conﬁguration of ideas of the ‘spirit 
of capitalism’ of a particular epoch: those which account for the process of
capitalism over the long term (most of which have been shaped by economic
Understanding the new management ideology
257


theory), and those which accord with its historical incarnation at a given
period of time within a given region of the world.
Three dimensions play a particularly important role at this second level in
providing a concrete expression for the spirit of capitalism:
1. The ﬁrst dimension indicates what is stimulating about an involve-
ment with capitalism – in other words, how this system can help people to
blossom, and how it can generate enthusiasm. This ‘stimulating’ dimen-
sion is usually related to the different forms of ‘liberation’ that capitalism
offers.
2. A second set of arguments emphasises the forms of security that is offered
to those who are involved, both for themselves and for their children.
3. Finally, a third set of arguments (and one that is especially important for
our demonstration) invokes the notion of justice (or fairness), explaining
how capitalism is coherent with a sense of justice, and how it contributes 
to the common good.
Thus one might argue that to successfully commit people to the capitalist pro-
cess, the ideology which legitimises it needs to provide answers to these three
implicit questions: what is stimulating about it, how does it provide security,
how does it assure justice?
When seen in this light, the spirit of capitalism can be said to have under-
gone a number of historical changes. From the literature on the evolution of
capitalism, one can sketch at least three ‘spirits’ that have appeared, at least in
western Europe, one after the other, since the nineteenth century.
1. The ﬁrst, described among others by Sombart, corresponds to a pre-
dominantly domestic form of capitalism. Its main incarnation is the
entrepreneurial bourgeois. The ‘excitement’ dimension is manifested by an
entrepreneurial spirit; its security dimension by respect for bourgeois
morality. In this instance, fairness mechanisms essentially revolve around
charity and personal assistance.
2. A second ‘spirit’ (descriptions of which were found between the 1930s and
the 1960s) which focuses on the idea of the large, integrated ﬁrm. Its main
incarnation is the salaried director. Security is to be achieved through
mechanisms such as career development and by the link between private
capitalism and the rise of a welfare state. Fairness takes on a very merito-
cratic form in that it incorporates skills whose certiﬁcation involves the
awarding of credentials.
3. A third form of capitalism, which began to manifest itself during the 1980s.
258
Methodology in CDA research


Boltanski and Chiapello (1999) focused on the way in which the spirit of
capitalism changed between the 1960s and 1990s. They devoted the ﬁrst two
chapters (of a book containing seven) to describing the changes on the basis of
an analysis of texts (as Weber and Sombart had done previously) that provide
moral education on business practices. For our era, this meant two bodies 
of work from the ﬁeld of management studies: one from the 1960s and one
from the 1990s (each representing around 500 pages and 50 texts). The text
we chose to analyse in this article is a good example of the kind of texts they
studied, and, in fact, Kanter was one of the authors (in French translation) 
in the 1990s’ corpus.
From a CDA perspective, a ‘spirit of capitalism’ can be regarded as an
‘order of discourse’, a conﬁguration of discourses articulated together in a par-
ticular way, dialectically enacted as ways of acting (and discoursally in genres)
Understanding the new management ideology
259
Table 10.1 Three spirits of capitalism
Forms of the 
capital 
accumulation 
process
Excitement
Fairness
Security
First spirit
End of nineteenth
century
Small family ﬁrms
Bourgeois
capitalism
Freedom from local
communities 
Progress
A mix of domestic
and market
fairness
Personal property,
Personal
relationships
Charity
Paternalism
Second spirit
1940–1970
Managerial ﬁrms
Big industrial
companies
Mass production
State economic policy
Career opportunities
Power positions
Effectiveness possible
in ‘free countries’
Meritocracy valuing
effectiveness
Management by
objectives
Long-term planning
Careers
Welfare state
Third spirit
Since 1980s
Network ﬁrms
Internet and biotech
Global ﬁnance
Varying and differentiated
production
No more authoritarian
chiefs
Fuzzy organisations
Innovation and creativity
Permanent change
New form of meritocracy
valuing mobility,
ability to nourish a
network
Each project is an
opportunity to develop
one’s employability
For the mobile and the
adaptable, the ones
who know how to
manage themselves,
companies will provide
self-help resources


and inculcated as ways of being or identities (and discoursally in styles). See
further below.
1.2 The fairness dimension of the spirit of capitalism: 
the ‘cité’ model
To be able to identify the exact nature of the notion of fairness as depicted 
in the management texts they studied, Boltanski and Chiapello (1999) used a
theoretical construct that Luc Boltanski had developed together with Laurent
Thévenot in an earlier publication (Boltanski and Thévenot 1991): the
‘justiﬁcatory regime’ model (‘cité’ in French). This construct had initially
been designed with a view to highlighting the conditions that make it possible
to say whether an evaluation or distribution of goods was being done in a fair
and legitimate manner. Such judgements can be accepted as legitimate and
support an agreement between different people because they are supposed to
be unrelated to the characteristics of those who have made them and, particu-
larly, independent of their power. They refer to ‘legitimate orders’ which are
endowed with a very general validity, and which are at a level above the con-
crete and particular situations evaluated, constituted by conventions generally
accepted in a society for judging the fairness of social arrangements.
Boltanski and Thévenot (1991) called these legitimate orders ‘cités’ (thus
referring to classical political philosophies whose object had been to design 
a legitimate order based on a principle of justice) and argued that they can be
used to reach agreement as well as to support criticism. However, as opposed
to political philosophies that had usually attempted to anchor this social order
in a single principle, they argued that, in complex modern societies, several
justiﬁcatory regimes can coexist within the same social space, even though
their relevance may vary in accordance with the situation (i.e., with the 
material or symbolic nature of the objects involved).
They identiﬁed six justiﬁcatory regimes:
1. the Inspirational Cité,
2. the Domestic Cité,
3. the Cité of Renown,
4. the Civic Cité,
5. the Market Cité, and
6. the Industrial Cité.
Each of these justiﬁcatory regimes is based upon a different principle of evalu-
ation (‘equivalency principle’) which entails a form of general equivalency 
260
Methodology in CDA research


(a standard) without which comparative evaluations become impossible. In
terms of a given standard (e.g., efﬁciency in the Industrial Cité), people’s ‘test
results’, and hence their speciﬁc (e.g., industrial) value for the rest of society,
can vary. A person’s worth, assessed through a legitimate process and in terms
of a given standard, was called his/her ‘greatness’.
In the Inspirational Cité, greatness is deﬁned as being akin to a saint who
has reached a state of grace (or an inspired artist). This quality appears after a
period of ascetic preparation, and is expressed mostly through manifestations
of inspiration (sainthood, creativity, an artistic sense, authenticity etc.). In the
Domestic Cité, people rely on their hierarchical position in a chain of personal
interdependencies in order to achieve greatness. The political ties that unite
people spring from a model of subordination which is based on a domestic
pattern. These ties are thought of as a generalisation of generational ties that
combine tradition and proximity. The ‘great one’ is the elder, the ancestor, the
father to whom respect and allegiance are due, and who in turn grants protec-
tion and support. In the Cité of Renown, greatness depends only on other
people’s opinions, i.e., on the number of persons who will grant credit and
esteem. The ‘great one’ in the Civic Cité is the representative of the group, the
one who expresses its collective will. In the Market Cité, the ‘great’ person is
the one who makes a fortune for him- or herself by offering highly coveted
goods in a competitive marketplace – and who knows when to seize the right
opportunities. Finally, in the Industrial Cité, greatness is based on efﬁciency
and determines a scale of professional abilities.
Justiﬁcatory regimes are described using a basic ‘grammar’ that speciﬁes
among other things:
(a) an equivalency principle(in reference to which an evaluation can be made
of all actions, things and persons for that particular Cité);
(b) a state of greatness, a ‘great one’ being a person who strongly em-
bodies the Cité’s values, and the state of smallness, deﬁned as lack of
greatness;
(c) a format of investment, this being a major precondition for each Cité’s 
stability since, by linking greatness to sacriﬁce (which takes a speciﬁc
form in each Cité), it ensures that all rights are offset by responsibilities;
(d) a paradigmatic test which, for each justiﬁcatory regime, best reveals a
person’s greatness. In order to avoid an idealistic construction that is
overly reliant on verbal argumentation, people’s claims have to be con-
fronted with the real world, hence pass a series of more or less stand-
ardised procedures called tests (‘épreuve’ in French). In the end, it is the
outcome of these tests that lends substance to the judgements people
Understanding the new management ideology
261


make. This is what provides them with the strength that they need to
stand up to challenges.
In terms of justiﬁcatory regimes or ‘cités’, the dimension of justice of the 
ﬁrst spirit of capitalism depends mainly upon the Domestic and Market
regimes, whereas the Industrial and Civic regimes become more salient in 
the second.
In their study of the third spirit of capitalism, Boltanski and Chiapello
(1999) showed that the six justiﬁcatory regimes identiﬁed by Boltanski and
Thévenot (1991) cannot fully describe all of the types of justiﬁcation that can
be found in the 1990s’ texts. A new and increasingly inﬂuential justiﬁcatory
logic has emerged which emphasises mobility, availability, and the variety of
one’s personal contacts: a Projects-oriented or Connectionist Cité. This refers
to a form of justice or fairness that is appropriate in a world which is organised
by networks which are connectionist and reticular in nature.
In the Project-oriented Cité the general standard with respect to which
greatness is evaluated is activity. In contrast with the Industrial Cité
where activity means ‘work’ and being active means ‘holding a steady and
wage-earning position’, in the Project-oriented Cité activity overcomes the
oppositions between work and non-work, steady and casual, paid and unpaid, 
proﬁt-sharing and volunteer work. Life is conceived as a series of projects: the
more they differ from one another, the more valuable. What is relevant is to be
always pursuing some sort of activity, never to be without a project, without
ideas, to be always looking forward to, and preparing for, something along
with other persons, who are brought together by the drive for activity. When
starting on a new project, all participants know that it will be short-lived. The
perspective of an unavoidable and desirable end is built in the nature of the
involvement, without curtailing the enthusiasm of the participants. Projects
Table 10.2 Part of the grammar of the Project-oriented or Connectionist Cité
Equivalency principle (general standard): activity; project initiation; remote links between
people
A state of smallness: inability to get involved, to trust in others, to communicate; closed-
mindedness, intolerance, stability, over-reliance on one’s roots, rigidity
A state of greatness: adaptability, ﬂexibility, polyvalence; sincerity in face-to-face encounters;
ability to spread the beneﬁts of social connections, to generate enthusiasm and to increase
team members’ employability
Format of investment: ready to sacriﬁce all that could curtail one’s availability, giving up 
lifelong plans
Standard (paradigmatic) test: ability to move from one project to another
262
Methodology in CDA research


are well adapted to networking for the very reason that they are transitory
forms: the succession of projects, by multiplying connections and increasing
the number of ties, results in an expansion of networks.
In the Project-oriented Cité, a ‘great one’ must be adaptable and ﬂexible.
But these qualities by themselves cannot sufﬁce to deﬁne the state of ‘being
great’ because they could also be implemented in an opportunistic way, to pur-
sue a strictly selﬁsh course towards success. By contrast, a ‘great’ person will
take advantage of his/her given qualities to contribute to the common good. 
In the Project-oriented Cité, a ‘great one’ therefore also generates a feeling of
trust. S/he does not lead in an authoritarian way, as did the hierarchical chief,
but manages the team by listening to others with tolerance and by respecting
their differences. S/he redistributes among them the connections s/he has
secured through networks. Such a project manager hence increases all his/her
team-mates’ employability.
The corpus of 1990s texts is marked by the salience of legitimations based
upon the Project-oriented Cité, and the decline of the Industrial and Civic
Cités which were salient in the second spirit of capitalism, as well as the vir-
tual disappearance of the Domestic, part of whose vocabulary is nevertheless
drawn upon but completely recontextualised within the Project-oriented
Cité. There is also an increase in the salience of the Inspirational and, to a
lesser degree, the Merchant Cités.
Boltanski and Chiapello (1999) is oriented to the language of the new 
capitalism, seeing each Citéor justiﬁcatory regime as associated with a speciﬁc
vocabulary in terms of which the categories of the ‘grammar’ of each Cité (the
state of ‘greatness’, the state of ‘smallness’, the format of investment etc.) can
be described. In terms of CDA, a Cité or justiﬁcatory regime can be regarded
as a discourse. Since a Citéis a durable and transferable structure (transferable
across ﬁelds, e.g., between the capitalist organisation, the family, the political
system) at a relatively high level of abstraction, we use ‘Discourse’ with a 
capital ‘D’. This convention is also useful in that each such Discourse is itself
analysable as a conﬁguration of discourses (lower case ‘d’) as we show below.
Many of these discourses appear as metaphors or similes, e.g., the ‘change-
masters’ of Kanter’s text become ‘idea scouts’, they ‘establish their own listen-
ing posts’; creativity is ‘like looking at the world through a kaleidoscope’. 
In analysing a text such as the one we focus on here, CDA is concerned not
only with identifying within it elements of the order of discourse and the
Discourses of a particular ‘spirit of capitalism’ and particular Cités. It is also
concerned with how the work of texturing, making texts as a part of making
meaning, in such inﬂuential texts as Kanter’s itself contributes to the dis-
semination of the new ‘spirit of capitalism’.
Understanding the new management ideology
263


2 Critical discourse analysis
Critical discourse analysis is based upon a view of semiosis as an irreducible
element of all material social processes. Social life is seen as interconnected
networks of social practices of diverse sorts (economic, political, cultural,
family etc.). Centring the concept of social practice allows an oscillation
between the perspective of social structure and the perspective of social action
and agency – both necessary perspectives in social research and analysis
(Chouliaraki and Fairclough 1999). By ‘social practice’ we mean a relatively
stabilised form of social activity. Examples would be classroom teaching, 
television news, family meals, medical consultations, or work situations inside
innovation projects (like the one represented in the Kanter text).
Every practice is an articulation of diverse social elements in a relatively 
stable conﬁguration, always including discourse. Let us say that every practice
includes the following elements: activities, subjects, and their social relations,
instruments, objects, time and place, forms of consciousness, values, dis-
course (or semiosis). These elements are dialectically related (Harvey 1996).
That is to say, they are different elements but not discrete, fully separate, ele-
ments. There is a sense in which each ‘internalises’ the others without being
reducible to them. So, for instance, social relations, social identities, cultural
values and consciousness are in part semiotic, but that does not mean that 
we theorise and research social relations for instance in the same way that we
theorise and research language – they have distinct properties, and research-
ing them gives rise to distinct disciplines.
Discourse ﬁgures in broadly three ways in social practices:
1. It ﬁgures as a part of the social activity within a practice. For instance, 
part of doing a job (for instance, as a shop assistant or a manager) is using
language in a particular way; so too is part of governing a country.
Discourse as part of social activity constitutes genres. Genres are diverse
ways of acting, of producing social life, in the semiotic mode. Examples
are: everyday conversation, meetings in various types of organisation,
political and other forms of interview, book reviews, or guides for manag-
ing e-ﬁrms (like Kanter’s book).
2. Discourse ﬁgures in representations. Social actors within any practice 
produce representations of other practices, as well as (‘reﬂexive’) repres-
entations of their own practice, in the course of their activity within 
the practice. They ‘recontextualise’ other practices (Bernstein 1990,
Chouliaraki and Fairclough 1999), that is, they incorporate them into their
own practice, and different social actors will represent them differently
264
Methodology in CDA research


according to how they are positioned within the practice. Discourse in the
representation and self-representation of social practices constitutes dis-
courses (note the difference between ‘discourse’ as an abstract noun, and
‘discourse(s)’ as a count noun). For instance, the lives of poor and dis-
advantaged people are represented through different discourses in the
social practices of government, politics, medicine and social science, and
through different discourses within each of these practices corresponding
to different positions of social actors.
3. Discourse ﬁgures in ways of being, in the constitution of identities – for
instance the identity of a political leader such as Tony Blair in the UK is
partly a semiotically constituted way of being. Discourse as part of ways of
being constitutes styles – for instance the styles of business managers, or
political leaders.
Social practices networked in a particular way constitute a social order – for
instance, the emergent neo-capitalist global order referred to above, or at more
local level, the social order of education in a particular society at a particular
time. The discourse/semiotic aspect of a social order is what we can call an
order of discourse. It is the way in which diverse genres and discourses and
styles are networked together. An order of discourse is a social structuring 
of semiotic difference – a particular social ordering of relationships among 
different ways of making meaning, i.e. different discourses and genres and
styles. One aspect of this ordering is dominance: some ways of making mean-
ing are dominant or mainstream in a particular order of discourse, others are
marginal, or oppositional, or ‘alternative’. For instance, there may be a domin-
ant way to conduct a doctor–patient consultation in Britain, but there are also
various other ways, which may be adopted or developed to a greater or lesser
extent in opposition to the dominant way. The dominant way probably still
maintains social distance between doctors and patients, and the authority 
of the doctor over the way interaction proceeds; but there are others ways
which are more ‘democratic’, in which doctors play down their authority. The
political concept of ‘hegemony’ can usefully be used in analysing orders of 
discourse (Laclau and Mouffe 1985, Fairclough 1992a) – a particular social
structuring of semiotic difference may become hegemonic, become part of 
the legitimising common sense which sustains relations of domination, but
hegemony will always be contested to a greater or lesser extent, in hegemonic
struggle. An order of discourse is not a closed or rigid system, but rather an
open system, which is put at risk by what happens in actual interactions.
The ‘spirit of capitalism’ as deﬁned above can be seen as an order of dis-
course characterised by dominant discourses (enacted as genres, inculcated
Understanding the new management ideology
265


as styles) but also by oppositional or ‘alternative’ discourses (genres, styles).
This accords with the view in Boltanski and Chiapello (1999) that any capit-
alist order is constantly traversed by critique. They show how the birth of the
third spirit of capitalism is a response to and incorporation of what they call
the ‘artistic critique’ of the 1960s and 1970s.
We said above that the relationship between discourse and other elements
of social practices is a dialectical relationship – discourse internalises and is
internalised by other elements without the different elements being reducible
to each other. They are different, but not discrete. If we think of the dialectics
of discoursein historical terms, in terms of processes of social change, the ques-
tion that arises is the ways in which and the conditions under which processes
of internalisation take place. Take the concept of a ‘knowledge economy’ and
‘knowledge society’. This suggests a qualitative change in economies and
societies such that economic and social processes are knowledge-driven –
change comes about, at an increasingly rapid pace, through the generation,
circulation, and operationalisation of knowledges in economic and social pro-
cesses. The relevance of these ideas here is that ‘knowledge-driven’ amounts
to ‘discourse-driven’: knowledges are generated and circulate as discourses,
and the process through which discourses become operationalised in eco-
nomies and societies is precisely the dialectics of discourse.
Discourses include imaginaries – representations of how things might 
or could or should be. The knowledges of the knowledge-economy and
knowledge-society are imaginaries in this sense – projections of possible states
of affairs, ‘possible worlds’. These imaginaries may be enacted as actual 
(networks of) practices – imagined activities, subjects, social relations etc. can
become real activities, subjects, social relations etc. Such enactments include
materialisations of discourses, in the ‘hardware’ (plant, machinery etc.) and
the ‘software’ (management systems etc.). Such enactments are also in part
themselves discoursal/semiotic: discourses become enacted as genres. So new
management discourses become new genres, for instance genres for team
meetings. Discourses as imaginaries may also come to be inculcated as new
ways of being, new identities. The dialectical process does not end with enact-
ment and inculcation. Social life is reﬂexive. That is, people not only act and
interact within networks of social practices, but they also interpret and rep-
resent to themselves and each other what they do, and these interpretations
and representations shape and reshape what they do.
There is nothing inevitable about the dialectics of discourse. A new dis-
course may come into an institution or organisation without being enacted 
or inculcated. It may be enacted, yet never be fully inculcated. For instance,
managerial discourses have been quite extensively enacted within British 
266
Methodology in CDA research


universities (for instance as procedures of staff appraisal, including a new
genre of ‘appraisal interview’), yet arguably the extent of inculcation is very
limited – most academics do not ‘own’ these management discourses. This
has a bearing on theories of ‘social constructionism’ (Sayer 2000). It is a 
commonplace in contemporary social science that social entities (institu-
tions, organisations, social agents etc.) are or have been constituted through
social processes, and a common understanding of these processes highlights
the effectivity of discourses: social entities are in some sense effects of 
discourses. Where social constructionism becomes problematic is where it
disregards the relative solidity and permanence of social entities, and their
resistance to change. In using a dialectical theory of discourse in social
research, one needs to take account, case by case, of the circumstances which
condition whether and to what degree social entities are resistant to new 
discourses.
The Boltanski and Chiapello (1999) argument can be formulated in these
terms. A spirit of capitalism is an order of discourse where discourses are
dialectically enacted in ‘action models’ (e.g., ‘tests’) which are partially semi-
otic in character, i.e., it is partly a matter of discourses being enacted as genres,
and dialectically inculcated in ways of being (identities) such as new manager
identities, partly again a semiotic inculcation of discourses in styles, partly a
matter of extra-semiotic embodiment – with the proviso that the dialectical
movement continues as these enactments/inculcations of the discourse are
themselves ongoingly and diversely represented in new discourses. This
reformulation seems to us to clarify the position of discourse (semiosis) in 
the Boltanski and Chiapello (1999) model, while avoiding any reductive 
discourse idealism, which is a shared concern for both CDA and the new 
sociology of capitalism.
3 Analysis of the sample text
We have chosen a recent text of one of the best-known management ‘gurus’.
Boltanski and Chiapello (1999) point out that this type of literature, aimed 
at informing managers about the latest innovations in managing enterprises
and people, is one of the main places of inscription of the spirit of capital-
ism. Though, as dominant ideology, it has a general capacity to penetrate the 
mental representations of the epoch – political and trade union discourses,
journalism, research and so forth. Like the spirit of capitalism, which is 
oriented both to capital accumulation and to principles of legitimation, man-
agement literature contains both new methods of running enterprises and
making proﬁt, and justiﬁcation for the way these are done – arguments which
Understanding the new management ideology
267


managers can use to respond to criticisms and to demands for them to justify
themselves.
The sample text is thus a good example of the many texts which contribute
to the constitution and inculcation of the new ‘spirit of capitalism’, in terms of
the dimensions of stimulation, security and justice and in terms of the Cités
which are drawn upon to ground legitimation in terms of justice, and those
which are conversely devalued. We shall look at it in terms of the three inter-
connected but analytically separable aspects of genre, style and discourses.
That is, what sort of activity is this a part of; what sort of interaction charac-
terised by what sort of social relations (genre); what sort of authorial identity is
constituted here (style); what sort of representations do we ﬁnd here of work
and organisations and their members in the new economy (discourses)?
3.1 Genre
The blurb on the book cover can give us an initial sense of genre. The book
‘provides a hands-on blueprint for adopting the core principles of e-culture’,
‘identiﬁes and analyses the emergence of e-culture – and provides a lively 
roll-up-your-sleeves guide to proﬁting from tomorrow’. So in addition to
being an ‘analysis’, it is a ‘guide’, a ‘blueprint’.
The chapter we are focusing on is the ninth of ten chapters, which are
divided into three Parts. Part One (‘Searching, searching: The Challenge of
Change’) sets forth ‘a variety of challenges’ – centrally, the challenge of the
internet. Part Two analyses ‘the implications for business of the advent of the
Internet and identiﬁes best practices in implementing e-culture principles’.
Part Three (which Chapter 9 is in) ‘offers a practical guide to change – how to
move fast to transform a whole organization, how to lead change, and how to
cultivate the human skills required for an Internet-enabled world’. Chapter 9
focuses on ‘how to lead change’.
Chapter 9 is made up of an introduction which identiﬁes seven ‘classic
skills involved in innovation and change’, a section on each ‘skill’, and a con-
cluding section entitled ‘The Rhythm of Change’. The dominant genre is a
form of self-help guide, embedded in an actional sequence which potentially
moves from acquiring knowledge to applying knowledge, from learning to
doing. Its social relations are those of expert advice, between an expert and
would-be learners and users. One might see presentation of research results as
a subsidiary genre, though its relationship to the dominant genre is complex 
as we show below, and it is only marginally present. Shifts in genre imply 
shifts in social relations, for instance, there is a brief levelling of the ground
between writer and readers at the beginning of the chapter as the genre shifts
268
Methodology in CDA research


to dialogue (‘Wait a minute. Haven’t we heard this before? Of course we have.’)
In accordance with the genre, targeted readers are ‘managers’ and ‘executives’,
as indicated by appreciative comments about the book quoted on the cover:
they all come, with one exception, from Chief Executive Ofﬁcers of compan-
ies, i.e., from those with whom ambitious managers identify. It is assumed 
that to succeed in one’s professional life as they have done, one must apply
Kanter’s prescriptions.
Genres are realised in semantic and lexico-grammatical features of texts.
Let us look at the dominant genre in these terms. Most of the sections on
‘skills’ begin with statements which make categorical claims. Some of these are
explicitly normative statements with obligational modalities (‘A raw idea that
emerges from the kaleidoscope must be shaped into a theme that makes the
idea come alive’, ‘Sensing an opportunity on the horizon is only part of the pic-
ture; an additional mental act of imagination is needed to ﬁnd a creative new
response to it.’). Others are apparently statements of fact (e.g., ‘Innovation
begins with someone being smart enough to sense a new need’) but with an
implicitly normative force (‘To be innovative, leaders must be smart enough
. . .’). There are many such ostensible descriptions which are implicit prescrip-
tions in the chapter (e.g., ‘Changemasters ﬁnd many ways to monitor external
reality’, ‘Changemasters sense problems and weaknesses before they repres-
ent full-blown threats’), and they are more frequent than explicit prescrip-
tions. This gives the sense that ‘analysis’ predominates over prescription. Yet
although the book is said to be based upon responses from 785 organisations,
300 original interviews in nearly 80 companies, and detailed case studies of
over two dozen companies, this is not a scientiﬁc analysis, and neither the
claims made nor the examples given are documented with evidence from 
the data. Nor is there a methodological section explaining how the collection
and analysis of the data ground the claims made in the book, though there is a
summary of ‘selected survey ﬁndings’ in an Appendix. All that is said about
the relationship of the research and the book is that the results ‘are reﬂected in
the lessons of this book’.
There is an oscillation between explicit or implicit normative claims or pre-
scriptions, and examples which are summarised anecdotally in a sentence or
two, or just a quotation from a Chief Executive Ofﬁcer. Here is an example of
this oscillation from the section on ‘Skill 3’:
Extract 1
Changemasters have to focus people’s eyes on the prize – to get them to see
the value beyond the hardship of change to the prize waiting at the end.
When honkong.com changed its business model and set a new theme,
Understanding the new management ideology
269


director Rudy Chan reported: ‘We needed to go through quite a lot of
explaining. We had to tell them why. And what’s in it for them in terms 
of career opportunities. And we needed to do that several times. It was a lot
of communication.’
The anecdotal examples often presuppose a knowledge of the case or the com-
pany as this does – ‘When honkong.com changed its business model and set a
new theme’ presupposes that (assumes reader knowledge that) honkong.com
did change its business model and set a new theme.
In terms of taxis, or the way in which clauses and sentences are related to
each other, the syntax is predominantly paratactic, one clause or sentence con-
stituting an addition to others, so that meanings (e.g., the meaning of ‘leader-
ship’) are cumulatively built up. This is most obvious in the predilection for
lists. There are seven lists in the chapter which are set off in the text, either
numbered or with bullet points (for instance: ‘The customer avoidance trap,
The competitor avoidance trap, The challenger avoidance trap’), and other
lists embedded in the text (e.g., ‘preselling, making deals, getting a sanity
check’ as the ‘actions’ which constitute ‘coalition-building’). Such lists are
easily memorised, and facilitate the transition from prescription to action
(think of shopping lists, or ‘to do’ lists). On the other hand, a paratactic addi-
tive relationship is inimical to complexity, analysis and argumentation. But the
paratactic relationship is not by any means limited to lists. It predominates in
the way sentences are related to each other in paragraphs, the way paragraphs
are related to each other, the way clauses and phrases are related to each other
in sentences. Take for instance the extract on ‘Skill 2’.
Extract 2
Skill 2. Kaleidoscopic Thinking: Stimulating Breakthrough Ideas
Sensing an opportunity on the horizon is only part of the picture; an 
additional mental act of imagination is needed to ﬁnd a creative new
response to it. Changemasters take all the input about needs and oppor-
tunities and use it to shake up reality a little, to get an exciting new idea of
what’s possible, to break through the old pattern and invent a new one.
Creativity is a lot like looking at the world through a kaleidoscope. 
You look at a set of elements, the same ones that everyone else sees, but 
then reassemble those ﬂoating bits and pieces into an enticing new pos-
sibility. Innovators shake up their thinking as though their brains are 
kaleidoscopes, permitting an array of different patterns out of the same bits
of reality. Changemasters challenge prevailing wisdom. They start from 
the premise that there are many solutions to a problem and that by chang-
ing the angle on the kaleidoscope, new possibilities will emerge. Where
270
Methodology in CDA research


other people would say ‘That’s impossible. We’ve always done it this 
way,’ they see another approach. Where others see only problems, they 
see possibilities.
There are additive paratactic relations between the two paragraphs; between
all the sentences in each paragraph; between clauses within sentences (e.g.,
the ﬁrst and second sentences). There are also some hypotactic relations
within sentences (e.g., the purpose clauses in sentence 2, ‘to shake up . . .
invent a new one’ – notice that they themselves constitute three paratactically
related clauses). In addition to additive paratactical relations, there are con-
trastive paratactical relations marked by ‘but’ and ‘whereas’. A portrait of the
kaleidoscopic thinking of ‘changemasters’ is cumulatively built up by adding
one statement to others, and contrasting the ‘changemaster’ with ‘others’.
The contrastive or adversative element is itself a signiﬁcant feature of the
syntax of the text, and it can be related to the Boltanski–Chiapello view of the
‘grammar’ of justiﬁcatory regimes (or Cités): they incorporate a contrast and 
a relation between ‘the great ones’ and ‘the small ones’, those who strongly
embody the Cité’s values those who do not. This is a deﬁning characteristic of
this genre of ‘popular management discourse’ as opposed to ‘academic, prac-
tical and political’ management discourses (Furusten 1999). The ‘great one’ 
is an example to readers; the ‘small one’, always described in unfavourable
terms, serves as a foil. It is obvious that a text which aims at action and 
implementation will represent prescribed behaviour in its best light and
devalue alternatives, especially when the latter are not (in contrast to criminal
behaviour, for instance) inherently negative. The ‘great ones’ are also system-
atically associated with the future, the ‘small ones’ with the past, on the basis
of a banal ideology of progress.
3.2 Style
The issue here is the sort of identity which is projected in the text for its author.
We can see this in terms of what the author is implicitly committed to by the
way the text is written – being a particular sort of person, claims about what is
the case, value claims about what is good and desirable. The author is clearly
projected as an expert through the explicit prescriptions and implicit pre-
scriptions (apparent descriptions) which are pervasive through the text.
Overwhelmingly, their modality is ‘strong’ – that is, the prescriptions of 
what should be done and the descriptions of what is the case are categorical,
unmitigated, not hedged. Take, for example, ‘Changemasters sense problems
and weaknesses before they represent full-blown threats’ and ‘Leaders must
Understanding the new management ideology
271


wake people out of inertia’. There are various ways in which the claim of the
former and the prescription of the latter might be mitigated and made less 
categorical: replacing ‘sense’ with ‘often sense’ or ‘tend to sense’ or ‘may sense’
in the former, replacing ‘must wake’ with ‘ought to wake’ or ‘should try to
wake’ in the latter. There are exceptions in the chapter, cases where modality
is mitigated, for example: ‘. . . changemasters are often more effective when
they are insiders bringing a revolutionary new perspective. A foundation of
community and a base of strong relationships inside large organisations can
speed the change process’. These are the (relatively rare) points in the text
where we hear at least a trace of the more circumspect voice of the academic
researcher reporting on the results of research, and they can be seen as con-
tributing to a hybrid style – the author is projected primarily as an expert guide
(and all-knowing ‘guru’) but with marginal traces of the academic researcher.
There are also other relatively marginal diversities, including the brief shift 
to dialogue alluded to above (‘Wait a minute. Haven’t we heard this before? 
Of course we have.’), where the author is projected as a co-participant with 
the reader in an event such as a seminar or meeting.
Style is also linked to values – the value commitments made in the text are
part of the constitution of an authorial identity. Values can be made explicit
through evaluations, e.g., ‘These pieces of the picture are important because
sometimes people just don’t understand what the change leader is talking
about’. But for the most part values are implicit – they are value assumptions.
For instance: ‘an additional mental act of imagination is needed to ﬁnd a 
creative new response’. ‘Finding a creative new response’ is assumed to be a
good thing to do, though it is not explicitly said to be desirable. Such assumed 
values are pervasive through this text – and the assumption is that they are
shared values, shared within the reading community of the text. These values
emanate in Boltanski and Chiapello’s terms from the ‘equivalency principles’
of the cités (the Discourses) which are present in the text, in particular the
‘inspirational’ (e.g., ‘ﬁnd a creative response’) and ‘connectionist’ (e.g., ‘coali-
tion building’) cités, as in the majority of popular management texts of the
1990s. The values associated with other cités are present in the adversative
relations of the text – as rejected values.
The author, Rosabeth Kanter, is what is normally called a management
‘guru’. Being a guru is partly a matter of credentials and standing (e.g., being 
a professor at the prestigious Harvard Business School), and partly a matter 
of book sales and the attractiveness and cost of the seminars one leads
(Huczynski 1993, Jackson 2001). It is centrally a matter of having the author-
ity to project, predict and interpret the future (Kanter ‘predicts how the
Internet will alter the way we work in the future’, according to the description
272
Methodology in CDA research


of her book on Amazon.com), prescribe what people need to succeed in the
future, and have people act on those prescriptions. The slippage from
description to prescription which we have described above is a central feature
of guru style: the performative power of statements which aim to bring about
what they represent as actual. Bourdieu (1991) has described this prescriptive
power of descriptions in political discourse. Visionaries, gurus, traditionally
belonged to the domains of religion and politics; they have now extended their
domain into management. Kanter constructs herself as ‘changemaster’ in this
text, as an incarnation of the new business hero she presents to readers. Her
creativity is foregrounded in the opening words of the book: ‘Evolve! – The
song. Lyrics by Rosabeth Moss Kanter’. And the text itself can be seen as
enacting the ‘kaleidoscope thinking’ it attributes to leaders: ‘You look at a set
of elements . . . but then reassemble those ﬂoating bits and pieces into an
enticing new possibility’. There is an enticing, seductive character to Kanter’s
text. The sheer semantic heterogeneity of the text is striking – the diversity of
the discourses, metaphors and similes which are articulated together in the
construal of leadership.
3.3 Discourse
To win conviction and enhance the prospects for action, texts in this genre must
address the three dimensions of legitimation distinguished by Boltanski 
and Chiapello (1999): stimulation, security and justice. It is the ﬁrst of these
dimensions (the promise of stimulation) that is most prominent, while the 
others (security and justice) are relatively underdeveloped in Kanter’s book as
in the texts studied by Boltanski and Chiapello. For instance, there is nothing
about what happens to ‘laggards’ or to leaders (‘changemasters’) who fail.
Boltanski and Chiapello (1999) predict this for the early stages of a new spirit
of capitalism before its novelty wears off. As the element of stimulation dimin-
ishes, people begin to see the limits of the new order in terms of security and
justice, and the spirit of capitalism must strengthen these dimensions to stand
up to critique.
The promise of stimulation evokes a world of change, innovation, creativ-
ity (‘to offer a dream, to stretch their horizons’, ‘to create the future’), liberty
(‘the free-expression atmosphere’), personal development (‘a call to become
something more’). The promise of security can be seen in the representation
of a team as a protected cocoon (where one is ‘nurtured’, ‘fed’ by a leader who
is also the ‘advocate’ of the team and ensures sufﬁcient ‘ﬂexibility’ for it to sur-
mount obstacles). The promise of fairness can be seen in giving people ‘recog-
nition’, ‘a warm glow’, ‘making everyone a Hero’. One feature of the ideal new
Understanding the new management ideology
273


world depicted in management literature is that security is seen as emanating
from people’s capacity to adapt. Either they are ﬂexible and adaptable, open
to change, capable of ﬁnding new projects, and live in relative personal 
security, or they are not and will be put aside when the current project ﬁnishes.
Security in mobility is the reward, which is why new management can be seen
as introducing a new conception of justice (a new cité). Someone who con-
tributes well to a project will be helped to ﬁnd another – his/her reputation will
be built up as a reward for his/her merits. In Kanter’s words: ‘Recognition is
important not only for its motivational pat on the back but also for publicity
value. The whole world now knows ( . . . ) who has done it, and what talents
reside in the community gene pool’.
The main Discourses (Cités) are the Inspirational and Connectionist,
though others are also less saliently present. In particular, there is a protagonist–
antagonist relation (textured as contrastive/adversative relations, see below)
between these two Discourses, and the Industrial and Domestic Discourses,
which are contested (‘challenging prevailing wisdom’, challenging ‘stiﬂing
bureaucracy’).
Each Discourse can be speciﬁed in terms of what Boltanski–Thévenot 
call its basic ‘grammar’, which includes: which ‘subjects’ or participants are 
represented as involved in the processes of the capitalist organisation; which
are ‘great ones’, which are ‘small ones’; what sort of actions (material, mental,
verbal) and attributions are characteristic for each type of subject; what rela-
tions there are between ‘great ones’ and ‘small ones’; what ‘objects’ (e.g., tech-
nologies) are represented as involved in the processes of the organisation;
what values are assumed (which we have discussed above). The text can be
analysed in terms of how it textures together the subjects, actions, relations,
objects and values of different Discourses.
The ‘subjects’ represented in the text are: the ‘great one’ (the leader), the
‘small one’ (the ‘laggards’, ‘skeptics’ etc.) and the leader’s helpers (his/her
‘people’, ‘stakeholders’ etc.). The ‘great ones’ are represented as: ‘change-
masters, leaders, pacesetters, idea scouts, innovators, lead actors, producer-
directors’, and so forth, the two most frequent representations being ‘leaders’
and ‘changemasters’ (‘change leaders’ also occurs). These representations of
‘great ones’ articulate together different discourses, including discourses 
of entertainment (‘ideas scouts’, cf. ‘talent scouts’) and theatre (‘lead actors’,
‘producer-directors’). The ‘small ones’ are represented primarily as ‘laggards’
(also ‘skeptics’, ‘resisters’); ‘laggard’ is drawn from the moral discourse of
everyday life.
It is the ‘great ones’ who are the predominant actors or agents in the text – it
is their actions as well as attributes that are in focus. The range of actions and
274
Methodology in CDA research


attributions includes elements from two main Cités – the ‘Inspirational’ and
‘Connectionist’. With respect to the former, the ‘great ones’ ‘sense problems
and weaknesses’, exhibit ‘curiosity’, ‘create’, ‘imagine’, ‘improvise’, ‘dream’,
have ‘visions’, ‘shake up’ reality and their own thinking, and so forth. Like 
all artists they are a little mad – ‘neurotic’, ‘paranoid’. They are charismatic:
they ‘inspire’ others, and ‘raise aspirations’ with their visions, they ‘wake 
people out of inertia’, and so forth. With respect to the latter, the ‘great ones’
‘reassemble’, ‘combine’, form ‘alliances’ and build and ‘widen’ ‘coalitions’,
‘build’ and ‘nurture teams’, have a ‘network of contacts’ etc. There are traces
of other Cités – the ‘Industrial’ (‘delivering on deadline’) and the ‘Merchant’
(‘making deals’), but the ‘deals’ have a ‘connectionist’ character which points
to a merger of Cités. In these ‘deals’, exchange is not balanced to the point that
parties are ‘quits’ and can therefore sever connection, as it is in the ‘merchant’
world when one pays the price of the object purchased. Here there always
remains a debt to pay, which allows for relations to be built on a long-term
basis (‘this can involve some creative exchange of beneﬁts, so that supporters
get something of value right away. Some changemasters seek contributions
beyond the amount they actually need because investment builds the commit-
ment of other people to help them’).
3.4 Texturing
The diverse Discourses which constitute cités, and the diverse discourses
which constitute each cité, are articulated, ‘textured’, together in the text in
accordance with its genre and the syntactic features which we have identiﬁed
above as realising the genre (most saliently, additive and adversative paratactic
relations).
On the one hand, leadership is constructed through relations of equi-
valence between different discourses (and Discourses) emanating from (the
orders of discourse of ) different areas of social life and social experience, and
so between these areas. On the other hand, relations of difference are set up
between the Inspirational/Connectionist and Industrial/Domestic Discourses
(and constituent discourses). The text builds a protagonist (Inspirational/
Connectionist) – antagonist (Industrial/Domestic) relation between them.
Let us begin with relations of difference. In Extract 3, a relationship of 
difference is textured between ‘pacesetters’ and ‘laggards’, in terms of, on the
one hand, the Inspirational and Connectionist Discourses (with a particular
appropriation of the Domestic Discourse which we come to shortly), and, on
the other hand, the Industrial Discourse. This relationship is textured as a
protagonist–antagonist relation (Martin 1992).
Understanding the new management ideology
275


Extract 3
Companies that are successful on the web operate differently from their 
laggard counterparts. On my global e-culture survey, those reporting that
they are much better than their competitors in the use of the Internet tend to
have ﬂexible, empowering, collaborative organizations. The ‘best’ are more
likely than the ‘worst’ to indicate, at statistically signiﬁcant levels, that:
• Departments collaborate (instead of sticking to themselves).
• Conﬂict is seen as creative (instead of disruptive).
• People can do anything not explicitly prohibited (instead of doing only
what is explicitly permitted).
• Decisions are made by the people with the most knowledge (instead of
the ones with the highest rank).
Pacesetters and laggards describe no differences in how hard they work
(in response to a question about whether work was conﬁned to traditional
hours or spilled over into personal time), but they are very different in how
collaboratively they work.
Working in e-culture mode requires organizations to be communities 
of purpose. Recall the elements of community sketched in chapter 1. A
community makes people feel like members, not just employees – members
with privileges but also responsibilities beyond the immediate job, extend-
ing to colleagues in other areas. Community means having things in com-
mon, a range of shared understandings transcending speciﬁc ﬁelds. Shared
understandings permit relatively seamless processes, interchangeability
among people, smooth formation of teams that know how to work together
even if they have never previously met, and rapid transmission of informa-
tion. In this chapter we will see how the principles of community apply
inside organizations and workplaces, sometimes facilitated by technology
but also independent of it. And I will examine the challenges that have to be
overcome to create organizational communities.
The greater integration that is integral to e-culture is different from 
the centralization of earlier eras. Integration must be accompanied by 
ﬂexibility and empowerment in order to achieve fast response, creativity, 
and innovation through improvisation. Web success involves operating
more like a community than a bureaucracy. It is a subtle but important 
distinction. Bureaucracy implies rigid job descriptions, command-and-
control hierarchies, and hoarding of information, which is doled out 
top-down on a need-to-know basis. Community implies a willingness to
abide by standardized procedures governing the whole organization, yes,
but also voluntary collaboration that is much richer and less programmed.
Communities can be mapped in formal ways, but they also have an emo-
tional meaning, a feeling of connection. Communities have both a structure
and a soul.
276
Methodology in CDA research


The texturing of the relationship of difference is effected through a range of
contrastive or antithetical relational structures and expressions: x instead of y,
x not just y, x but also y, x is different from y, more like x than y. The clearest
case is in the list in the centre of the extract, where protagonist practices 
represented before the brackets are set off against antagonist practices within
the brackets.
This extract illustrates how the meanings of words drawn from the vocabu-
lary of the Domestic Discourse is changed through their recontextualisation
within a largely Connectionist–Inspirational context. The new world has
nothing in common with the original Domestic Cité one ﬁnds for example 
in texts from the 1930s, where ‘the great ones’ are old, carriers of tradition 
etc. in a hierarchical world where one should respect one’s elders. This 
world accorded with the bourgeois capitalism of the time, but does not accord
with the contemporary elevation of rupture and innovation into supreme 
values. This particular appropriation of the Domestic Discourse is clear in 
the ﬁnal paragraph, where ‘communities’ are attributed with Inspira-
tionist attributes – notably ‘a soul’ – and the two Discourses are worked into 
a relation of equivalence. A relationship of difference is textured between 
this Domestic–Inspirational hybrid and the ‘bureaucracy’ of the Industrial
Cité.
Turning to relations of equivalence, this extract also textures relations 
of equivalence between different discourses within each Discourse. Firstly,
vocabulary items which are in equivalent positions in contrastive relations 
are thereby textured as equivalent, e.g., integration and community on the 
one hand, centralization and bureaucracy on the other. Secondly, such 
relations of equivalence are textured through additive paratactic structures,
sometimes with the conjunction ‘and’ (e.g., ‘ﬂexible, empowering, collabora-
tive’, where the three elements belong to different discourses). There are also
contrastive relations within the ‘protagonist’ conjunction of Discourses:
‘members, not just employees’; ‘privileges but also responsibilities’; ‘a 
willingness to abide by standardized procedures governing the whole organ-
ization, yes, but also voluntary collaboration that is much richer and less pro-
grammed’; ‘Communities can be mapped in formal ways, butthey alsohave an
emotional meaning, a feeling of connection . . . both a structure and a soul’.
These contrastive relations do double duty: they both register contrastive 
features on the protagonist side, and the contrast between the complexity 
of the latter (x but also y) and the simplicity of the antagonistic Industrial
Discourse (x).
There is also a combination of relations of equivalence and difference in
Extract 4:
Understanding the new management ideology
277


Extract 4
Skill 1: Sensing Needs and Opportunities: Tuning in to the Environment
Changemasters sense problems and weaknesses before they represent 
full-blown threats. They see the opportunities when external forces change
– new technological capabilities, industry upheavals, regulatory shifts – and
then they identify gaps between what is and what could be. Recall the diver-
gent paths to e-business success taken by pacesetter companies compared
with the laggards in Chapter 3. Whereas laggards respond to hints of new
developments on the horizon with denial and anger, pacesetters exhibit
curiosity.
Changemasters ﬁnd many ways to monitor external reality. They become
idea scouts, attentive to early signs of discontinuity, disruption, threat, or
opportunity. They can establish their own listening posts, such as a satellite
ofﬁce in an up-and-coming location, an alliance with an innovative partner,
or investments in organizations that are creating the future.
Through additive paratactic relations, equivalences are again textured
between elements of Inspirational (‘sensing’, ‘tuning in’, being ‘idea scouts’)
and Connectionist (‘establishing listening posts’, ‘an alliance’) Discourses;
between discourses of intuition (‘sensing’) and, through a metaphorical exten-
sion of radio electronic discourse, a discourse of self-reﬂexivity (‘tuning in’),
an entertainment discourse (‘idea scouts’ – cf. ‘talent scouts’) or a discourse of
military intelligence or espionage (‘establish listening posts’).
Through a contrastive paratactic relation, a relation of difference is tex-
tured between a psychoanalytical discourse (‘denial or anger’) and perhaps a
discourse of child psychology which is a part of the ‘Inspirational’ Discourse
(‘exhibit curiosity’). The texturing work here is both the texturing of these
equivalence relations through additive and contrastive paratactic construc-
tions, and through collocations: the collocation of ‘scouts’ with ‘idea’ is the
most obviously creative collocation; ‘identify gaps’ (conventional strategic
management discourse) is collocated with ‘(between) what is and what could
be’ – religion/charismatic politics, even revolutionary politics. Note also col-
locations of ‘sense’ (discourse of intuition) and ‘needs and opportunities’/
‘problems and weaknesses’ (conventional strategic management discourse).
Extract 5 is the list of the seven ‘skills’:
Extract 5
Seven classic skills are involved in innovation and change: tuning in to the
environment, kaleidoscopic thinking, an inspiring vision, coalition building,
nurturing a working team, persisting through difﬁculties, and spreading
credit and recognition. These are more than discrete skills; they reﬂect a
perspective, a style, that is basic to e-culture.
278
Methodology in CDA research


The list textures together in a relation of equivalence elements of the Inspira-
tional Discourse (‘tuning in to the environment’, ‘an inspiring vision’) and the
Connectionist Discourse (‘coalition building’, ‘nurturing a working team’,
‘spreading credit and recognition’). ‘Persisting through difﬁculties’ is more
difﬁcult to place, but perhaps evokes an Inspirational world and the unrecog-
nised genius able to carry on alone in the face of opposition for the sake of
recognition in posterity. ‘Kaleidoscopic thinking’ evokes both Inspirational
and Connectionist Discourses, creativity taking a connectionist form, the
form of a new relation rather than an invention ex nihilo. The list textures
together elements of discourses of charismatic politics or perhaps religion
(‘inspiring vision’), self-reﬂexivity/counselling (‘tuning in’), cognitive theory
and perhaps play (and childhood) (‘kaleidoscopic thinking’) within the
Inspirational Discourse, politics (‘coalition building’) and parenting (‘nurtur-
ing’) within the Connectionist Discourse.
4 Conclusion
We shall conclude with some thoughts on this collaboration as an exercise in
transdisciplinarity, returning to the theme we raised in the Introduction. We
suggested there that transdisciplinary research is a particular form of inter-
disciplinary research which does not simply bring together different disciplines
and theoretical-analytical frameworks. It also initiates a dialogue between two
disciplines and frameworks which may lead to a development of both through
a process of each internally appropriating the logic of the other as a resource
for its own development. We consider what we have achieved ﬁrst from the
perspective of CDA, second from the perspective of the new sociology of 
capitalism.
From the perspective of CDA, our collaborative analysis has appropriated
the logic of the new sociology of capitalism in ways which point to the devel-
opment of the theoretical concepts of ‘order of discourse’, ‘discourse’ and
‘style’. We have suggested that a substantive change in the form of capitalism
entails a change in the ‘spirit of capitalism’, and we have seen the latter both 
as an ideology and as an order of discourse – a particular conﬁguration of 
discourses enacted as genres and inculcated as styles. We have also suggested
that the cités which are conﬁgured within the constitution of the ‘spirit of 
capitalism’ are Discourses, which are in turn analysable as conﬁgurations of
discourses. We have also associated styles with values, and especially implicit
values, which we have suggested can be seen as emanating from the ‘equival-
ency principles’ of particular cités. In suggesting these connections between
the categories of the two theories, we are opening up various directions of 
Understanding the new management ideology
279


theoretical elaboration for CDA by ‘putting to work’ within it the logic of new
sociology of capitalism: the relationship between capitalist formations, ideo-
logies, and orders of discourse; the various levels of abstraction or generality
at which discourses (and ‘Discourses’) need to be identiﬁed; the relationship
between D/discourses, styles and legimitation.
From the perspective of New Sociology of Capitalism, collaborating with
CDA allows an elaboration and deepening of a text analysis which was mainly
thematic and centred upon pre-established analytical categories (the cités,
dimensions of legitimation of a spirit of capitalism). The linguistic tools of
CDA have encouraged us to look more closely at how texts are structured, how
ways of writing construct, for example, equivalences and differences, how the
author of a text constructs him/herself through the discourse, and so forth.
More generally, we believe that the study we have carried out is not merely
of interest in terms of collaboration between disciplines. It also provides a 
relatively in-depth analysis of an inﬂuential management ‘guru’ text, allow-
ing its codes to be exposed, which is one of a variety of ways in which social
researchers can de-sacrilise the words of these new prophets. De-sacrilisation
seems to us an important undertaking, for such texts have a real inﬂuence 
on the maintenance of dominant ideologies and on the actions of managers
who read them. Yet the lack of a scientiﬁc apparatus and a relatively unsop-
histicated style lead social scientists to treat them with disinterest or contempt,
as is more generally the case with popular literature and television. Con-
sequently such texts are rarely subjected to critique, leaving the ﬁeld free for
them to do their doctrinal work. It seems to us, by contrast, that studying such
texts is one of the tasks of social science as we conceive it – to subject to debate
what presents itself as given and obvious, and to expose to critique all the
social agencies which impose themselves on people, in order to enhance
democratic debate.
280
Methodology in CDA research


11. Critical discourse analysis in
researching language in the new
capitalism: overdetermination,
transdisciplinarity and textual analysis1
C
apitalism has the capacity to overcome crises by radically transforming
itself periodically so that economic growth and proﬁtability can con-
tinue. Such a transformation towards ‘New Capitalism’ has been taking place
since the 1970s in response to a crisis in the post-Second World War model
(‘Fordism’). This transformation involves both restructuring of relations
between the economic, political and social domains (including the com-
modiﬁcation and marketisation of ﬁelds such as education which become 
subject to the economic logic of the market), and the re-scaling of relations
between different scales of social life – the global, the regional, e.g., the
European Union, the national, and the local. Governments on different scales,
social democratic as well as conservative and liberal, have embraced ‘neo-
liberalism’: a political project for facilitating restructuring and re-scaling of
social relations in accord with the demands of an unrestrained global capital-
ism (Bourdieu 1998a). It has been imposed on formerly socialist economies as
allegedly the best means of rapid system transformation, economic renewal,
and integration into the global economy. It has led to radical attacks on social
welfare provision and the reduction of the protections that ‘welfare states’ pro-
vided for people against the effects of markets. It has also led to an increasing
division between rich and poor, increasing economic insecurity and stress
even for the ‘new middle’ classes, and an intensiﬁcation of the exploitation of
labour. The unrestrained emphasis on growth also poses major threats to the
environment. It has also produced a new imperialism in which international
ﬁnancial agencies under the tutelage of the US and its rich allies indiscrimin-
ately impose restructuring, sometimes with disastrous consequences, e.g.,
Russia and Argentina – an imperialism which has recently taken a military
form in the ‘war on terrorism’ and the invasion of Iraq. It is not the impetus to


increasing international economic integration (or ‘globalisation’ in that sense)
that is the problem, but the particular form in which this is being imposed, and
the particular consequences, e.g., in terms of unequal distribution of wealth,
which are being made to follow. All this has resulted in the disorientation and
disarming of economic, political and social forces committed to radical alter-
natives, and has contributed to a closure of public debate and a weakening of
democracy.
1 Language in new capitalism
The common idea of new capitalism as a ‘knowledge-based’ or ‘knowledge-
driven’ socio-economic order implies that it is also ‘discourse-driven’, 
suggesting that language may have a more signiﬁcant role in contemporary
socio-economic changes than it has had in the past. If this is so, discourse 
analysis has an important contribution to make to research on the transforma-
tions of capitalism. The signiﬁcance of language in these transformations has
not gone unnoticed by social researchers. Bourdieu and Wacquant (2001: 3) 
for instance point to a ‘new planetary vulgate’, which they characterise as 
a vocabulary (‘globalisation’, ‘ﬂexibility’, ‘governance’, ‘employability’,
‘exclusion’ and so forth), which ‘is endowed with the performative power 
to bring into being the very realities it claims to describe’. That is, the neo-
liberal political project of removing obstacles to the new economic order is
discourse-driven.
But, as well as indicating the signiﬁcance of language in these socio-economic
transformations, Bourdieu and Wacquant’s paper suggests that social research
needs the contribution of discourse analysts. It is not enough to characterise
the ‘new planetary vulgate’ as a list of words, a vocabulary; rather, texts and
interactions need to be analysed to show how some of the effects that they
identify are brought off, e.g., making the socio-economic transformations 
of new capitalism and the policies of governments to facilitate them seem
inevitable; representing desires as facts; and representing the imaginaries of
interested policies – the interested possible realities they project – as the way
the world actually is ( Fairclough 2000b). Bourdieu and Wacquant’s account
of the effectivity of neo-liberal discourse exceeds the capacity of their (other-
wise extremely powerful) sociological research methods.
But it is not only text and interactional analysis that discourse analysts 
can bring to social research on the new capitalism, it is also a satisfactory 
theorisation of the dialectics of discourse (elaborated further below). If the
restructuring and re-scaling (Jessop 2000) are changes in the networking of
social practices, they are also a restructuring and re-scaling of discourse, 
282
Methodology in CDA research


of ‘orders of discourse’ (the term is explained below). The restructuring of
orders of discourse is a matter of shifting relations, i.e., changes in networking,
between the discourse elements of different (networks of) social practices. A
prime example is the way in which the language of management has colonised
public institutions and organisations such as universities, although I should
add that this process is a colonisation/appropriation dialectic, i.e., not only 
a matter of the entry of discourses into new domains, but the diverse ways in
which they are received, appropriated, and recontextualised in different locales,
and the ultimately unpredictable outcomes of this process. The re-scaling of
orders of discourse is a matter of changes in the networking of the discourse
elements of social practices on different scales of social organisation – global,
regional, national and local, for instance, the enhanced and accelerated per-
meability of local social practices (local government, small-scale industry,
local media) in countries across the world to discourses which are globally dis-
seminated through organisations like the International Monetary Fund (IMF)
and the World Bank. Working the above account of the transformation of 
capitalism into a dialectical theory of discourse provides a theoretical frame-
work for researching the global penetrative power of the ‘new planetary 
vulgate’ which Bourdieu and Wacquant (2001) allude to, as well as its limits.
This theoretical framework is also needed to research what Bourdieu 
and Wacquant (2001: 4) call the ‘performative power’ of the ‘new planetary
vulgate’, i.e., its power to ‘bring into being the very realities it describes’. How
does this discourse come to be internalised (Harvey 1996) in social practices,
and under what conditions does it construct and reconstruct (rather than
merely construe) social practices including their non-discoursal elements?
How does it come to be enacted in ways of acting and interacting, e.g., organ-
isational routines and procedures including genres and inculcated in the ways
of being, i.e., the identities of social agents? How does it come to be mater-
ialised in the ‘hardware’ of institutions and organisations? Researching this
crucial issue requires detailed investigation of organisational and institutional
change on a comparative basis, such as the study by Salskov-Iversen et al.
(2000) of the contrasting colonisation/appropriation of the new ‘public 
management’ discourse by local authorities in Britain and Mexico, but work-
ing with the sort of dialectical theory of discourse I sketch out below. (See 
also Iedema 1999.)
2 An example: the Blair text
Having given above a general account of the transformations of new capital-
ism, and a general rationale for a language focus in researching new capitalism,
Critical discourse analysis in researching language
283


284
Methodology in CDA research
Table 11.1 Text by Tony Blair
Paragraph
Paragraph 1
Paragraph 2
Paragraph 3
Paragraph 4
Paragraph 5
Paragraph 6
Paragraph 7
Text
The modern world is swept by change. New technologies emerge constantly,
new markets are opening up. There are new competitors but also great new
opportunities.
Our success depends on how well we exploit our most valuable assets: our
knowledge, skills and creativity. These are the key to designing high-value
goods and services and advanced business practices. They are at the heart of a
modern, knowledge-driven economy.
This new world challenges business to be innovative and creative, to improve
performance continuously, to build new alliances and ventures. But it also
challenges Government: to create and execute a new approach to industrial
policy.
That is the purpose of this White Paper. Old-fashioned state intervention did
not and cannot work. But neither does naïve reliance on markets.
The Government must promote competition, stimulating enterprise, ﬂexibility
and innovation by opening markets. But we must also invest in British
capabilities when companies alone cannot: in education, in science and in the
creation of a culture of enterprise. And we must promote creative partnerships
which help companies: to collaborate for competitive advantage; to promote a
long-term vision in a world of short-term pressures; to benchmark their
performance against the best in the world; and to forge alliances with other
businesses and employees. All this is the DTI’s role.
We will not meet our objectives overnight. The White Paper creates a policy
framework for the next ten years. We must compete more effectively in today’s
tough markets if we are to prosper in the markets of tomorrow.
In Government, in business, in our universities and throughout society we
must do much more to foster a new entrepreneurial spirit: equipping ourselves
for the long term, prepared to seize opportunities, committed to constant
innovation and enhanced performance. That is the route to commercial
success and prosperity for all. We must put the future on Britain’s side.
Tony Blair (signature)
The Rt Hon Tony Blair MP, Prime Minister
I now want to focus on speciﬁc issues which arise from a single text. Table 11.1
is the ‘Foreword’ to a UK Department of Trade and Industry White Paper,
‘Our Competitive Future: Building the Knowledge-Driven Economy’, written
by (or at least signed by) the Prime Minister, Tony Blair. I have used a tabular 
layout in paragraphs for purposes of clarity. (Note that this is one of the texts
analysed in the ﬁrst paper in this section, ‘A dialectical–relational approach to


critical discourse analysis in social research’, but the focus of the analysis is 
different in this paper.)
One thing I ﬁnd striking about this text (and many other contemporary
texts in politics and government but also other ﬁelds such as education) is the
texturing of a relationship between the ‘global’2 and the national. The relev-
ance of this feature of the text to the concerns of this paper is that this way of
construing the global and the national and the relationship between them is, as
I shall argue in more detail later, characteristically neo-liberal – using that term
as above for the dominant political position within current transformations 
of capitalism. In using the term ‘texturing’, I am focusing on the ‘work’ that is
done textually, i.e., the textual ‘working up’ of that relationship. Blair is writ-
ing about, and texturing a relationship between, ‘the modern world’ (more
speciﬁcally the ‘new global economy’, an expression he uses often although
not in this text) and Britain. Let us refer to these as different ‘space–times’: 
the global space–time and the national space–time. I shall come back to that
term later. For instance, Paragraph 1 represents the global space–time of the
‘modern world’. The ﬁrst sentence of the Paragraph 2 can be seen as combin-
ing representations of global and national space–times. The relation between
‘success’ and exploitation of ‘assets’ is global (it applies anywhere in the ‘new
global economy’), but the relational process verb (‘depends on’) links a nomin-
alisation (‘our success’) and an embedded clause (‘how well we exploit. . . .’)
which represent processes in British national space–time. The second and
third sentences of Paragraph 2 represent the global space–time. I shall com-
ment ﬁrst on how these space–times are constructed, and then on how they are
textured together.
3 The global space–time
Global space is represented as an entity, a place, ‘the modern world’, ‘this new
world’. It is a participant in processes rather than a circumstance (as it would
be in, for example, ‘new markets are opening up on an international level’). It
is the passive subject (and ‘logical object’) in the ﬁrst sentence of Paragraph 1
and the active subject in the ﬁrst sentence of Paragraph 3: ‘this new world 
challenges . . .’. It is also the theme of the text’s opening sentence and, one
might say, of the ﬁrst paragraph.
Global time is represented as present although what that means needs
some clariﬁcation. The verbs are present tense, either simple present or 
present continuous (‘are opening up’). In most cases the simple present is
‘timeless present’, representing an indeterminate stretch of time which
includes but pre-dates and post-dates the present. The present continuous
Critical discourse analysis in researching language
285


with the event verb ‘open up’ has both the meaning of inception and 
incompletion (‘are beginning to open up’) and an iterative meaning (‘keep
opening up’), as does the simple present ‘emerge’ combined with the adverb
‘constantly’.
The modality of representations of the processes and relations of the 
global space–time is epistemic and categorically assertive: positive statements
without modal markers which represent processes as real and actual. These
statements of some of the truisms of the age are of a somewhat gnomic char-
acter. Yet, ‘are opening up’ and ‘emerge constantly’ bring covert predictions
(‘will carry on emerging and opening up’) of an ‘irrealis’ future into the repres-
entation of global space–time as ‘realis’ present (Iedema 1998, Graham 2001). 
So too does the contrast in Paragraph 6 between ‘today’s tough markets’ and
‘the markets of tomorrow’; there is an implicit prediction of the competitive
character of these future markets.
The processes of the global space–time are material (the three processes 
in the ﬁrst two sentences of Paragraph 1, ‘is swept’, ‘emerge’, ‘are opening
up’), existential (the third sentence of Paragraph 1), relational (‘depends 
on’, ‘are’, Paragraph 2) and verbal (‘challenges’, Paragraph 3). The actors in
the material processes are non-human, inanimate (‘new technologies’, ‘new 
markets’) or nominalised (‘change’), and the actor in the verbal process is 
‘this new world’. The global space–time is represented as processes without
human agency.
The representation of relations between processes is also worth noting,
especially in Paragraph 1. Semantically, the relationship between the ﬁrst 
sentence and the rest of the paragraph is elaboration; the relationship between
the second and third sentences, and between the two clauses of the second, 
is addition, and the relationship between the two phrases of the third can 
be seen as both additive (‘also’) and contrastive (‘but’) (Halliday 1994).
Grammatically, there are three sentences, the second and third containing
paratactically related clauses and phrases, respectively. The global space–time
is represented as a list of processes. But there is also a nominalised process
(‘change’) and two inanimate nouns (‘markets’, ‘opportunities’) which, like
the nominalisation, represent processes, i.e., people trading in new ways, and
people being able to do new things, as entities, two of which (‘change’, ‘new
markets’) are actors in material processes.
4 The national space–time
National space is also represented as a place, Britain, although it is implicitly
evoked through some of its attributes (‘we’, ‘the government’ etc.) rather 
286
Methodology in CDA research


than directly represented – ‘Britain’ does not appear until Paragraph 7, 
and ‘British’ appears just once in Paragraph 5. It is also differentiated (see 
the ﬁnal paragraph) in terms of ﬁelds (‘Government’, ‘business’, ‘our uni-
versities’) in which, as ‘throughout society’, ‘a new entrepreneurial 
spirit’ is to be ‘fostered’, bringing all domains of social life under the sign of
business.
In contrast to the predominant timeless present of the global space–time,
the temporality of the national space–time is predominantly future, for
instance, in Paragraph 5. Notice also that the future is to be put ‘on Britain’s
side’ (Paragraph 7). The verbs of the main clauses of the ﬁrst three sentences
of Paragraph 5 are deontically modalised (‘must’), and the meanings are ‘pres-
ent necessity of future action’. The implicit normative framework is not, 
for instance, ethical but pragmatic and circumstantial, i.e., we are forced by
circumstances. On the other hand, in using ‘must’ rather than ‘have to’, Blair
commits himself to these necessities rather than locating their source 
elsewhere. Whereas statements about the global space–time are descriptive,
statements about the national space–time are predominantly prescriptive,
though Paragraph 6 begins with a sentence which is epistemically modalised,
i.e., a prediction (‘we will not meet our objectives overnight’). The national
space–time is represented mainly in terms of ‘irrealis’ processes: what things
should be like and must be made like rather than what they are like. The 
processes of subordinate and embedded clauses (‘stimulating’, ‘opening’,
‘collaborating’, ‘benchmarking’) are also irrealis through a process of 
‘propagation’ of the irrealis processes of main clauses analogous to the ‘value
propagation’ discussed by Lemke (1998), but so too are the embedded 
processes of nominalisations (‘competition’, ‘ﬂexibility’). As well, the irrealis
processes are in (irrealis) causal relation with each other, e.g., ‘creative 
partnerships’ lead to ‘collaboration’ which leads to ‘competitive advantage’.
The processes of the national space–time are predominantly material and, in
contrast to the global space–time, the actors in material processes are human,
either represented by the pronoun ‘we’ or collective nouns (‘the Government’,
‘companies’).
I shall comment on the representation of relationships between processes
just in Paragraph 5. The semantic relationship between the ﬁrst sentence and
the second and third taken together is both additive (‘also’) and contrastive
(‘but’); the relationship between the second and third sentences is addi-
tion; and the relationship between the ﬁrst three sentences and the fourth is
elaboration. In terms of relations between sentences, the representation of
global space–time in Paragraph 1 and national space–time in Paragraph 5 have
a similar list-like quality. But there is a difference in relations within sentences.
Critical discourse analysis in researching language
287


In the ﬁrst sentence of Paragraph 5, the ﬁrst non-ﬁnite clause (from ‘stimulat-
ing’) is subordinate to the preceding ﬁnite clause while the second non-ﬁnite
clause (‘by opening’) is subordinate to the ﬁrst non-ﬁnite clause. Semantically,
the relations are elaboration and means, respectively. In the second sentence,
the second ﬁnite clause (from ‘when’) is subordinate to the ﬁrst, i.e., the
semantic relation is apparently temporal but perhaps rather causal (‘because
companies alone cannot’). There is layered embedding in the third sentence:
a restrictive relative clause (beginning ‘which help’) embedded in a noun
phrase, and a list of coordinated non-ﬁnite clauses in a semantic relation of
addition (from ‘to collaborate’) which are embedded in the relative clause as
complements of ‘help’. There are many nominalised processes (‘competi-
tion’, ‘ﬂexibility’, ‘innovation’ etc.) although in contrast with Paragraph 1,
they do not function as actors.
The text as a whole, in the representation of both global and national
space–times, is notable for the number of lists: elements in a semantically 
additive and grammatically paratactic relationship. Using a terminology I shall
come back to, these lists texture relations of equivalence among elements. 
In some cases, equivalent elements are co-hyponyms, for instance ‘our 
assets: knowledge, skills and creativity’ in Paragraph 2 where ‘knowledge’,
‘skills’, and ‘creativity’ are co-hyponyms of ‘assets’ (the superordinate term).
‘New technologies emerge constantly’, ‘new markets are opening up’, ‘(there
being) new competitors’, and ‘new opportunities’ are co-hyponyms of
‘change’ in Paragraph 1; ‘education’, ‘science’, and ‘(the creation of ) a culture
of enterprise’ are co-hyponyms of ‘British capabilities’ in Paragraph 5. But
‘equipping ourselves for the long term’, ‘(being) prepared to seize opportun-
ities’, ‘(being) committed to constant innovation and enhanced performance’
are co-meronyms of ‘fostering a new entrepreneurial spirit’ – the former 
are aspects of the latter (Martin 1992). Elsewhere, elements are textured in
equivalence relations without being in such hierarchies, as co-members of 
a class which is not labelled (what van Leeuwen (1996) calls ‘associations’),
for instance in Paragraph 3, ‘to be innovative and creative’, ‘to improve per-
formance continuously’ and ‘to build new alliances and ventures’. In the last 
sentence of Paragraph 2, the relation of equivalence between ‘modern’ and
‘knowledge-driven’ can be taken as the semantic relation of elaboration
(Halliday 1994).
Let me come to how the global space–time is textured into a relationship
with the national space–time in the Blair text.
(a) The overall semantic pattern or rhetorical formation of the text can be
seen as the ‘problem-solution’ pattern (Hoey 2001). The problem is the
288
Methodology in CDA research


incontrovertible and inevitable reality that people are faced with (the
global economy); the solution is what they must do to succeed in this 
new reality. A relationship is textured between ‘is’ and ‘must’, reality and
necessity, which precludes real policy options.
(b) A relationship of subordination of national space–time to global
space–time (national policy to global economy) is textured through 
projection in Paragraph 3, in verbal processes in which ‘this new world’
is addresser (posing ‘challenges’) and (national) ‘business’ and ‘Govern-
ment’ are addressees.
(c) A relationship of subordination of national space–time to global space–
time is textured in Paragraph 2 as the relation between national policy
action (the embedded clause in sentence 1) and an implicit global reason
(sentences 2 and 3) for this action. Notice the slippage from national to
global in the anaphoric reference at the beginning of sentence 2: ‘these’
refers anaphorically not to ‘our knowledge, skills and creativity’, but to
‘knowledge, skills and creativity’ generally.
(d) Processes on a national level are framed by circumstantial elements (‘in 
a world of short-term pressures’, ‘in today’s tough markets’ ‘the markets
of tomorrow’) which embed them within processes on a global level in
Paragraphs 5 and 6.
(e) The national space–time is populated, one might say colonised, by the
entiﬁed and spatialised processes of neo-liberal representations of the
‘global economy’ (‘ﬂexibility’, ‘enterprise’, ‘innovation’, ‘partnerships’
etc.) which are positively valued, i.e., verbs such as ‘stimulate’ and ‘pro-
mote’ can be seen as textual triggers for positive valuation.
5 CDA in research on new capitalism
Let us come back to relations of equivalence, using ‘knowledge, skills and 
creativity’ as an example. There is potentially a negative aspect to texturing
elements as equivalent: it can subvert prior differences. What is striking about
this example is that it makes equivalent words which come from different 
discourses that are historically associated with different domains of social 
life: education and learning (‘knowledge’), crafts and trades (‘skills’), and art
(‘creativity’). This subversion of the difference between prior discourses is
constitutive in the making of a new discourse. A discourse is a representation
of some area of social life from a particular perspective. One might refer rather
to ‘registers’, but ‘discourses’ implies that all domains of social life (and of 
language use) are multi-perspectival, e.g., representing economic production
in terms of ‘creativity’ might be abhorrent from certain perspectives in the
Critical discourse analysis in researching language
289


artistic ﬁeld. The new discourse in this case is neo-liberal. That is a way of
labelling a particular perspective within the political ﬁeld, and a characteristic
of this labelling is that it makes these words equivalent as co-hyponyms of
‘assets’. I should add that there are issues of time-scale here: the equivalence 
of ‘knowledge’ and ‘skills’ is older than their co-equivalence with ‘creativity’.
Furthermore, some texts are original in texturing new equivalences while others
(including this one) are typical of large bodies of texts which characteristic-
ally texture particular equivalences. This text is typical, I would suggest, of 
a body of texts which draws upon the political discourse of New Labour, 
of the ‘Third Way’, which one can see as a particular variant of the political
discourse of neo-liberalism (Fairclough 2000b).
So, at one level of analysis, the relations textured by texts constitute 
discourses in relation to (and potentially in subversive relation to) other 
discourses. The particular constructions of global and national space–time 
can be seen in the same terms. They are characteristic of neo-liberal political
discourse and, at the same time subversive of prior political discourses; in 
this case, the neo-liberal political discourse of the ‘Third Way’ is subversive
especially of the social democratic discourse of ‘old Labour’. The relations of
equivalence in particular point to what I suggest is a general property of texts:
they hybridise discourses in constituting discourses. Actually, that is only one
aspect of other, more general processes: they also hybridise genres in consti-
tuting genres and hybridise styles (in the sense of ways of being, i.e., identities,
in their language aspect) in constituting styles. This is an aspect of the multi-
functional character of texts, but I am suggesting that texts not only simult-
aneously have representational, actional, and identiﬁcatory functions in 
their linguistic features, they also have these functions ‘interdiscursively’ at 
the level of discourses, genres and styles. (The version of multifunctionality 
I am adopting here is, of course, different from the most familiar version of 
the ideational, interpersonal, and textual metafunctions in systemic functional
linguistics (SFL), but the principle of multifunctionality is the same (Halliday
1994, Fairclough 2003)).
In CDA, interdiscursive analysis of texts is the mediating level of analysis
which is crucial to integrating social and linguistic analyses (Fairclough
1992a, Chouliaraki and Fairclough 1999). I prefer to use the term semiosis
rather than ‘discourse’ as an abstract noun. One advantage is that it is a
reminder that what is at issue is not just (verbal) language but also other 
semiotic modalities (Kress and van Leuwen 2000); another is that it avoids
confusion with ‘discourses’ as a count noun in the sense I have just discussed.
Semiosis is an element of social practices which is dialectically interconnected
with other elements – in the terminology of dialectical theory, it is a ‘moment’
290
Methodology in CDA research


of the social. What this means is that, while different elements of social prac-
tices – including forms of activity, social relations, and their institutional
forms; persons with beliefs, values, emotions, histories; material objects
(including the means or technologies of activities); and semiosis – are indeed
different and cannot be reduced to each other and, therefore, demand differ-
ent social scientiﬁc theories and methodologies, they are not discrete. They
ﬂow to one another; they ‘internalise’ one another in Harvey’s terminology
(Harvey 1996, also Fairclough 2001c, 2003). Discourses, genres and styles
are three main ways in which semiosis ﬁgures in social practices as part of 
the action (genres), in representation (discourses), and in identiﬁcation
(styles).
Social practices are networked. One way of describing a particular social
ﬁeld in the sense of Bourdieu (Bourdieu and Wacquant 1992) or indeed a
social order is in terms of the networking of social practices which char-
acterises it. Social change is change in the networking of social practices;
therefore, the transformations of new capitalism can be analysed in terms of
changes in network relations, i.e., both structural changes (changes in rela-
tions between ﬁelds or domains), and scalar changes (changes in relations
between global, regional, national and local), in the terminology I introduced
earlier. The semiotic element or moment of a network of social practices is an
order of discourse – a particular articulation or conﬁguration of genres, dis-
courses and styles. Orders of discourse are the social structuring of semiotic
difference or variation. Interdiscursive analysis of texts is the mediating 
link between linguistic analysis and social analysis because, on the one hand,
the ‘mix’ of genres, discourses and styles in a text is realised in its semantic, 
lexicogrammatical and phonological features and, on the other hand, that
‘mix’ constitutes a particular working at the level of the concrete event of the
semiotic moment of social practices – orders of discourse. A particular text 
can simultaneously, depending on the ‘mix’ of genres, discourses and styles,
constitute a reworking of prior, habitual or familiar constellations of linguistic
features, e.g., relations of equivalence, and a reworking of the relatively
durable articulations of genres, discourses and styles which constitute orders
of discourse and relations between orders of discourse (and hence, given the
dialectical view of semiosis as a moment of the social, relations between social
practices). Thus, the equivalences noted in the text not only rework relations
between orders of discourse but also between the social practices they are
moments of (education, crafts/trades, art). Interdiscursive analysis, thus,
enables textual analysis to be properly integrated into social analysis, and in
the case of the particular focus in this paper, to be properly integrated into
social analysis of the transformations of new capitalism.
Critical discourse analysis in researching language
291


I have focused upon the political discourse of Blair’s text. It would also be
possible to analyse its genre and its style, i.e., to analyse it as a form of political
action (specifying what such ‘Forewords’ are doing) and as a form of constitut-
ing the identity of a political leader. But I want, rather, to comment on relations
between discourses, genres and styles in terms of the historical process within
which this text is positioned. I described the temporality of the national
space–time as ‘irrealis’. To put it differently, this sort of political discourse
deals in imaginaries: it projects ways of acting and ways of being. Whether it
remains merely a construal of possible ways of acting and being, or comes to
construct real ways of acting and being, is a contingent matter (Sayer 2000).
Discourses can be socially constructive, i.e., social life can be remodelled in
their image, but there are no guarantees in that regard. There are conditions of
possibility for discourses to have such constructive or performative effects
(Fairclough, Jessop and Sayer 2004). If they do have such effects, then the
dialectics of discourse takes effect: discourses may be enacted in ways of acting
and interacting, and they may be inculcated in ways of being, i.e., identities.
Take, for instance, ‘creative partnerships’. For ‘creative partnerships’ to go
beyond the realm of imaginary construal into the realm of actual existence,
people would need to start acting, interacting and being ‘differently’. Partly,
these enactments and inculcations are themselves semiotic, entailing new 
genres and styles. But partly they are non-semiotic: for instance, the dialect-
ical internalisation of discourses in new management systems and forms of
embodiment; or their materialisation in new architectural forms; or new ways
of organising urban space. Texts such as this one are, of course, precisely in
the business of creating imaginaries as a step towards changed realities. One
needs a dialectical view of semiosis to grasp that potential process in a way
which gives due force to the impact of language in initiating it and in carrying
it through.
Blair’s text is positioned in complex chains or networks of texts with which
it contracts intertextual relations, both ‘retrospective’ and ‘prospective’, 
i.e., both with prior texts, which in one way or other have shaped it or which it
is oriented to or in dialogue with, and with subsequent texts which report,
represent, echo, and so forth the text and which it may anticipate. The 
concept of recontextualisation helps to grasp the dynamics of these rela-
tions (Bernstein 1990). But these relations on the concrete level of relations
between speciﬁc events and texts are shaped by the more durable relations 
of networks of social practices and orders of discourse as their semiotic
moments. Orders of discourse are characterised by ‘chain’ relations as well 
as ‘choice’ relations. In particular, relations within as well as between orders 
292
Methodology in CDA research


of discourse are regulated by genre chains, i.e., relatively durable and 
institutionalised relationships between genres characterised by particular
principles of recontextualisation and transformation. Thus, the genres of 
politics and government are chained with the genres of mass media in such a
way that the recontextualisation of a political document like the Blair text
within a press report, and the transformations from the one to the other, have
a relatively regular and predictable character. Social change importantly
includes change in these relations of recontextualisation and genre chains. For
instance, the ‘globalising’ character of the transformations of new capitalism
includes the emergence of relations of recontextualisation and genre chains
which enable and regulate more ﬂuid ways of acting across scales (at the limit,
from the global to the local). Texts such as this not only represent relations
between space–times, they are also positioned within such relations. And 
any account of the constitutive or performative effects of semiosis in the 
transformations of new capitalism must include these shifts in relations of
recontextualisation.
At the same time, however, recontextualisation should be seen in terms of a
colonising/appropriating dialectic (Chouliaraki and Fairclough 1999). In this
case, for instance, one might refer to recontextualisation relations between 
the economic ﬁeld and the political ﬁeld (and their orders of discourse), and
between the global scale and the national scale. Blair’s representation of global
space–time can be seen as a recontextualisation of representations of the 
‘new economic order’ and economic ‘globalisation’ which are pervasive in
texts, for instance, of the World Bank, IMF and Organisation for Economic
Cooperation and Development (OECD). One can meaningfully consider
how national political discourse is being colonised by global economic dis-
course. But, at the same time, this narrative of economic change can be seen as
appropriated into doing particular sorts of (‘rhetorical’) work in particular
sorts of text. Thus, Hay and Rosamund (2002) claim that, by legitimising
national policy change in terms of inexorable and uncontrollable processes,
globalisation is a rhetorical strategy used in domestic political discourse in
Britain (though not British political discourse within international agencies
such as the United Nations), but not in France where the legitimising narrative
is one of ‘European integration’. Textually, one can look at how such a recon-
textualised narrative is transformed – in this case, into a very minimal narrative
compared with the elaborated versions one ﬁnds, for instance, in World Bank
texts (Fairclough 2000b) – and worked into a relation with other elements, 
in this case, elements of policy formulation, in ways which are rhetorically
motivated.
Critical discourse analysis in researching language
293


6 Overdetermination and transdisciplinarity
I have distinguished above different levels of concreteness and abstract-
ness: social events and texts on the one hand, social practices and orders of
discourse on the other. I assume a realist social ontology, in which social 
structures as well as social events are part of social reality. Social structures are
abstract entities which deﬁne potentials, i.e., sets of possibilities. However,
the relationship between what is structurally possible and what actually 
happens, i.e., between structures and events, is a very complex one. Events are
not in any simple or direct way the effects of abstract social structures. Their
relationship is mediated: there are intermediate entities between structures
and events. I call these social practices. Social practices can be thought of as
ways of controlling the selection of certain structural possibilities and the
exclusion of others, and the retention of these selections over time, in particu-
lar areas of social life.
Language is an element of the social at all levels. Schematically, these are:
Social structures: languages
Social practices: orders of discourse
Social events: texts.
Languages can be regarded as among the abstract social structures I have just
been referring to. A language deﬁnes a certain potential, certain possibilities,
and excludes others. But texts as elements of social events are not simply the
effects of the potentials deﬁned by languages. There also exist intermediate
organisational entities of a speciﬁcally linguistic sort: the linguistic moments
of networks of social practices, i.e., orders of discourse. The elements of
orders of discourse are not, for instance, nouns and sentences (elements of 
linguistic structures), but discourses, genres and styles. These elements select
certain possibilities deﬁned by languages and exclude others; they control 
linguistic variability for particular areas of social life. So orders of discourse
can be seen as the social organisation and control of linguistic variation. There
is an argument in Chouliaraki and Fairclough (2000) for an extension of
Hasan’s (2000) account of ‘semologic’ to include orders of discourse.
When moving from abstract structures towards concrete events, it becomes
increasingly difﬁcult to separate language from other social elements. In the
terminology of Althusser, language becomes increasingly overdetermined by
other social elements (Althusser and Balibar 1970).3 So at the level of abstract
structures, the analyst can talk more or less exclusively about language – more
or less – because ‘functional’ theories of language view even the grammars of
294
Methodology in CDA research


languages as socially shaped (Halliday 1978). The way I have deﬁned orders
of discourse makes it clear that, at this intermediate level, there is a much
greater overdetermination of language by other social elements. Orders of 
discourse are the social organisation and control of linguistic (semiotic) 
variation, and their elements (discourses, genres, styles) are correspondingly
not purely linguistic categories but categories which cut across the division
between semiosis and non-semiosis and can act as a bridge between dis-
ciplines in transdisciplinary research. When one comes to texts as elements of
social events, the ‘overdetermination’ of language by other social elements
becomes massive: texts are not just effects of linguistic structures and orders 
of discourse, they are also effects of other social practices and structures as
well as of the casual powers of social agents. Therefore, it becomes difﬁcult to
separate out the factors shaping texts (Fairclough, Jessop and Sayer 2004).
It follows, I suggest, that researchers should work in a transdisciplinaryway
(Dubiel 1985, Halliday 1993) in doing discourse analysis and text analysis.
‘Interdisciplinarity’ covers a multitude of practices, including the coming-
together of researchers with different disciplinary backgrounds and training
for the purposes of a particular research project, without any implication that
the contributing disciplinary theories or methods are affected or changed by
the experience. Working in a transdisciplinary way is one method of working
in an interdisciplinary way, which is distinguished by a commitment to enter a
dialogue with other disciplines and theories, and put their logic to work in the
development of one’s own theory, methods, research objects and research
agendas. It is not simply a matter of adding concepts and categories from other
disciplines and theories, but working on and elaborating one’s own theoretical
and methodological resources so as to be able to address insights or problems
captured in other theories and disciplines from the perspective of one’s 
particular concerns. It makes sense to do so in the light of what I said above
about overdetermination: semiosis is an analytically separate element of social
events whose analysis requires its own theories, categories and methods but,
at the same time, one must be seeking to analyse the language element of events
– text – in ways which elucidate its dialectical relations with other elements.
Disciplinary specialisation is simultaneously necessary and insufﬁcient,
desirable and dangerous.
The critical realist distinction between the real, the actualand the empirical
is also germane to this issue. I have already, in effect, distinguished between
the ‘real’ and the ‘actual’: the ‘real’ for critical realism is structures and their
associated ‘mechanisms’, i.e., the structural delimitation of the possible,
whereas the ‘actual’ is the concrete, i.e., what actually happens as opposed to
what could happen. (This critical realist sense of ‘real’ is unfortunate because
Critical discourse analysis in researching language
295


both the ‘real’ and the ‘actual’ are real in any reasonable sense of the term.) The
empirical is what is available as knowledge of the real and the actual. However,
the real and the actual cannot be reduced to the empirical, i.e., one cannot
assume that what is known exhausts what is. When applying this perspective
to texts, it implies that analysts should be somewhat cautious about what they
know as linguists about texts, avoid any claims for a positive science of texts,
and recognise the need to work on the common social opacity of textual 
analyses by developing their resources for textual analysis through a trans-
disciplinary way of working.
7 Space–time and equivalence/difference relations
With these considerations in mind, let me come back to the Blair text and to
put into focus the incipient transdisciplinary character of the analysis I have
done by positioning the text in relation to social scientiﬁc theories of space–
time on the one hand, and logics of equivalence and difference on the other.
The use of the category of ‘space–time’ in recent geographical and social
theory registers the view that there is an ‘indissoluble link’ between space 
and time (Harvey 1996). People in modern societies simultaneously inhabit
different spaces: their immediate localities (‘places’), sub-national regions
(e.g., ‘the North’ in the UK), nation states, and international spaces (e.g., the
European Union, the ‘global’). These are also characterised by differences in
temporality. Furthermore, these space–times are not externally given but are
socially constructed. So too are relationships which are established (and
negotiated and contested) between them. These relationships can prove to be
problematic in different ways for different classes and groups of people. For
instance, Harvey (1996) discusses the persisting problem in working-class
politics of how to connect the ‘militant particularism’ (the term is Raymond
Williams’s) of trade union and political activists in particular places (localities,
workplaces) with universalist national and international agendas for social
emancipation. At the same time, there are mundane and banal ways in which
relationships between different space–times are lived and experienced in 
people’s daily lives.
The transformations of new capitalism include changes in the social 
construction of space–times and of relations between space–times. The emer-
gent new social order brings new problems in relating and moving between 
simultaneously occupied space–times, and between new social divisions
which have been discussed, for instance, by Castells (1996) in terms of the 
differences between those who primarily occupy global as opposed to local
networks (also Bauman 1998). It also brings new problems in achieving and
296
Methodology in CDA research


legitimising normalised, banal, relations between space–times. The signiﬁc-
ant points in terms of my present concerns are that (a) these processes of 
establishing, negotiating and legitimising space–times and relations between
space–times are processes which are omnipresent in texts, and (b) an elucida-
tion of these processes (whether for theoretical purposes of understanding
them or for political purposes of contesting them) requires the resources 
of textual analysis. At the same time, however, those resources need to be
enhanced in a transdisciplinary way by exploring methods by which one can
‘operationalise’, in textual analysis, perspectives on space and time which
have been developed in social theory.
My earlier analysis of the Blair text, in which I attempted a transdisciplinary
approach, is intended to suggest the signiﬁcance of texts and texturing in the
shifting constructions of global and national space–times and of the relation-
ship between them associated with the new capitalism and neo-liberal political
discourse. Global space–time is represented, and described, as a reality of 
the undelimited (‘timeless’) present although as I pointed out in a some-
what contradictory way in that the ‘realis’ description disguises some ‘irrealis’
prediction. The processes of global space–time are also represented as spati-
ally universal (though ‘great new opportunities’ might seem rather difﬁcult 
to see for millions of people in the poorest countries). Its processes are pro-
cesses without responsible human agents. For instance, technologies simply
‘emerge’, i.e., they are not developed and promoted by human agents (such as
corporations or governments) in connection with particular purposes and
interests. Such processes are described rather than analysed or explained; a
sense of their reality is built up through a cumulative list of evidences and
appearances rather than through analysis of causes and effects. A relationship
is textured between the global space–time and of the national space–time
which frames the latter within the former: the global space–time is an incon-
trovertible and inevitable reality, and ‘we’ must respond to it in ways which
allow us to live and succeed within it. This is reminiscent of accounts of
‘time–space compression’ and its implications in terms of enhanced connec-
tivity between scales of social life, and the inescapability of global processes
and events at other scales (Giddens 1991, Harvey 1996). National space–time
is irrealis, a set of prescriptions for future action to achieve success in the
global reality. Its agents are human and collective. Policies and actions which
are prescribed are, in some cases, rationalised and legitimised. Ends are asso-
ciated with means, e.g., ‘by opening markets’; reasons are given, although gen-
erally implicitly, e.g., ‘companies alone cannot (invest in British capabilities)’
is a reason for ‘us’ doing so, and being in ‘a world of short-term pressures’ is a
reason for promoting a long-term vision. In contrast with the description of
Critical discourse analysis in researching language
297


the global in terms of appearances, there is a causal logic at work in these
national policy prescriptions.
Heller (1999) characterises modernity as legitimising present actions in
terms of grand visions of the future. The Blair text has something of this char-
acter but without its optimistic or visionary aspects. The national space–time
is not envisioned in terms of progress in the modernist sense. The inevitable
and imperative global space–time, which broods over the national space–
time, enforces a particular direction of change: the grand vision (if such it be)
is coloured by an implicit sense of risk and danger from ‘new competitors’;
‘success’ is contingent; and failure to compete effectively now will mean we
will not ‘prosper in the markets of tomorrow’. Neo-liberalism may, as Gray
(1993) suggests, share the ‘canonical thinking’ of socialism, but without its
optimistic sense of progress for the betterment of humankind. The prescribed
future is more a matter of acting to create reality in accordance with a neo-
liberal blueprint so as not to fail.
Let me turn more brieﬂy to relations of equivalence and difference. Laclau
and Mouffe (1985) theorise the political process (and ‘hegemony’) in terms of
the simultaneous working of two different ‘logics’: a logic of ‘difference’ which
creates differences and divisions, and a logic of ‘equivalence’ which creates
equivalences in ‘subverting’ existing differences and divisions. This can use-
fully be seen as a general characterisation of social processes of classiﬁcation:
people in all social practices are continuously dividing and combining and,
thereby, producing (also reproducing) and subverting divisions and differ-
ences. Social interaction, as Laclau and Mouffe (1985) suggest, is an ongoing
work of articulation and disarticulation. This is true of the textual moment of
social events. Elements (words, phrases etc.) are constantly being textured
into relations of equivalence and relations of difference; prior equivalences
and differences are constantly being ‘subverted’; and these processes are an
important part of the textual moment of the social process of classiﬁcation. By
operationalising this theory in textual analysis, one also strengthens the claims
of textual analysis to be able to contribute to social research on classiﬁcation
and processes of articulation and disarticulation. Laclau and Mouffe’s (1985)
political theory is already a discourse theory in a Foucaultian sense, but what
it lacks is a text analytical capacity.
8 Conclusion
What is at issue on one level in this paper is how we (as systemic linguists or
critical discourse analysts) can make a strong case to other social scientists for
textual analysis as a signiﬁcant element in social research on the transformations
298
Methodology in CDA research


of new capitalism (or ‘globalisation’). Traditions of textual analysis in lin-
guistics already have much to offer, and I have, of course, drawn upon SFL in
particular in the analysis. But I have also made a case for a transdisciplinary
way of working in textual analysis in which one attempts to maintain a dialogue
with social theoretical and research perspectives and to develop and enhance
textual analysis by seeking to operationalise within it categories and insights
from these perspectives. I have also argued that interdiscursive analysis of
texts is a crucial mediating link between linguistic analysis and social analysis,
a link which is needed, I would argue, if one is to succeed in incorporating 
textual analysis more substantively within social research. The rationale and
clariﬁcation of how interdiscursive analysis can act in this mediating way
depends upon theoretical categories and perspectives within CDA which I
have brieﬂy discussed.
There is much in SFL which is of value in this project, including a long-
standing concern with socially oriented analysis of text and a linguistic theory
which is itself socially oriented and informed. Also, the dynamic, process view
of text as ‘texturing’ echoes thinking within SFL (Lemke 1998). The key 
difference regards interdiscursivity and the category of ‘order of discourse’
(Chouliaraki and Fairclough 1999). One can put this in terms of the levels of
concreteness and abstractness I have distinguished; just as the general rela-
tionship between social structures and social events needs to seen as mediated
by social practices, so also does the relationship between semiotic structures
(languages) and texts need to be mediated by orders of discourse, the semiotic
moment of social practices. The interdiscursivity of texts is the correlate at the
concrete level of social events of orders of discourse at the more abstract level
of social practices. Incorporating interdiscursive analysis into textual analysis
provides, as I suggested earlier, a way to link linguistic analysis to social 
analysis and, thus, places us in a stronger position to make a substantive con-
tribution to social research.
Notes
1. I am grateful to Isabela Ieocu (formerly Preoteasa) for her helpful comments on
a draft of this paper.
2. I shall sometimes put ‘global’ in scare quotes to indicate the contentiousness 
of claims about ‘globalisation’. A key issue is the relationship between real 
processes of increased international trade, international operation of corpora-
tions, international cultural ﬂows etc., and their representation as ‘globalisation’.
Some argue that ‘globalisation’ is more of a partial and interested and ideo-
logical way of representing actual changes than a real process (Held et al.1999).
Critical discourse analysis in researching language
299


3. Althusser takes the term ‘overdetermination’ from Freud who uses it to
describe the condensation of a number of thoughts in a single image in dreams
or the transference of psychic energy from a potent thought to an apparently
trivial image. Althusser uses the term to describe the effects of the contradic-
tions of each practice within a social formation on the social formation as 
a whole, with respect to relations of domination/subordination between con-
tradictions. (See Glossary, Althusser and Balibar 1970.) Althusser (Althusser
and Balibar 1970: 188) notes that this was not an arbitrary borrowing from
Freud but a necessary one, ‘for the same theoretical problem is at stake in both
cases: with what concept are we to think the determination of either an element
or a structure by a structure?’ Similarly, my use of the concept reﬂects my con-
cern with the same theoretical problem (Fairclough, Jessop and Sayer 2002).
300
Methodology in CDA research


12. Marx as a critical discourse analyst: 
the genesis of a critical method and 
its relevance to the critique of 
global capital
Norman Fairclough and Phil Graham
I
n this paper we identify elements in Marx’s economic and political writings
that are relevant to contemporary critical discourse analysis (CDA). We
argue that Marx can be seen to be engaging in a form of discourse analysis. 
We identify the elements in Marx’s historical materialist method that sup-
port such a perspective, and exemplify these in a longitudinal comparison of
Marx’s texts.
1 Introduction
This paper has developed as one part of a wider project: the critique of 
language in new capitalism. By ‘new capitalism’ we mean the emergent form of
capitalism, variously referred to as ‘globalisation’, ‘the global economy’, ‘the
knowledge economy’, ‘the information society’, and so forth. It is the form of
capitalism which is currently emerging as a new and dominant form of social
organisation on a global scale ( Jessop 2000). Among its more salient charac-
teristics are the importance of international and ‘global’ institutions, and the
ways in which the actions of such institutions are integrated with national,
regional and local scales and, more particularly, a systemic emphasis on com-
modifying the most intimate aspects of human existence, including thought,
language, attitudes, and opinions (Graham 1999, 2000).
There are various ways in which language and other discursive artefacts
(for instance, imagery) are of greater importance to this new socio-economic
formation than to its predecessors. Let us for instance brieﬂy pursue this 
argument with respect to its ‘knowledge-based’ nature. The very idea of a


‘knowledge-based’ economy, and its counterpart ‘information society’, entails
a discourse-based economy and society, in the sense that these more or less
valuable knowledges are inevitably produced, exchanged and consumed as
discourses. Put more plainly, more or less valuable knowledges presuppose
more and less valued ways of knowing, which are always institutionally
deﬁned as such in discourse (Graham 1999, 2000). Moreover, the cycle 
of knowledge production, exchange and consumption includes ‘operation-
alisation’: on the one hand the ‘enactment’ of knowledges (discourses) as
social practices, as ways of acting and interacting; and on the other hand 
the ‘inculcation’ of knowledges (discourses) as ways of knowing one’s self 
and the world, as ways of being, as identities (Fairclough 2000a, Graham
2000: 141).
Language is intricately involved throughout this cycle: the enactment of
discourses includes the creation of new genres through ‘generic chaining’, 
or generic convergence (Fairclough 2000a); the subtle but profound effects
wrought by new ways of mediating linguistic and discursive exchanges (Graham
2000); and the inculcation of discourses, including the creation of new styles,
new discursive ways of being, knowing and having; and new artefacts and
institutions of knowledge (Fairclough 2000, Graham 2000). At every point 
in this cycle, language is both implicated and exposed as a decisive element.
The diffusion, operationalisation, enactment and inculcation of discourses is
crucial in the integration of different scales of economic activity. If the socio-
economic order is discourse- and language-based in this sense – and we must
assume it is – understanding of it, resistance to it, and struggle against it must
also incorporate a signiﬁcant discursive element (Melucci 1996).
We shall not attempt an extended rationale for the critique of the new capit-
alism here – we assume that readers will be familiar with evidence of alarming
disparities between, on the one hand familiar claims to enhance human
progress, welfare, poverty-relief, and so forth through ‘economic growth’, and
on the other hand an increasingly pronounced gap between rich and poor,
declining economic and social standards for millions if not billions of people,
major damage to both ecological systems and the social fabric, and so forth 
(cf. Saul 1997, Bauman 1998, Kennedy 1998, Graham 1999, Hart 1999,
Jessop 2000). The important point to make for this paper is that the critique 
of the new capitalism is incomplete without a signiﬁcant element of lan-
guage critique. One might say the same about any form of capitalism, or indeed
about other socio-economic systems. But if the resources of discourse, and 
in particular language, do indeed, as we suggest, carry more weight in the 
constitution and reproduction of the emergent form of global capitalism, then
language critique becomes correspondingly more important.
302
Methodology in CDA research


Why then go back to Marx? It is uncontentious that Marx’s critique of 
capitalism has been the single most substantial and inﬂuential critique, and 
we believe that Marx’s method remains important in understanding the emer-
gent new capitalism. What has not been sufﬁciently recognised, however, is
the signiﬁcant place of critique of language in the critical method which he
applied to capitalism. Indeed, we argue that Marx’s method includes elements
of what is now generally known as ‘critical discourse analysis’. Our aim in
looking at Marx as a discourse analyst ‘avant la lettre’ is ﬁrst of all to establish
this, and secondly to ask whether there are insights we can take from Marx
which are of theoretical and/or methodological value in developing a critical
analysis of language as part of the contemporary critique of capitalism. We
shall argue that there are. We believe that this sort of critique should start from
a view of language as an element of the material social process which is dialec-
tically interconnected with other elements (Chouliaraki and Fairclough 1999,
Fairclough 2000a, Graham 1999, 2000), and that the production of social 
life (both economic production and production in non-economic domains) 
is based within the articulation together of diverse elements and aspects of
sociality into relatively stable conﬁgurations which always essentially and
inherently include language (or more generally, discourse). This view stands
in contrast with the predominant approach to the sociality of language within
linguistics, which has consisted in a double movement of ﬁrst abstracting lan-
guage from its material interconnectedness with the rest of social life, treating
language as an ‘ideal’ and non-material entity, and then construing the social-
ity of language as relations ‘between’ language – so constituted as an object 
of linguistic theory and analysis – and society, as if these were two separately
constituted realities which subsequently, or even accidentally, come into con-
tact with each other. What emerges in particular from our reading of Marx is 
precisely his emphasis on the dialectical interconnectivity of language and
other elements of the social, which we believe is an essential basis for a form of
language critique which can do full justice to social power of language in new
capitalism without reducing social life to language, removing language from
material existence, or reifying language.
Of course, to speak of Marx’s method as if it were a monolithic and homo-
genous ‘thing’ is to do a great violence to the perspective. His approach was
profoundly transdisciplinary, many-faceted, and ever-changing, both draw-
ing on and inspiring studies in political theory, political economy, jurisprud-
ence, philosophy, social theory, anthropology and historiography. Further, to
view the whole of Marx as a theoretical monolith is to ignore or disallow the
development of thought and the path of self-clariﬁcation common to any intel-
lectual career. Here we examine Marx’s development with the assumption that
Marx as a critical discourse analyst
303


it can, at least in part, be viewed as the development of a critical understanding
of just how central language is to social organisation, social change, and to the
reproduction of social forms, as well as to understanding relations between
these phenomena.
2 Critical discourse analysis: a brief overview
The perspective from which we approach the wider research project and 
the reading of Marx is ‘critical discourse analysis’ (Fairclough 1992a, 1995,
Fairclough and Wodak 1997). Critical discourse analysis (hereafter CDA)
analyses language as ‘discourse’, which we take to mean that language is con-
ceived as one element of the social process dialectically interconnected with
others along the lines sketched out above. It is a ‘critical’ analysis of discourse
in that it sets out precisely to explore these often opaque dialectical inter-
connections within the tradition of critical social science. That is, it shares the
concern of critical social science to show how socio-economic systems are
built upon the domination, exploitation and dehumanisation of people by
people, and to show how contradictions within these systems constitute a
potential for transforming them in progressive and emancipatory directions.
In our understanding, CDA differs from other critical (e.g., Foucaultian,
‘postmodern’, ‘post-structural’, ‘social constructivist’ etc.) approaches to 
discourse in its view of spoken, written and multimediated texts. CDA views
texts as a moment in the material production and reproduction of social life,
and analyses the social ‘work’ done in texts as a signiﬁcant focus of materialist
social critique.
CDA builds upon ‘critical linguistics’ (Fowler et al. 1979) by centring 
the conceptualisation of language as ‘discourse’ and more explicitly locating
critical language analysis within critical social science (Fairclough 1989a,
1992a). Critical linguistics and CDA have both been shaped by Marxism,
especially twentieth-century ‘western Marxism’ (Fairclough and Wodak
1997). Although the analysis of language in relation to the power relations 
and ideologies of capitalism has been a concern throughout, there has more
recently developed a particular concern with contemporary processes of
socio-economic change and the ways in which language ﬁgures within them
(Fairclough 1992a, 2000c, Graham 2000). The ‘language in new capitalism’
project (Fairclough et al. 2000) is currently giving a tighter focus to this work,
and a more explicit political orientation, linking CDA more closely to con-
temporary analyses of the form and contradictions of new capitalism, and the
forms of resistance and struggles for change which are developing in response
to it.
304
Methodology in CDA research


Critical research on new capitalism is, by nature and necessity, inter-
disciplinary. We envisage critical discourse analysis as working within such a
conjunction in a ‘transdisciplinary’ way (Fairclough 2000c); that is, entering 
a dialogue with other disciplines, theories and methods, putting their logic 
to work in developing critical discourse analysis as a theory and method in
relation to the particular object of research. The relationship between object
of research, theory and method is conceived of as a dynamic relationship, not
a matter of pre-existing theory and method being ‘applied’ to a new object, but
of theory and method (in our case, the theory and method of critical discourse
analysis) evolving in the encounter with the object of research, whose con-
struction is in turn ongoingly developed through this process of evolution.
Marxism and the work of Marx in particular is obviously a signiﬁcant partner-
in-dialogue for critical discourse analysis given the focus on capitalism. We
therefore see this paper as initiating a process of putting a Marxist logic to work
in developing critical discourse analysis as theory and method to enhance 
its capacity to address the object of research.
We proceed by outlining the origins and development of Marx’s method,
highlighting the explicit and implicit role of language as his method matures
over the course of a life. We draw these elements together by focusing on 
examples from six of Marx’s works. A caveat to this paper is that it is not a crit-
ical analysis of Marx’s discourse. Rather, it is an exposition of the elements 
in Marx that we believe can contribute theoretically and methodologically to
CDA, and, more speciﬁcally, to CDA’s contribution to the transdisciplinary
project of critically engaging contemporary capitalism.
3 Marx, classical scholarship and language: an historical
contextualisation
Critics of Marx who suggest that he lacked a systematic ‘theory of language’
(e.g., Cook 1982: 530, Lepschy 1985) overlook the nature of nineteenth-
century scholarship. While much attention has been directed towards under-
standing the historical links between Kant, Hegel and Marx (e.g., Hook
1928a, Bloom 1943, Adorno 1966/1973, 1994, Cook 1982, Warminski 1995),
little attention has been given to the broader historical tapestry in which 
these writers appear as pivotal ﬁgures in the history of western thought
(Bloom 1943). The contributions of Marx, Hegel and Kant cannot be under-
stood without taking into account the enduring inﬂuence of classical scholar-
ship in general (Bloom 1943). Nor can we grasp the centrality of language
critique to Marx’s method without taking into account nineteenth-century
scholarship in general, and, in particular, his philosophical and juridical 
Marx as a critical discourse analyst
305


education in Germany at a time when Hegel’s philosophy was considered 
to be a revolutionary intellectual force (cf. Hook 1928: 114, Bloom 1943,
Tucker 1972: xvii–xviii, Colletti 1975: 46). An understanding of language
was central to scholarship during the time Marx studied. It was, in fact, the
foundation of classical scholarship (Grote 1872, Adorno 1973: 56, 1994:
18–21, 116–118, Cook 1982: 530).
In the following section, we outline three conceptual elements that are 
central to understanding the discursive aspects of Marx’s critical method. 
The elements we have chosen to highlight are: the doctrine of abstraction,
Aristotle’s conception of dialectic, and the late-eighteenth to mid-nineteenth
century conceptions of ideology, the philosophical counterpart of post-
revolutionary political economy in France and Germany. When we trace these
themes out in their historical signiﬁcance, what we ﬁnd in Marx’s formulation
is an intense mixture of naturalism and humanism intertwined with a funda-
mentally discursive approach to analysing social phenomena.
4 The ‘doctrine of abstraction’ and its signiﬁcance to 
Marx’s thought
Hegel substitutes the act of abstraction revolving within itself for these 
ﬁxed abstractions; in so doing he has the merit, ﬁrst of all, of having revealed
the source of all these inappropriate concepts which originally belonged to
separate philosophers, of having combined them and of having created 
as the object of criticism the exhaustive range of abstraction rather than 
one particular abstraction. We shall later see why Hegel separates thought
from the subject; but it is already clear that if man is not human, then the
expression of his essential nature cannot be human, and therefore that
thought itself could not be conceived as an expression of man’s being, of
man as a human and natural subject, with eyes, ears, etc., living in society, in
the world, and in nature. (Marx 1844/1975a: 398)
While much is made of Marx’s materialist critique of Hegel, rarely is it
acknowledged that it merely extends a debate that has continued for thou-
sands of years (Colletti 1975: 22–24). The very earliest written record we have
in the western tradition of antagonism between idealism and materialism can
be found in Aristotle’s arguments against Plato’s ‘ideal forms’ (Grote 1872:
29–30, Colletti 1975: 24, Lawson-Tancred 1998: xxvii).1 It is here that we
ﬁnd Aristotle deploying the concept of abstraction in an attempt to reconcile
‘ideal’ and ‘material’ aspects of human existence. The notion of ‘abstraction’
as being essential to human cognition has its origin in Aristotle’s materialist
critique of Plato’s idealism.2 Central to Aristotle’s rebuttal of idealism is his
306
Methodology in CDA research


insistence that the ‘Forms of material things are not separate realities, yet we
seem to be able to consider them without considering the matter or without
considering other concrete features of material things’ (Weinberg 1968: 1).
This, of course, was in contradiction to Plato and his followers who held that
form had a separate existence from matter, and that humans were able to 
link these separate aspects because of knowledge gathered during a previous
existence, thus rendering a theory of abstraction unnecessary (page 1).
Aristotle argued against this, claiming that because ‘form and matter are
joined in physical objects’, a theory of abstraction is ‘both possible and neces-
sary’ (page 1).3 Aristotle’s materialist theory of cognition is the foundation
upon which the scholastics developed their ‘doctrine of abstraction’ (page 2).
The doctrine remained the fundamental tool for reasoning about ques-
tions of cognition throughout the height of the scholastic period, persisting
throughout the enlightenment and beyond (McKeon 1928: 425–426). It was
also an object of contention, and thus underwent all the usual twists and turns
that such pivotal ideas do (Randall 1940). Descartes’ ontological dualism
owes its existence to the doctrine of abstraction, as does Kant’s theory of the 
a priori.4 Logical positivism is similarly derived. But essentially, Aristotle’s
formulation, as it was passed down by the scholastics, remained intact until
Hegel reshaped it in a very speciﬁc way: by adding the concept of genesis –
change over time. This was in contradistinction to doctrinaire abstraction, as
it was most fully developed by the scholastics, which was concerned with the
immutable and Universal attributes of isolated things, the Universal charac-
teristics of objective matter. Hegel, on the other hand, added the dimension 
of social time – history – and formulated a theory of abstraction that assumed
the effects of dynamic, antagonistic and antithetical social processes through-
out history, thus bequeathing us the concept of the evolving ‘Idea’ (Marx 1844/
1975a: 398, McTaggart 1893, Hook 1928a: 117).
The signiﬁcance of Hegel’s contribution cannot be overestimated. Rather
than being conﬁned to a dry logic of ‘things’, Hegel reshaped the static tool 
of abstraction into a dynamic system that describes how universal categories
themselves evolve over time (McTaggart 1893: 490).5 For Hegel, this change
over time – this evolution of historical consciousness – was a matter of thought
becoming conscious of itself through dynamic, contradictory and inter-
dependent processes of abstraction working upon themselves, the historical
culmination of which is to be ‘Absolute Knowledge or Spirit knowing itself as
Spirit’ (Hegel 1807/1966: 808).6 History is thus ‘the process of becoming in
terms of knowledge, a conscious self-mediating process – Spirit externalized
and emptied into Time’ (page 807). The ‘goal’ of History is ‘the revelation of
the depth of spiritual life’ (page 808).
Marx as a critical discourse analyst
307


It is precisely these ‘mystical’ aspects in Hegel that drive Marx’s pivotal cri-
tique of idealism. For Hegel, ‘self-realising self-consciousness’, the historical
movement of abstract thought, determines the course of human history 
(Marx 1846/1972: 118). For Marx the opposite is true: human life – social
activity – determines the form, nature and consequences that our conscious
abstractions take (Marx 1846/1972: 118, Warminski 1995: 118).7 But 
Marx’s is no simple inversion of Hegel, ‘that is what the Young Hegelians do
and what he criticises them for’ (Warminski 1995: 120). His approach is,
rather, ‘a full-scale “deconstruction” of both consciousness and life and the
“relation” between them’ (1995: 120). But for Marx, language and social
consciousness are identical – ‘language is practical consciousness’ (1846/
1972: 122); the one cannot be practically distinguished from the other:
Language does not transform ideas, so that the peculiarity of ideas is dis-
solved and their social character runs alongside them as a separate entity,
like prices alongside commodities. Ideas do not exist separately from 
language. (Marx 1857/1973: 163)
For Marx, Hegel’s (1910) Phenomenology is ‘concealed and mystifying 
criticism’ because it hides the social character of our ideas, the social nature 
of shared abstractions (Marx 1844/1975a: 385). But he sees that Hegel has
grasped an important feature of abstraction: genesis, ‘the moving and produc-
ing principle’, the dynamic, processual, intrinsically productive nature of
human social activity which, once given a materialist orientation, is the basis of
Marx’s critical method (1844/1975a: 386).
5 Dialectics: outlines of a method
Dialectics – literally: language as the organon of thought – would mean to
attempt a critical rescue of the rhetorical element, a mutual approximation
of thing and expression, to the point where the difference fades. Dialectics
appropriates for the power of thought what historically seemed to be a ﬂaw
in thinking: its link with language, which nothing can wholly break [. . .].
Dialectics seeks to mediate between random views and unessential 
accuracy, to master this dilemma by way of the formal, logical dilemma. 
But dialectic inclines to content because content is not closed, not pre-
determined by a skeleton; it is a protest against mythology. (Adorno
1966/1973: 56)
The classical formulation of dialectical method is a relational, socially grounded
approach to analysing assertions. Its methods and categories are derived from
308
Methodology in CDA research


language in use, from ‘common speech’; its objective is to challenge ‘common
sense’ (Grote 1872: 385–390). In ancient Greece, it has been argued, dialec-
tical method was the essence of ‘free speech and free thought’, and thus was
considered to be the essence of democracy (Berti 1978). If Hegel’s dynamic
treatment of abstraction is the foundation of Marx’s theoretical perspective,
Aristotle’s dialectic may be viewed similarly as his analytical method. As
deﬁned by Aristotle, dialectic is a critical linguistic method formulated to 
challenge the dogmas of received wisdom (Adorno 1966/1973, Grote 1872:
384). A crucial aspect of Aristotlean dialectic is its relational logic.8 Various
misunderstandings of relational logic have led to antithetical, ‘substantialist’
(Bourdieu 1998c: 4) readings of important categories in Marx’s work, ‘social
class’ for example. From a relational perspective, any property we care to 
identify as a signiﬁcant ‘distinction’ in social life, including social class, ‘is
nothing other than difference, a gap, a distinctive feature, in short, a relational
property existing only in and through its relation with other properties’
(Bourdieu 1998c: 6).9 Bourdieu’s relational logic, like Marx’s, is fundament-
ally Aristotlean.
In its classical form, dialectical argument is organised around Aristotle’s
Categories, the most fundamental of these being Entia (Grote 1872: 90).
‘Entia’ are deﬁned relationally within propositions, and while the term has 
a rough correspondence to ‘Essences’ or ‘Substances’, it is best viewed as a
gradation of essences, as ‘more and less essential’ essences (Grote 1872: 90,
Lawson-Tancred 1998: xxviii–xxvix).10 But the most important of the
Categories is Relation. Considered in the most comprehensive sense, all of
Aristotle’s categories ‘are implicated and subordinated to Relation’, even the
fundamental category of ‘essence’ (Grote 1872: 115–120). Relation, ‘under-
stood in the large sense which really belongs to it, ought to be considered as 
a Universal, comprehending and pervading all the Categories’ (page 120).
Relations in Aristotle are organised around the concept of Relata (pages
100–104). Relataare ‘of other things, or are said to be in some manner towards
something else’ (page 100). They are ‘so designated in virtue of their relation 
to another Correlata; the master is master of a servant – the servant is servant
of a master’ (Grote 1872: 101, cf. also Hegel 1807/1966: 228–240, Marx
1844/1975b). Relata and Correlata are mutually deﬁning; they are simul
naturâ. If you suppress one of the pair, the other vanishes’ (Grote 1872: 102).
It is no selective contrivance on our part that we choose to highlight the rela-
tional aspect of Aristotle’s system. Aristotle describes Relation, ‘not as one
amongst many distinct Categories, but as implicated with all the Categories’
(Grote 1872: 126).11And this primacy of the relational in Aristotle can also be
clearly seen throughout Marx.
Marx as a critical discourse analyst
309


Dialectical arguments, then, are primarily concerned with language. They
have ‘for their province words and discourse; they are . . . powers or accom-
plishments of discourse’ (page 384). The objects of dialectic are ‘Endoxa’,
‘premises, propositions and problems’ which are ‘borrowed from someone
among the varieties of accredited or authoritative opinions’ – from ‘a particular
country’, ‘an intelligent majority’ or from ‘a particular school of philosophers
or wise individuals’ (page 383). They are found ‘exclusively in the regions of
. . . received opinions’, and are supported to varying degrees by ‘the mass 
of opinions and beliefs ﬂoating and carrying authority at the same time’ 
(page 389). In any given community, endoxic propositions are often contradict-
ory, and will have many meanings and interpretations within that community.
They are an important focus for dialectical investigation for precisely this 
reason. Each individual, as they mature, ‘imbibes these opinions and beliefs
insensibly and without special or professional teaching . . . and it is from them
that the reasonings of common life . . . are supplied’ (1872: 385). In other
words, endoxa form the basis of what we call ‘common sense’.12 Dialectical
argument ‘searches for a “counter syllogism” of which the conclusion is con-
tradictory . . . to the [endoxic] thesis itself’ (page 390).13 The primary func-
tion of dialectic is that of ‘dissipating the false persuasions of knowledge’
based on fallacious ﬁrst principles or taken-for-granted, commonsense beliefs
and assumptions (page 391). The subject matter may be ‘ethical’, ‘physical’,
or ‘logical’ (Grote 1872: 394).14
Abstraction again becomes signiﬁcant when we encounter the human
‘essence’ in Marx. That is because Marx does not regard it as some vague,
immutable, and constant ‘abstraction inherent in each individual’ (Marx
1844/1975a: 423). The reality of the human ‘essence’ is, rather, a dynamic 
set of relationships, ‘the ensemble of social relations’ in which each person is
embedded (Marx 1844/1975a: 423). Aristotle deﬁnes ‘essences’ under ten
categories.15 The most noteworthy aspect of the categories is, though, how
Aristotle develops them. He considers them ‘in their relation to Propositions;
and his ten classes discriminate the relation which they bear to each other as
parts or constituent elements of a proposition’ (Grote 1872: 94). Even more
signiﬁcantly for socially grounded linguistics, the categories are drawn from
‘common speech; and from the dialectic . . . which debated about matters of
common life and talk, about received and current opinions’ (pages 94–95).
Aristotle’s Categories are derived from language-in-use within speciﬁc social
contexts. They are sociolinguistically derived.
‘Essences’ may be either abstract or concrete, but in Aristotle, ‘Abstract
alone can be predicated of abstract; concrete alone can be predicated of 
concrete. If we describe the relation between the abstract and the concrete, we
310
Methodology in CDA research


must say, The Abstract is in the Concrete – the concrete contains or embodies
the Abstract’ (Grote 1872: 91). But Marx, like Hegel before him, is concerned
with showing the historical relationship between abstract and concrete
aspects of human experience through the deployment of dialectical argu-
ment (Hook 1928: 120–123).16 The aim of dialectic is not to discover truth,
but rather to ‘convict an opponent of inconsistency’ and to propose counter
assertions (page 385). The method is designed to investigate the common
meanings – the accepted assumptions, deﬁnitions and understandings – of a
given subject by way of investigating the received, authoritative statements
about it. It proceeds by laying out the orthodoxies of, for instance, a particular
science, into its accepted propositions; differentiating between the various
uses and meanings of these; and showing the relationships of these parts to the
whole subject matter.
The dialectical method that Marx deploys should not be confused with 
the reductio ad absurdum carried on by the late scholasticism of the counter-
reformation (cf. McKeon 1928, Saul 1992, 1997). Rather, it is as an expres-
sion of what we know as ‘scientiﬁc method’ (Randall 1940). The ‘free
thinkers’ among the scholastics, especially those in the school of Padua, 
developed through dialectic method, a method based on the ‘careful analysis
of experience’ that ‘left their hands with a reﬁnement and precision . . . which
the seventeenth century scientists who used it did not surpass in all their 
careful investigation of method’ (Randall 1940: 178). In this sense, ‘scientiﬁc
method’ and ‘critical method’ are identical. Both are founded, dialectically, on
a healthy scepticism towards common sense, dogma, and taken-for-grantedness.
At their very foundation they are relational and dynamic, social and empirical 
linguistic methods. Critical praxis stands opposed to what is now often called
‘ideology’, but which has always been the dominating myths propagated 
by vested interests (Horkheimer and Adorno 1947/1998: 20, Adorno 1966/
1973: 56). This brings us to a central and overt object of Marx’s critical
engagement with language: ideology.
6 Ideology: language and language critique
The term ‘ideology’ has for some time been understood as ‘false conscious-
ness’, ‘ruling class ideals’, ‘belief systems’, ‘mistaken common sense’, ‘religi-
ous dogma’, or something similar (see, e.g., Roucek 1944: 479, Burks 1949,
Huxley 1950: 10, Bergmann 1951, Lipset 1966, Sartori 1969, Kennedy
1979: 353). However, ideology was conceived of in the ﬁrst instance as an
intellectual discipline to ﬁll the perceived void left by the Church’s moral
authority and the scholastic system’s associated monopoly on knowledge in
Marx as a critical discourse analyst
311


post-Thermidorian France (Roucek 1944, Kennedy 1979). As such, it 
dominated the last few years of eighteenth-century France, and continued as 
a dominant inﬂuence for the ﬁrst half of the nineteenth century throughout
Western Europe, including Italy and Spain, even having considerable inﬂu-
ence in the United States (Roucek 1944: 482, Kennedy 1979: 362–364).17As
a terminology and an intellectual project, ‘Ideology’ was initially conceived 
of by Destutt de Tracy (1754–1836) with the explicit purpose of dominating
the whole human intellectual environment, including the ﬁelds of morality,
political economy, physics, calculus and, ultimately, politics proper (Kennedy
1979: 356–358). Tracy intended that ideology should replace theology as the
‘queen’ of human intellectual endeavour (Kennedy 1979: 356). Its formula-
tion was an attempt to stabilise post-revolutionary France in the very image of
the Enlightenment:
At stake was a whole political and social philosophy, a conservative post-
Thermidorean liberalism of a part of the propertied class, an Ideology
which was strongly materialist in its conception of the relationship between
the physical and the moral. (page 356)
Throughout the ﬁrst half of the nineteenth century, Ideology was a much-
contested movement, especially in the social and political sciences of France
and Germany. ‘Ideology’ was meant literally as the ‘science of ideas’ (Kennedy
1979: 355). It was ﬁrst announced as such by Tracy in 1796, with a full social,
political, educational and economic agenda later being published by him 
in a four-volume work in 1805 (Roucek 1944: 482, Kennedy 1979). Late 
eighteenth century scholars associated with the movement searched to unite
political economy, moral philosophy and the liberal arts to develop ‘a sound
“theory of the moral and political sciences” which embraced grammar, logic,
education, morality, and “ﬁnally the greatest of arts, for whose success all the
others must cooperate, that of regulating society”’ (Kennedy 1979: 355, cf.
also Neill 1949). And that was Ideology, a liberal science of human thought
with the ultimate purpose of regulating social morality. Its central focus was
language and its relationship to thought (Kennedy 1979: 364–366).
In the genesis of Marx’s method, his critique of The German Ideology
(1846/1972a,b) is the point at which his relational social logic, his materialist
perspective on dynamic abstraction, and his conception of socio-historical
transitivity as productive human activity are ﬁrst fully expressed. The German
Ideology marks a watershed in Marx’s intellectual project. It synthesises 
and summarises his political, economic, historical, social and philosophical
positions; it contains a statement of the ﬁrst principles of Marx’s political
312
Methodology in CDA research


economy; and it is the beginnings of the ‘mature’ Marx. Not surprisingly, it is
here that we ﬁnd Marx formulating his most explicit and sustained treatment
of language and consciousness as material processes of production, as aspects
of the social production process which are inherently bound up in the totality
and materiality of human experience.
Marx’s much referred to comments about language in The German
Ideology (1846/1972a,b) are best seen as a critical response to the idealist,
alienated conceptions of language and consciousness widely propagated by
the formal ‘ideologists’, or, in the Napoleonic perjorative, ‘ideologues’, of the
day, particularly those associated with Tracy. The French ideologists had their
German counterparts in the ‘Young Hegelians’, led in the early nineteenth
century by Bruno Bauer (1809–1882) and Max Stirner (1806–1856). It is the
Germans who are the main targets of Marx’s critique. In Germany, the ‘Young
Hegelians’ developed their own ‘science of ideas’ based on Hegel’s philo-
sophy and his intensely conservative conceptions of the state. Ideology, 
both in its French and German formulations, was essentially a legitimising dis-
cipline comprising ‘Natural Order’ apologists for the French and Prussian
aristocracies of the day (Marx 1846/1972a,b, Neill 1949, Kennedy 1979).
Marx and formal ideology were contemporaries.18 He saw ideology as a
contrivance by vested interests to ﬁll the moral void left by the diminished
inﬂuence of the Church and ‘Divine Right’ monarchies, and a fortiori their
socially sanctioned authority. The intentions of ideology’s earliest pro-
ponents, ‘a group of propertied intellectuals in power after Thermidor’, was 
to ‘transform and stabilize post-revolutionary France’ by supplanting the
eroded authority of the Church and the monarchy with the study of ideo-
logy (Kennedy 1979: 358). The express focus of ideology was language 
and its relationship to thought: ‘[w]e can never pay too much attention to the
illusions which certain words produce. Nothing proves better how vague 
and confused their meaning is’ (Tracy 1805, in Kennedy 1979). For the most
enthusiastic of the French School, ‘Ideology’ was to be ‘the torchlight of 
grammar’ (Lemare 1812, in Kennedy 1979: 363). Marx’s pejorative construal
of ideology, which includes references to the French and German schools 
in The German Ideology (1846/1972a,b), Grundrisse (1857/1973), and
Capital (1976, 1978, 1981), comes ‘not from Hegel . . . but only from the
cumulative usages current in the 1830s and 1840s and speciﬁcally from
Destutt De Tracy’ (Kennedy 1979: 366). The German Ideologyﬁrstly critiques
ideological conceptions of the relationship between language, consciousness,
social life and ‘civil society’.
The ideologists had emphasised the unity of language and thought, lan-
guage being for them a system of arbitrary signs, the externalised artefacts of
Marx as a critical discourse analyst
313


thought ‘abstracted from time and men’ (Frank 1844, in Kennedy 1979: 364).
For Tracy, ideas are ‘the only things that exist for us, the only means we have to
know things’ (Kennedy 1979: 364).19 Hegel is identical to the French ideo-
logists in his conception of language and thought:
The strictly raw material of language itself depends more upon an inward
symbolism than a symbolism referring to external objects; it depends, i.e.,
on anthropological articulation, as it were the posture in the corporeal act 
of oral utterance. For each vowel and each consonant accordingly, as well 
as for their more abstract elements . . . and for their combinations, people
have tried to ﬁnd the appropriate signiﬁcation. But these dull subconscious
beginnings are deprived of their original importance and prominence by
new inﬂuences, it may be by external agencies or by the needs of civilization.
Having been originally sensuous intuitions, they are reduced to signs, and
thus have only traces left of their original meaning, if it be not altogether
extinguished. As to the formal element, again, it is the work of analytic intel-
lect [Verstand] which informs language with its categories: it is this logical
instinct which gives rise to grammar. (Hegel 1830/1998: 306)
Marx held an almost opposite perspective on the relationship between 
language and thought:
The production of ideas, of conceptions, of consciousness, is at ﬁrst
directly interwoven with the material activity and the material intercourses
of men, the language of real life. Conceiving, thinking, the mental inter-
course of men, appear at this stage as the direct efﬂux of their material
behaviour. The same applies to mental production as expressed in the 
language of politics, laws, morality, religion, metaphysics etc. of a people.
Men are the producers of their conceptions, ideas, etc. –  real active men, as
they are conditioned by a deﬁnite development of their productive forces
and of the intercourse corresponding to these, up to its furthest form.
Consciousness can never be anything else than conscious existence, 
and the existence of men is their actual life-process. If in all ideology men
and their circumstances appear upside-down as in a camera obscura, this
phenomenon arises just as much from their historical life-process as the
inversion of objects on the retina does from their physical life-process.
(Marx 1846/1972a,b: 118)
For Hegel, language functions to externalise the internal and intuitive state
of isolated individuals. It is ‘the imagination which creates signs’, and these
signs are language (Hegel 1833/1998: 303). In Hegel’s ideology, meaning made
in language moves from abstract intuition and imagination to symbolise 
314
Methodology in CDA research


and particularise already universalised meanings (i.e., a system of already-
thought-of abstractions), ‘reason’ being the universalising force, mechanism,
or system into which the categorical effects of language ‘ﬁt’ (page 305).
Language, as a system of signs, is ‘a product of intelligence’, and ‘gives to sensa-
tions, intuitions, conceptions, a second and higher existence than they natur-
ally possess – invests them with the right of existence in the ideational realm’
(Hegel 1833/1998: 303–305, cf. also Hegel 1807/1966: 340–341). Hegel’s
view is that the written word drives language forward to ‘perfection’ (1833/
1998: 307). He derides the ‘hieroglyphic mode of writing’ for keeping the
‘Chinese vocal language from reaching that objective precision which is
gained in articulation by alphabetic writing’ (page 307). Alphabetic writing 
‘is on all accounts the more intelligent: in it the word – the mode, peculiar to
the intellect, of uttering its ideas most worthily – is brought to consciousness
and made an object of reﬂection’ (page 307). But for Marx, language is ﬁrstly a
social and material phenomenon, not the reiﬁed object of abstract specula-
tion. It is, rather, a dynamic social product that emerges from the material 
relationships between people and their social and material environments:
‘language, like consciousness, only arises from the need, the necessity, of inter-
course with other men’ (1846/1972: 122). For Marx, meaning travels in
entirely the opposite direction from Hegel.
Similarities can be seen between the German ideologists and the hard-line
social-constructivist school that rose to prominence in the last quarter of the
twentieth century in western social theory:
Since the Young Hegelians consider conceptions, thoughts, ideas, in fact all
the products of consciousness, to which they attribute an independent exis-
tence, as the real chains of men . . . it is evident that the Young Hegelians
have to ﬁght only against these illusions of consciousness. Since, according
to their fantasy, the relationships of men, all their doings, their chains 
and their limitations are products of consciousness, the Young Hegelians
logically put to men the moral postulate of exchanging their present con-
sciousness for human, critical, or egoistic consciousness, and thus remov-
ing their limitations. This demand to change consciousness amounts to
demands to interpret reality in another way, i.e., to recognise it by means of
another interpretation. (Marx 1846/1972a,b: 113)
Like the latter-day constructivists, the Young Hegelians ﬁnd themselves at
war with ‘phrases. They forget, however, that to these phrases they themselves
are only opposing other phrases, and that they are in no way combating the
real existing world when they are merely combating the phrases of this world’
(page 113). Marx is clear that ‘the language of real life’ – a many-sided
Marx as a critical discourse analyst
315


metaphor for social praxis – is materially implicated in a reciprocally causal
relationship with the whole of social life, including language in the abstract, its
categories, and the social relations in which these are produced by people.
These are the foundations, history and context of Marx’s critical approach.
It is a critical praxis that views productive processes, not as merely or 
exclusively ‘economic’ activities, but more precisely, as the network of social
activities by which societies reproduce themselves at every level: materially,
socially, relationally, consciously, economically and linguistically (Graham
2000: 137). The dialectic is Marx’s method of analysis. A materialist approach
to the problem of abstraction is his theoretical underpinning. Language, 
consciousness and praxis are considered to be in an inseparable relationship
of ‘causal reciprocity’ (Hook 1928a: 124). Combined, the theoretical and
methodological tools outlined here provide a critical, linguistic, propositional
method of analysis, the main purpose of which is to challenge the taken-for-
grantedness of common-sense ideas about human life, precisely by beginning
with human life rather than deducing it a posteriori from eternal ideas.
Dialectical materialism ‘is what Aristotle becomes when modiﬁed by Hegel
and Darwin. It is an emergent naturalism with a strong anti-religious ﬂavor
struggling with the problem of “time”’ (Hook 1928a: 122).
Language critique is thus central to Marx’s approach; an historical, materi-
alist, critical understanding of language is the very foundation of his method.
But language is not a separate or independent ‘thing’ for Marx, not the object
of decontextualised contemplation. The transitivity of the clause and the trans-
itivity of human social life are predicated of one and the same subject: human
social activity, ‘the language of real life’. Critical language analysis is central to
Marx’s method precisely because language is the only way we have of grasping
the diachronics of changing social circumstances – not language as an abstract
system of signs, but as a mutually determining product and substance of
changing material circumstances and practices; not as the abstract representa-
tive of externalised ideas, but as both product, producer, and reproducer of
social consciousness, which in turn is in a reciprocally causal relationship with
the whole of the human experience. In these very important respects, Marx’s
method and the methods of CDA are identical.
7 Language critique in the development of Marx’s method
We now discuss a number of Marx’s texts – two economic texts (Economic 
and Philosophic Manuscripts, 1844/1975a, and Capital[vol. 1], 1867/1976),
two political texts (Critique of Hegel’s Doctrine of the State, 1843/1975,Critique
of the Gotha Programme, 1875/1972), and an historical analysis (Eighteenth
316
Methodology in CDA research


Brumaire of Louis Bonaparte, 1851–2/1973). The aim here is twofold. First,
to discuss the development of Marx’s critical method in terms of how language
critique ﬁgures within it, especially with reference to the economic texts.
Second, to illustrate how Marx deploys critical linguistic analysis in different
ways in different types of text – economic, political and historical.
Throughout the early Marx, through to the Grundrisse, we can clearly
identify elements of a classical Aristotlean method, especially in the pre-
dominance of speciﬁc analytical and taxonomic terminologies: ‘subjects and 
predicates’; ‘Ens’, ‘genus’ and ‘species’; ‘differentia and semblances’; ‘accidents
and errors in language’, and so on.20A longitudinal shift in Marx’s method can
be seen in both his political and economic texts. In the earlier economic texts,
up to and including the Grundrisse (1857–8), Marx deploys the method we
have outlined above: a close reading and dialectical critique of the texts of the
classical political economists. In his mature work, Capital, his own alternative
to the theory of the political economists is presented. This does not mean 
that texts of the political economists do not ﬁgure in Capital – there are many
quotations, especially in the footnotes – but they have a different role, and
there is less explicit critique of the language of the texts. At this point, he uses
the words of classical political economy, as well as parliamentary reports and
submissions, as either ‘documentary proof’ of his assertions, or as ‘a running
commentary to the text, a commentary borrowed from the history of eco-
nomic science’ (Engels 1883, in Marx 1976: 108).21 We begin our exposition
with a political text, Critique of Hegel’s Doctrine of the State (1843/1975).
8 Critique of Hegel’s Doctrine of the State
Marx’s much-reﬁned Aristotelian method, one that is immediately recognis-
able as such, is especially evident in Marx’s early works. The following is a
passage from Critique of Hegel’s Doctrine of the State in which Marx deploys a
classic dialectical method, directly and critically engaging one of Hegel’s texts
(Hegel’s is the ﬁrst paragraph, italics are in the original):
[§ 267] ‘This necessity in ideality is the inner self-development of the 
Idea. As the substance of the individual subject, it is the political sentiment
[patriotism]; in distinction therefrom, as the substance of the objective
world, it is the organism of the state, i.e., it is the strictly political state and
its constitution.’
The subject here is ‘necessity in ideality’, the ‘inner self of the Idea’, the
predicate – political sentiment and the political constitution. In plain words
this means: political sentiment is the subjective substance of the state, the
political constitution its objective substance. The logical development from
Marx as a critical discourse analyst
317


the family and civil society to the state is, therefore, mere appearance as 
we are not shown how family and civil sentiment, and family and social
institutions, as such are related to political sentiment and political institu-
tions. [. . .]
The crux of the matter is that Hegel everywhere makes the Idea into the
subject, while the genuine, real subject, such as ‘political sentiment’, is
turned into the predicate. The development, however, always takes place
on the side of the predicate. (Marx 1843/1975: 65, italics in original)
This critique appears to be almost entirely logico-grammatical in its
approach. Marx critiques Hegel for what seems like a grammatical error. More 
precisely, though, it is a critique of Hegel’s idealistic inversion of reality: ‘the
Idea’ is forced erroneously into the position of ‘subject’, which is clearly
understood here by Marx as an active, transitiveentity, and an entity deﬁnable
as such by its logical position and its ‘development’ in the text. Hegel is mis-
takenly asserting agency for ‘the Idea’ rather than for a ‘genuine, real subject’,
‘political sentiment’, for instance. It is worth noting here that Marx is careful to
ﬁrstly engage Hegel within the realm of abstraction; he avoids asserting in the
ﬁrst instance that ‘the political constitution’ ought to be predicated of family,
civil sentiment, social institutions, and the relations between these, thus
avoiding predicating abstract qualities of concrete relations in a single step,
according to the traditions of dialectical critique (Grote 1872: 91).22 He
chooses instead to take Hegel on his own terms, that is, entirely in the realm 
of abstraction. Even here, he points out that Hegel is mistaken: ‘political 
sentiment’ ought to be subject and ‘the state’ its predicate – abstract object
predicated of abstract subject; the ‘state’ as manifest ‘political sentiment’.
This brief fragment of critical analysis achieves a threefold effect. First,
Marx identiﬁes the agency that Hegel typically and erroneously attributes to
‘the Idea’. Second, he proposes the correct logical abstract relations of Hegel’s
proposition. Third, Marx formulates the concrete, materialist alternative: 
that the real relations, which Hegel reduces to ‘mere appearance’, an illusory
expression of ‘the Idea’ at work, are to be found in the relationships of ‘family
and civil sentiment’ and ‘family and social institutions’ to ‘political sentiment
and political institutions’. This shows quite clearly that Marx is not merely
inverting Hegel. He does that in the ﬁrst move by rearranging subject and
predicate, by ﬁrstly rearranging the relations in Hegel’s proposition, and then
by framing the materialist form of the problem. Rather than attempting to
reveal relations between abstract subjects and predicates in a single step, Marx
presents an emergent, materialist formulation of the problem. He presents
‘family’, the smallest social institution of society, in its relation to ‘civil senti-
ment’ on the one hand, and to ‘social institutions’ on the other, as the correct
318
Methodology in CDA research


formulation of the problem.23 We see, then, that Marx is indeed concerned
with investigating ‘both consciousness and life and the ‘relation’ between
them’ (Warminski 1995: 120). Warminski’s scare quotes around relation
denote the fact that Marx does not see consciousness and life as separate
‘things’, even though consciousness in particular is a clearly deﬁnable aspect
of human life in general.24 For Marx, life, language, social activity, and con-
sciousness are essential and inseparably related aspects of human phenomena
in terms of materiality and causality. By noting this, we are concerned again
with stressing Marx’s materialist perspective on meaning-making and its
inseparability from human experience in all its aspects. Designating concrete
relations in terms of ‘subjects’ and ‘predicates’ is for Marx, quite clearly, the act
of asserting historically dynamic, causal, reciprocal, co-extensive relations
among elements in language, and consequently among the elements of human
life itself.
Aristotle directs the dialectician to investigate propositions in a particular
way: they are to be put in the most general terms possible and stated as
Universal if they are generally believed to be true (Grote 1872: 401). They are
then to be reduced as far as possible into their particulars. But this is not to be
done in a single step, ‘not at once as separate individuals, but as comprised in
subordinate genera and species; descending from highest to least divisible’
(Grote 1872: 413).25Both Hegel and Marx clearly deploy such an approach in
their critical analyses. Here, Marx is again testing Hegel’s assertions about the
constitution of the State (Hegel’s words are in the quotation marks):
(1) ‘This organism is the differentiation of the Idea into various elements
and their objective reality.’ It is not argued that the organism of the state is its
differentiation into various elements and their objective reality. The real
point here is that the organism of the state is its differentiation into various
elements and their reality is organic. The real differences or the various
aspects of the political constitution are the presupposition of the subject.
The predicate is their deﬁnition as organic. Instead, the Idea is made into
the subject, the distinct members and their reality are understood as its
development, its result, whereas the reverse holds good, viz. that the Idea
must be developed from the real differences. The organic is precisely the
Idea of the differences and their ideal determination.
(2) Hegel, however, talks here of the Idea as of a subject that becomes 
differentiated into its members. Apart from the reversal of subject and 
predicate, the appearance is created that there is an idea over and above 
the organism. The starting point is the abstract Idea which then develops
into the political constitution of the state. We are not concerned with a 
political Idea but with the abstract Idea in a political form. The mere fact 
Marx as a critical discourse analyst
319


I say ‘this organism (i.e., the state, the political constitution) is the differ-
entiation of the Idea into various elements etc.’ does not mean that I know 
anything about the speciﬁc idea of the political constitution; the same state-
ment can be made about the organism of an animal as about the organism
of the state. How are we to distinguish between animal and political
organisms? Our general deﬁnitions do not advance our understanding. An
explanation, however, which fails to supply the differentiais noexplanation
at all. (Marx 1843/1975: 67)
Here is another formal term of Aristotelian dialectic by which propositions
are separated into their constituent parts: differentia (Grote 1872: 417). 
But this should be understood as dynamic differentiation, the real and transi-
tive splitting of a whole into its constituent parts over time, and conversely, 
the emergent formation of constituents into ‘wholes’, in language as in life.
Closely related to this is the concept of organic relations between constituent
elements, ‘predicates’, of the ‘subject’.26 In short, these are the participant-
elements of the state which stand in logically necessary and constitutional 
relationships with each other and with the state; the state emerges from the
relations between these human elements. Thus, according to the argument
Marx is putting forward against Hegel, any assertions about the nature of the
state should be deduced from the differences between its constituent parts,
and, as a corollary of this, from the nature of the essential relationships
between these elements. The organic is thus the ideal expression of the 
sum total of all relations within the state between the different constituents of
the state. Hegel does not go far enough. He stops at the most general of terms,
failing even to differentiate between the organic nature (constituents) of, for
instance, animals, and the organic nature of the state. Hegel is admonished for
his misuse of abstraction, as well as for his failure to show the real constituent
parts of these.
By absolutising the Idea, Hegel objectiﬁes human consciousness; he
attributes abstract ideas with historical agency, a phenomenon most clearly
expressed in the dogmas of religion (1844/1975a,b: 382–385). Hegel’s ideal-
ism, like contemporary neo-liberal economics, reduces real human history,
real human activity, to a purely theoretical abstraction, a universalised idea
which can have no meaningful relation to particular people because it is a
closed system of abstractions which can only refer to its own insubstantial and
circular elements. In such a system
Real man and real nature become mere predicates, symbols of this hidden,
unreal man and this unreal nature. Subject and predicate therefore stand in
320
Methodology in CDA research


a relation of absolute inversion to one another; a mystical subject–object or
subjectivity encroaching upon the object, the absolute subject as a process, as 
a subject which alienates itself and returns to itself from alienation, while at
the same time re-absorbing this alienation, and the subject as this process;
pure, ceaseless revolving within itself. (page 396)
Here, we see further allusions to language in what seems like quite a meta-
phorical form: humanity and nature become ‘predicates’ of the ‘subject’,
which is ‘God, absolute spirit, the self-knowing and self-manifesting idea’
(page 396). Marx then reconstrues ‘subject’ to expose the tension between
passive and active elements in the relationships implicit in Hegel. Hegel’s 
subject [self-realising self-consciousness] stands in a conﬂated relationship
with its object [humanity in the abstract, i.e., as already-thought-of, theore-
tical humans]. In asserting a relationship between the universal idea and the
abstract idea of thinkers, Hegel, in fact, separates real thought from real
thinkers, leaving a pure abstraction, the idea, as the motivating force of history.
Hegel’s conﬂated ‘subject–object’ is thus devoid of meaningful content:
because it is
nothing more than the abstract, empty form of that real living act, its content
can only be a formal [i.e., abstract] content, created by abstraction from all
content. Consequently there are general, abstract forms of abstraction
which ﬁt every content and are therefore indifferent to all content; forms of
thought and logical categories torn away from real mind and real nature.
(pages 396–397)
His subject, the absolute idea, with its historical universe of dependent 
predicates – namely abstract humanity and abstract nature – is thus separated
from its source, humans actively thinking (and, presumably, speaking, acting,
and so on). Hegel’s subject therefore has no meaningful content because it can
only refer to a constituency of abstract aspects of itself, all of which stand in a
predeﬁned relationship with the abstract subject, the Idea. Here again we ﬁnd
oblique allusions to language: abstractions that are indifferent to all content,
logical categories and forms of thought torn from their realities. Marx is both
critiquing Hegel’s theoretical discourse, and indicating an alternative way of
constituting a theoretical discourse, i.e., through identifying the relation-
ships, the interconnected and mutually deﬁning activities, of real life.
In engaging Hegel’s assertions about the state, Marx develops in incipient
form the foundational elements of his critical method. And, in identifying the
historical signiﬁcance of Hegel’s dynamic understanding of abstraction, he
formulates the rationale for his materialist method:27
Marx as a critical discourse analyst
321


Hegel’s positive achievement in his speculative logic is to present deter-
minate concepts, the universal ﬁxed thought-forms in their independence
of nature and mind, as a necessary result of the universal estrangement of
human existence, and thus also of human thought, and to comprehend
them as moments of abstraction (page 397). [. . .]
But nature too, taken abstractly, for itself, and ﬁxed in its separation from
man, is nothing for man. It goes without saying that the abstract thinker who
decides on intuition, intuits nature abstractly.28 Just as nature lay enclosed
in the thinker in a shape which even to him was shrouded and mysterious, as
an absolute idea, a thing of thought, so what he allowed to come forth from
himself was simply this abstract nature, nature as a thing of thought. . . .
Or, to put it in human terms, the abstract thinker discovers from intuiting
nature that the entities he imagined he was creating out of nothing, out of
pure abstraction, in a divine dialectic, as the pure products of the labour of
thought living and moving within itself and never looking out into reality,
are nothing more than abstractions from natural forms. (pages 398–399)
By investigating the way in which Marx engages Hegel’s idealism regarding
the State, we can see that many of the foundational concepts that Marx deploys
in his critique of political economy later on are developed using the elements
of language critique that we have outlined above (abstraction, dialectic and
ideology): alienation; conceptual fetishism; objectiﬁcation and reiﬁcation; the
labour process; labour as an all-embracing conception of productive human
activity; and the primacy of material reality, including social reality, in deter-
mining consciousness – all of these aspects can be identiﬁed in incipient form
in Marx’s critical engagement with Hegel’s idealist discourse on the politics of
the state.
9 Economic and Philosophic Manuscripts
We now move to the First Manuscript of the Economic and Philosophical
Manuscripts (1844/1975a,b). This marks an important turning point in
Marx’s work, and not merely in terms of his new focus upon political eco-
nomy. He brings the conceptual elements incipient in the critique of Hegel
(objectiﬁcation, alienation, conceptual fetishism, the labour process) to bear
upon the problems of political economy. Marx gives his own account of what
he is doing in much of the Manuscripts, especially in the ﬁrst part. We can see
that he proceeds from the ‘endoxa’, the received wisdom, of classical political
economy, explicitly conﬁning his empirical investigation ‘to the propositions
of political economy’ in order to challenge its foundational assertions and 
formulate a contradictory thesis, or, in the formal terminology of dialectic,
322
Methodology in CDA research


‘counter syllogisms’, of his own (Marx 1844/1975a,b: 315). We receive fur-
ther explicit evidence that Marx is engaged in language critique from the
Preface of the Manuscripts:
It is hardly necessary to assure the reader who is familiar with political 
economy that I arrived at my conclusions through an entirely empirical
analysis based on an exhaustive critical study of political economy.
(1844/1977: 13–14)
By ‘political economy’, Marx means the texts of the political economists.
There is an oscillation of voices in the Manuscripts which is sometimes
difﬁcult to keep track of (Carver 1998): there are many quotations from the
political economists, and there is Marx’s own voice, which is sometimes echo-
ing the political economists, sometimes critiquing them. What sort of critique
is this? We argue that it is a critical analysis of what would nowadays be called
the discourse of the political economists, which sometimes refers to their 
language, sometimes to their ‘propositions’, ‘arguments’, ‘presuppositions’.
At all levels of analysis, though, Marx keeps the socially positioned and condi-
tioned representations of capitalism made by political economy in view.
The Manuscripts begins with a section on ‘The Wages of Labour’ which at
ﬁrst is purely in Marx’s own voice and which hardly refers to the political
economists, other than paraphrasing Smith (1776/1997) brieﬂy. This intro-
ductory section is a summary of the conclusions he draws about wage labour
in Excerpts from James Mill’s ‘Elements of Political Economy’(1844), the original
version of which contains a total of 97 quotations from Mill.29Then Marx writes:
‘Let us put ourselves now wholly at the standpoint of the political economist,
and follow him in comparing the theoretical and practical claims of the worker’.
Much of the pages which follow consists of Marx’s own representations of
‘what the political economist tells us’, or extracts from the political economists,
sometimes with minimal connecting linkages from Marx. For the most part,
according to dialectical method, we are hearing the political economists ‘in
their own words’. But there are also some critical recontextualisations from
Marx. For example, he writes at one point: ‘Let us now rise above the level of
political economy and try to answer two questions . . .’ (1844/1977: 44).
The section numbered VII, 1–3 consists of a summary of claims of ‘the
political economist’ about labour, set out in a pattern of concessional + main
clauses which highlight contradictions in the political economists’ discourse:
Whilst according to the political economists it is solely through labour that
man enhances the value of the products of nature . . . according to this
Marx as a critical discourse analyst
323


same political economy the landowner and the capitalist . . . are every-
where superior to the worker and lay down the law to him. (1844/1977:
22–3)
Here, we see Marx highlighting conﬂicting views of the relationships that
deﬁne capital as a form of social organisation. Marx concludes this set of 
contradictory claims as follows:
But it follows from the analysis made by the political economists, even
though they themselves are unaware of the fact, that labour itself – not
merely under present conditions, but in general, insofar as its goal is
restricted to the increase of wealth – is harmful and destructive. (1844/
1977: 23)
Marx is drawing a conclusion from the arguments and the words of the polit-
ical economists which is implicit in them, a conclusion which the political
economists were not aware of, and which ‘rises above the level of political
economy’ (‘transcends’ it in Hegelian terms). It is a conclusion which is highly
contradictory with the arguments of Smith, Mill, Ricardo, and so on.
Marx uses the same technique in subsection (4) of the section headed 
‘The Proﬁt of Capital’. He critiques the political economists by showing the
contradictions in their own words with respect to their claim that:
the sole defence against the capitalists [and against monopoly] is com-
petition, which according to the evidence of political economy acts
beneﬁcently by both raising wages and lowering the prices of commodities
to the advantage of the consuming public. (1844/1975a: 300)
This is dialectical argument, on the basis of quotations from the political
economists, aimed at producing a counter-syllogism to that of the political
economists, namely that competition leads to its opposite, monopoly; that
‘competition among capitalists increases the accumulation of capital . . . the
concentration of capital in the hands of the few’; and that ‘if labour is a com-
modity, it is a commodity with the most unfortunate characteristics’ because it
is doomed to reduce its own worth along with those of other commodities as
productivity increases (1844/1977: 37). Marx notes later that although ‘the
doctrine of competition’ in political economy is ‘opposed’ to ‘the doctrine of
monopoly’, competition is conceived as an ‘accidental, deliberate, violent
consequence’ of monopoly, and not its ‘necessary, inevitable, and natural’
consequence (1844/1977: 62).30 Today’s monopolistic global megaliths,
institutional and corporate, which preside over the most systematic, overt,
324
Methodology in CDA research


and pronounced social inequalities in history, continue to propound the 
doctrine of monopoly in precisely the manner Marx is criticising here. Marx’s
critique of classical political economy discourse also holds true for its contem-
porary counterpart. Marx’s earliest critique remains relevant.
The section headed ‘Rent of Land’ includes a discussion of feudal landed
property (XVII–XVIII). Here, Marx’s relational logic is foregrounded. The
‘essence’ of feudal landed property is the ‘domination of the land as an alien
power over men. The serf is the adjunct of the land. Likewise, the lord of an
entailed estate, the ﬁrst-born son, belongs to the land’ (1844/1975a: 318). In
terms of the Aristotelian method of dialectic discussed earlier, the serf and 
the lord are ‘predicates’ of the essence, its co-deﬁning ‘relata’ and ‘correlata’,
without which feudal relations could not exist. But the illusory ‘appearance’
expressed in these relations is ‘a more intimate connection between the pro-
prietor and the land’, and between the lord and the serf. It does not ‘appear
directly as the rule of mere capital’ (1844/1977: 56–7). The ‘appearance’ of
this form of social organisation is ‘expressed’ in the language, ‘nulle terre sans
mâitre’ (page 318).31 The foundation of the lord–serf relationship is the
blending of land and master, the personiﬁcation of feudal land as the lord who
carries the name of the land, and as such belongs to it. As objects of the land,
lord and serf are feudalism’s socio-historical enactment. However, for capital,
‘it is inevitable that this appearance be abolished – that landed property . . .
be drawn completely into the orbit of private property and become a com-
modity; that the rule of the property owner should appear as the naked rule of
private property’ (page 319).
‘Appearance’ here is shifting ‘forms’ which the ‘essence’ of feudal organisa-
tion (the domination of the land as an alien power over men) takes, at ﬁrst ‘dis-
guised’ then ‘naked’. It is also how the feudal property relationship ‘appears’
to the people whose relationships deﬁne it as such, as their consciousness of
these historical relationships. The dynamic process of landed property in the
movement from feudalism to capitalism – from land as ‘common weal’ to land
as private property, as the foundations of capital – leads to ‘the abolition of the
distinction between capitalist and landowner’, the relationship between its
‘essence’ and its ‘forms’ of ‘appearance’, how they ‘appear’ to people, and the
language in which these ‘appearances’ is ‘expressed’. Marx’s account grasps
the interconnection between land and capital as forms of property relations in
their historical movement, rather than just registering ‘appearances’ (tempor-
ary forms, forms given to consciousness in the social practice of historically
entrenched relations, including the language in which these are expressed 
and deﬁned). He shows, in reality, that the qualitative transformation from
feudalism to capitalism is a relational and institutional transformation which
Marx as a critical discourse analyst
325


in effect removes the illusion of personal domination to reveal capital’s rule of
‘the thing over the person’ which lies latent in feudal relations:
the rule of person over person now becomes the universal rule of the thing
over the person, the product of the producer. Just as the equivalent, value,
contained the determination of the alienation of private property, so now we
see that money is the sensuous, corporeal existence of that alienation.
(Marx 1844/1975b: 270)32
The ﬁnal section of the First Manuscript is headed ‘Estranged Labour’. It is a
critique of commodiﬁcation and alienation. Marx begins:
We have started out from the premises of political economy. We have
accepted its language and its laws. We presupposed private property; the
separation of labour, capital and land, and likewise of wages, proﬁt and 
capital; the division of labour; competition; the concept of exchange value,
etc. From political economy itself, using its own words, we have shown that
the worker sinks to the level of a commodity, and moreover the most
wretched commodity of all; that the misery of the worker is in inverse 
proportion to the power and volume of his production; that the necessary
consequence of competition is the accumulation of capital in a few hands
and hence the restoration of monopoly in a more terrible form; and that
ﬁnally the distinction between capitalist and landlord, between agricultur-
alist worker and industrial worker, disappears and the whole of society 
must split into the two classes of property owners and propertyless workers.
(Marx 1844/1975a: 322)33
This passage from the Manuscripts again highlights the dialectical and rela-
tional foundations of Marx’s method of language critique. Starting with the
premises, language and laws of political economy, which construe the move 
to a capitalist economy as inherently triumphalist (a familiar theme in today’s
global order), Marx presents an alternative view of the historical move from
feudal relations to capitalist ones, and the critical implications thereof. He also
presents three foundational and essential aspect of his later critical formulation
in Capital: class antagonism based on ownership rights; the commodiﬁcation
of productive human activity; and, as a corollary to these, the alienation of
labour itself, its belonging to someone, or more importantly some thing, else.
Listed later in the section: ‘the more the worker produces, the less he has 
to consume; the more values he creates, the more valueless, unworthy, he
becomes’, etc. These are the realities – the laws of political economy are mere
euphemistic explanations, mistakes of comprehension:
326
Methodology in CDA research


It [political economy] does not Comprehend these laws – i.e., it does not
show how they arise from the nature of private property. . . . Precisely
because political economy fails to grasp the interconnections within the
movement, it was possible to oppose, for example, the doctrine of competi-
tion to the doctrine of monopoly, the doctrine of craft freedom to the 
doctrine of the guild, and the doctrine of the division of landed property 
to the doctrine of the great estate; for competition, craft freedom, and divi-
sion of landed property were developed and conceived only as accidental,
deliberate, violent consequences of monopoly, of the guilds, and of feudal
property, and not as their necessary, inevitable, and natural consequences.
(1844/1975: 322–323)
And later in the section: ‘Political economy conceals the estrangement in the
nature of labour by ignoring the direct relationship between the worker
(labour) and production (page 325).’
Marx’s repeated criticism of political economy here is that it ‘fails to grasp
the interconnections within the movement’ – it fails to give a dynamic account
of relationships that give rise to its analytical abstractions, which are merely
‘appearances’ and ‘expressions’ of deeper relationships. It is a failure in the
discourse of political economy – a problem of socially positioned representa-
tion, a problem of its recontextualisation but also misappropriation of the
world in political economic discourse. Therefore,
We now have to grasp the essential connection between private property,
greed, the separation of labour, capital and landed property, exchange and
competition, value and the devaluation [Entwertung] of man, monopoly,
and competition, etc. – the connection between this entire system of
estrangement [Entfremdung] and the money system. (1844/1977: 62)
Marx goes on to give an extended account of how the worker is alienated 
in capitalist production – alienated from the product of labour, from him/
herself (‘self-estrangement’), from common humanity (‘species-being’), and
from other workers by the intermediation of money and property relations.
The alienated relationship of workers to what they produce, their conscious-
ness of themselves and each other, the relationship between work and 
capitalist, private property, wages etc. are all shown to be interconnected
facets and effects of the social relations and processes entailed by capitalist
production.
What can CDA take from this? The critique of political economy is funda-
mentally a critique of its failure to grasp ‘the interconnections within the 
movement’ of social history, social reality. It is a critique of the discourse of
Marx as a critical discourse analyst
327


political economy focused upon its lack of understanding, and consequently
its mistaken construal, of social relations. From a discourse analytical per-
spective, Marx’s critique of political economy is a critique of the connectivity
in its texts: semantic relationships between words, argumentative relation-
ships between propositions, temporal relationships between processes, 
syntactic relationships between and within sentences, relationships between
what is asserted and what is presupposed, etc. What it points to is a critical
analysis of the whole formal and conceptual architecture and texture of polit-
ical economy texts, focusing on texts as relational work (Fairclough 2000a),
texts as producing certain relations and not producing others, as foreground-
ing selected elements of those relations, as well as their being produced 
from within certain relations and not from within others.
10 Capital
Marx’s critique of the political economists is a critique of their failure to go
beyond appearances in their representation of capitalism and to challenge
their own presuppositions. The same line of critique is evident in what is 
generally seen as Marx’s most mature and complete work, Capital (1976,
1978, 1981). We comment in particular on the famous analysis in Chapter 1 of
the ﬁrst volume of the ‘fetishism of commodities’.34
Marx points to the ‘enigmatical character of the product of labour’ when it
‘assumes the form of commodities’:
The equality of all sorts of human labour is expressed objectively by their
products being all equally values; the measure of the expenditure of labour
power by the duration of that expenditure, takes the form of the quantity of
value of the products of labour; and ﬁnally, the mutual relations of the pro-
ducers, within which the social character of their labour afﬁrms itself, takes
the form of a social relation between the products. (1867/1976: 76–7)
In the commodity, ‘the social character of men’s labour appears to them as an
objective character stamped upon the product of that labour . . . a deﬁnite
social relation between men . . . assumes, in their eyes, the fantastic form of 
a relation between things’. Things and their values appear in the place of 
real social relations; they become the appearance of social relations. This is
‘the fetishism of commodities’, which has its origins in ‘the peculiar social
character of the labour that produces them’, i.e., as alienated labour; as labour
alienated from its own products. To producers, ‘the relations connecting 
the labour of one individual with that of the rest appear, not as direct social
328
Methodology in CDA research


relations . . . but as what they really are, material relations between persons
and social relations between things’ (page 78).
The determination of the magnitude of value by labour-time is therefore 
a secret, hidden under the apparent ﬂuctuations in the relative values of
commodities. . . . It requires a fully developed production of commodities
before, from accumulated experience alone, the scientiﬁc conviction springs
up, that all the different kinds of private labour . . . are continually being
reduced to the quantitative proportions in which society requires them.
That is, the incommensurable qualities of individuals’ lives are rendered com-
mensurable by money, which is also commensurable with all other things.
The categories of bourgeois economy . . . are forms of thought expressing
with social validity the conditions and relations of a deﬁnite, historically
determined mode of production viz the production of commodities. . . .
Political economy has analysed, however incompletely, value and its magni-
tude, and has discovered what lies beneath these forms. But it has never
once asked the question why labour is represented by the value of its prod-
uct and labour-time by the magnitude of that value. These formulae, which
bear it stamped upon them in unmistakable letters that they belong to a state
of society, in which the process of production has the mastery over man . . .
appear to the bourgeois intellect to be as much a self-evident necessity
imposed by Nature as productive labour itself.
Marx does not explicitly refer to language here, but he notes elsewhere the
similarity between language and values. Value is not objective, nor is it inher-
ent in things; rather, it is an abstract concept that ‘transforms every product 
of labour into a social hieroglyph’ (Marx 1976: 167). Value and language share
a generative source, productive human activity: ‘the characteristic which
objects of utility have of being values is as much men’s social product as is their
language’ (1976: 167). We can treat this extract as a critique of discourse, both
the discourse of everyday life and the discourse of the political economists.
With respect to the former, the fetishism of commodities is a matter of a par-
ticular form of consciousness, how ‘the social character of men’s labour appears
to them’, which arises from ‘the peculiar social character’ of their labour. 
But as the German Ideology puts it, consciousness is always ‘burdened’ with
‘matter’ – with language. What is at issue here is in contemporary terms the
discourse of producers and production.
With respect to the political economists, Marx’s critique echoes the 
critique in the Economic and Philosophic Manuscripts: the ‘formulae’ (a word
Marx as a critical discourse analyst
329


he also used in the earlier text) of political economists appear to them as ‘self-
evident’, they do not ask ‘why’, they do not delve into the underlying relations
to reveal the ‘secret’ of the determination of the magnitude of value by labour-
time – nor could they, for that requires a ‘fully developed production of 
commodities’; the ‘formulae’ of the political economists belong to the ‘state 
of society’ in which they lived (1970: 85). Both the fetishistic discourse of 
producers and the ‘formulae’ of the political economists are ﬂawed in failing 
to grasp underlying relations – and again therefore open to critique of what 
we referred to above as the ‘connectivity’ of texts (and in texts). Thus the 
critique of discourse remains an important part of Marx’s method in Capital,
even though explicit engagement with and critique of the texts of the political
economists is more muted.
11 Critique of the Gotha Programme
A similar conclusion for CDA can be drawn from another of Marx’s mature
works, the Critique of the Gotha Programme of 1875, the last of Marx’s major
political critiques, which is a critique of a draft programme of the German
Socialist Party. We shall focus on the following extract, in which Marx dis-
cusses a section of the programme which claims that ‘the proceeds of labour’
belong ‘with equal right’ to all members of society. He is discussing ‘with equal
right’, which he refers to as ‘ideological nonsense’, with respect to a future
socialist society:
What we have to deal with here is a communist society, not as it has developed
on its own foundations, but, on the contrary, just as it emerges from 
capitalist society; which is thus in every respect, economically, morally, and
intellectually, still stamped with the birthmarks of the old society from
whose womb it emerges. Accordingly, the individual producer receives
back from society – after the deductions have been made – exactly what he
gives to it. What he has given to it is his individual quantum of labour . . .
the same principle prevails as in the exchange of commodity equivalents: a
given amount of labour in one form is exchanged for an equal amount of
labour in another form.
Hence, equal right here is still in principle – bourgeois right . . . while
the exchange of equivalents in commodity exchange exists only on the 
average and not in the individual case . . . this equal right is still constantly
stigmatized by a bourgeois limitation. The right of the producers is propor-
tional to the labour they supply; the equality consists in the fact that 
measurement is made with an equal standard, labour.
But one man is superior to another physically, or mentally, and supplies
more labour in the same time, or can labour for a longer time; and labour, to
330
Methodology in CDA research


serve as a measure, must be deﬁned by its duration or intensity, otherwise it
ceases to be a standard of measurement. This equalright is an unequal right
for unequal labour . . . it tacitly recognizes unequal individual endowment,
and thus productive capacity, as a natural privilege. It is, therefore, a right of
inequality, in its content, like every right. Right, by its very nature, can con-
sist only in the application of an equal standard; but unequal individuals
(and they would not be different individuals if they were not unequal) are
measurable only by an equal standard insofar as they are brought under 
an equal point of view, are taken from one deﬁnite side only – for instance, 
in the present case, are regarded only as workers and nothing more is seen 
in them, everything else being ignored. . . . To avoid all these defects, 
right, instead of being equal, would have to be unequal. (1875/1972:
387–388)
Marx is arguing that ‘equal rights’ is the application of an ‘equal standard’ of
measurement, no different from money, which reduces people to mere ‘workers’,
to abstract labour, ignoring other characteristics of people which affect the
work they are capable of doing (hence, ‘from each according to their ability; 
to each according to their needs’). The result must be to produce inequality
under the ‘bourgeois’, ‘ideological’, guise of ‘equality’ of ‘rights’. The mistake
is falsely rendering the incommensurable commensurable by standardised
measurements. The (intertextual) critique of the appearance of this bourgeois
discourse in a socialist programme, and of the exclusion from it of ‘the realist
outlook’ which had already ‘taken root’ in the Party, again centres upon a 
failure to grasp underlying relationships – between ‘rights’, ‘standards’, and a
reductive equalisation of people to nothing but abstract labour. Again, from the
perspective of CDA, it is a critique of the conceptual architecture and textual
connectivity of the discourse. Here we have Marx in a mature text engaging 
in the sort of close textual critique which we saw in the early Economic and
Philosophic Manuscripts, with fundamentally the same target.
12 The Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Bonaparte
The Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Bonaparte (Marx 1851–2/1973) is in con-
trast to the other texts we have discussed an analysis of actual historical events
– the process leading to Louis Bonaparte’s coup d’etat in France in 1851 –
which includes Marx’s analysis of how language ﬁgured in this socio-political
process. We shall begin with the celebrated opening passage:
Hegel remarks somewhere that all facts and personages of great importance
in world history occur, as it were, twice. He forgot to add: the ﬁrst time as
tragedy, the second as farce . . .
Marx as a critical discourse analyst
331


Men make their own history, but they do not make it just as they please;
they do not make it under circumstances chosen by themselves, but under
circumstances directly encountered, given and transmitted from the past.
The tradition of all dead generations weighs like a nightmare on the brain of
the living. And just when they seem engaged in revolutionising themselves
and things, in creating something that has never existed. . . . they anxiously
conjure up the spirits of the past to their service and borrow from them
names, battle cries and costumes in order to present the new scene of world
history in this time-honoured disguise and this borrowed language. Thus
Luther donned the mask of the Apostle Paul, the revolution of 1789 to 1814
draped itself alternately as the Roman republic and the Roman empire, 
and the Revolution of 1848 knew nothing better than to parody, now 
1789, now the revolutionary tradition of 1793 to 1795. (1851–2/1973:
95–96)
And later in the text:
One sees: all ‘idees napoleoniennes’ are ideas of the undeveloped small
holding in the freshness of its youth; for the small holding that has outlived
its day they are an absurdity. They are only the hallucinations of its death
struggle, words that are transformed into phrases, spirits transformed into
ghosts . . . the parody of the empire. (page 131)
Revolutions are made in ‘borrowed language’ – ‘language’ in a metaphorical
sense, but including language in a literal sense. Marx is talking, in Bakhtinian
terms, about heteroglossia, the heteroglossic or intertextual resources that are
drawn from the past in the enactment of the present (cf. Fairclough 1992a:
Chapter 4, Lemke 1995: Chapter 3). But once the ‘sober reality’ and real ‘con-
tent’ of the revolution emerge, the borrowed ‘phrases’ disappear, and new 
discourses emerge. Thus the French Revolutionaries of 1789 ‘performed the
task of their time in Roman costume and with Roman phrases, the task 
of unchaining and setting up a modern bourgeois society’, a ‘self-deception’ 
in order to ‘conceal from themselves the bourgeois limitations of the content 
of their struggles’. But ‘the new social formation once established, the ante-
diluvian Colossi disappeared and with them the resurrected Romanity. . . .
Wholly absorbed in the production of wealth and peaceful competitive 
struggle, it no longer comprehended that ghosts from the days of Rome had
watched over its cradle’.35
Marx contrasts these ‘earlier revolutions’ – where the ‘phrase’ (an empty
shibboleth) conceals the ‘content’ (the meaning, the world historical conse-
quences) – with the ‘social revolution’ struggled for by the communists, which
332
Methodology in CDA research


must ‘arrive at’ its ‘content’ without ‘superstition with regard to the past’. This
is summed up in the powerful chiasmus at the end of this extract:
The social revolution of the nineteenth century cannot draw its poetry from
the past, but only from the future. It cannot begin with itself before it has
stripped off all superstition with regard to the past. Earlier revolutions
required recollections of past world history in order to drug themselves
concerning their own content. In order to arrive at its own content, the 
revolution of the nineteenth century must let the dead bury their dead. There
the phrase went beyond the content; here the content goes beyond the phrase.
(Our italics, page 99)
The contrast between ‘phrase’ and ‘content’, ‘phrase’ and ‘reality’, recurs
throughout the text. The German word ‘Phrase’ is most often used by Marx in
a pejorative way, as we can see later in the text:
And as in private life one differentiates between what a man thinks and 
says of himself and what he really is and does, so in historical struggles one
must distinguish still more the phrases and fancies of parties from their real
organism and their real interests, their conception of themselves, from their
reality. (page 119)
But the relationship between ‘phrase’ and ‘content’ can be more complex.
In the revolution of 1848, ‘the social republic appeared as a phrase, a
prophecy’. It ‘indicated the general content of the modern revolution’ (i.e., 
the socialist revolution), but it was a content which could not be realised then,
because it ‘was in most singular contradiction to everything that, with the
material available, with the degree of education attained by the masses, under
the given circumstances and relations, could be immediately realised in 
practice. . . . In no period do we ﬁnd a more confused mixture of high-ﬂown
phrases and actual uncertainty and clumsiness . . .’. Nevertheless the content
of ‘social republic’
haunts the subsequent acts of the drama like a ghost. The democratic 
republic announces its arrival. On June 13 1849, it is dissipated together
with its petty bourgeois. . . . The parliamentary republic, together with the
bourgeoisie, takes possession of the entire stage; it enjoys its existence to the
full, but December 2 1851 buries it to the accompaniment of the anguished
cry of the royalists in coalition: ‘Long live the Republic!’. . . . The over-
throw of the parliamentary republic . . . was ‘the victory of Bonaparte over
parliament, of the executive power over the legislative power, of force without
phrases over the force of phrases’.
Marx as a critical discourse analyst
333


The phrase ‘social republic’ was ‘prophetic’ in ‘indicating’ (pointing towards)
real social revolution. It ‘haunts the subsequent acts of the drama’, however,
like ‘a ghost’, an insubstantial phrase at odds with the content, being (in 
contemporary CDA terms) successively recontextualised (appropriated but
simultaneously transformed) in ‘democratic republic’ and ‘parliamentary
republic’, but its ‘force’ as a phrase at odds with content was no match for the
‘force without phrases’ of Bonaparte.
‘This Bonaparte, who constitutes himself chief of the lumpenproletariat
. . . is the real Bonaparte, the Bonaparte sans phrase’ (page 138). Here we ﬁnd
Marx describing the politics of cynical, corporatist populism, the precursor to
twentieth century fascism (Saul 1992: Chapter 10, 1997: Chapter 4). He saw
through the ‘borrowed language’: ‘An old crafty roué, he conceives the histor-
ical life of the nations and their performances of state as comedy in the most
vulgar sense, as a masquerade where the grand costumes, words and postures
merely serve to make the pettiest knavery’ (page 138). Yet after his ‘victory’, he
himself falls victim to his own phrases, the elements of his own ‘ideology’:
he become(s) the victim of his own conception of the world, the serious 
buffoon who no longer takes world history for a comedy but his comedy for
world history. . . . with ofﬁcial phrases about order, religion, family and
property in public, before the citizens, and with . . . the society of disorder,
prostitution and theft, behind him . . .
The real content of a phrase may be ‘revealed’ through experience:
The defeat of the June insurgents . . . had shown that in Europe the ques-
tions at issue are other than that of ‘republic or monarchy’. It had revealed
that here bourgeois republic signiﬁes the unlimited despotism of one class
over other classes. It had proved that . . . the republic signiﬁes in general
only the political form of revolution of bourgeois society and not its conserva-
tive form of life. (page 104)
Forms of consciousness and ‘phrases’ are positioned and positioning – the
force of their utterance depends upon positions in social relations, in the social
hierarchy, both for their social validity, and for their (often constitutive) per-
spective on the constitution of society:
But the democrat, because he represents the petty bourgeoisie, that is, a
transition class, in which the interests of two classes are simultaneously
mutually blunted, imagines himself situated above class antagonism gener-
ally . . . they, along with all the rest of the nation, form the people. What they
334
Methodology in CDA research


represent is the people’s rights; what interests them is the people’s interests.
Accordingly, when a struggle is impending . . . they merely have to give the
signal and the people . . . will fall upon the oppressors. (page 123)
This is one of a number of instances of free indirect speech in the text – 
Marx is parodying ‘the democrat’ – the italicised phrases (apart from ‘a 
transition class’) are ‘the democrat’s’ phrases, phrases which constitute an
‘imaginary’ consciousness arising from a ‘transitional’ historical position in
class relations.
The relationship between ‘phrase’ and ‘content’ can be more nuanced than
we have suggested so far. Marx contrasts the ‘awakening of the dead’ in the
1789 and 1848 revolutions: ‘Thus the awakening of the dead in those revolu-
tions’ – he means the 1789 revolution, as well as the English revolution –
‘served the purpose of glorifying the new struggles, not of parodying the old;
of magnifying the given task in imagination, not ﬂeeing from its solution in
reality; of ﬁnding once more the spirit of revolution, not making its ghost walk
about again’. Each of these antithetical clauses sets 1789 against 1848, and 
the contrast is made explicit: ‘From 1848 to 1851 only the ghost of the old 
revolution walked about’. So ‘borrowed phrases’ can serve constructive and
essential purposes in revolutionary struggles even while ‘concealing the bour-
geois limitations of their content’ – or they can merely summon up ‘ghosts’.
What is of value here for CDA, especially in the context of a critique of the
language of the new capitalism? Marx shows how revolutions (and counter-
revolutions) ‘borrow’ their ‘language’ from the past – in the terms of CDA, it is
a recognition of social heteroglossia, of intertextuality, of how change involves
the selective recontextualisation and interdiscursive appropriation of existing
(past) discourses, and of this as a process which is socially positioned, relative
to different social positionings. There is an ambivalence about this process:
while it conceals the ‘content’ beneath the ‘phrase’, Marx suggests that it may
either be a positive and necessary recourse for ‘ﬁnding once more the spirit of
revolution’, or conversely a mere ‘parody’, a ‘ghost’. Derrida (1994) questions
Marx’s conﬁdent claim that social revolutions are/will be different: Marx
points to the way in which the phrases of the past continue to ‘haunt’ the pres-
ent, as the phrases of Marxism ‘haunt’ us today – can we really expect an end
to this?
The economic transformations of today – which appear to have the charac-
ter of a counter-revolution against welfare state capitalism – certainly do not
borrow the heroic language of ‘Romanity’, but they do nevertheless conceal
their ‘content’ in ‘phrases’ from ‘borrowed languages’, especially that of the
‘golden age’ of capitalism, which in turn is borrowed from scholastic dogma
Marx as a critical discourse analyst
335


(Graham 2001).36 For instance, the language of ‘individual freedom’ which is
applied not only to the ‘freedom’ of people as ‘consumers’ ‘to choose’ from the
unprecedented range of ‘choice’, the provision of which capital not infre-
quently represents as its raison d’être, but also for instance with more obvious
cynicism to the ‘freedom’ which people gain from a market which is increas-
ingly demanding part-time and short-term workers. Of course critiques of
such ideological language are common in CDA, but what Marx valuably
emphasises is that the ideological ‘force’ of such ‘phrases’ comes from their
potency in historical consciousness in memory – it was the power of the 
memory of the ﬁrst French revolution and the ﬁrst Napoleon which gave the
‘phrases’ of the second their force.
13 Marx and CDA
What can CDA learn from Marx’s critique of discourse? Some aspects of
Marx’s critique are already familiar within CDA – for instance, his ‘trans-
formational criticism’ of texts of Hegel in which the focus is Hegel’s idealist
attribution of agency to ‘the idea’:
The idea is made the subject and the actual relation of family and civil soci-
ety to the state is conceived as its internal imaginary activity. Family and civil
society are the premises of the state; they are the genuinely active elements,
but in speculative philosophy things are inverted. (Marx 1843/1975: 62)
The critique of texts in terms of their representations of agency is a central
concern of ‘critical linguistics’ and CDA. Also, Marx’s view of language as just
one element in the productive activity of social life, always dialectically inter-
connected with others as an ever-present moment and aspect of the produc-
tion (meant here in the broadest possible sense to include all human activity)
and reproduction of social forms (consciousness, physical activity, institu-
tionalised forms) has certainly received some (if so far insufﬁcient) develop-
ment within CDA (e.g., Chouliaraki and Fairclough 1999, Graham 1999). So
too the recognition that different discourses are tied to different positions
within given systems of social relations – though Marx’s stress on the develop-
ment of discourses as conditional upon stages of development of systems 
of social relations and production adds a crucial historical dimension to the
positionality of discourses.
In the commentary on selected texts above, however, we have focused on
what we have referred to as the ‘connectivity’ in texts: relations, contradic-
tions, and tensions between elements. We see the critique of texts in these
336
Methodology in CDA research


terms as ﬁrstly tied to materialist view of texts as a modality of social produc-
tion, but secondly dependent upon methods of analysing texts which are so far
underdeveloped (Fairclough 2000a). Hitherto, text analysis in CDA as else-
where has been limited by theories of language which focus on the sentence,
and tend to see texts in terms of extensions of the grammar of the sentence. We
need ways of seeing and analysing texts as processes, as work, as ‘working 
up’ speciﬁc relations between elements to the exclusion of other possible rela-
tions – semantic, conceptual and classiﬁcatory relationships between words,
logical relationships between propositions, temporal relationships between
processes, syntactic relationships between and within sentences, relation-
ships between what is asserted and what is presupposed, and so forth. This
‘work’ of texts is closely integrated within the productive activities of social life
(Halliday 1993: 8); it dialectally internalises other facets of these produc-
tive activities and is dialectically internalised within them, while nevertheless
remaining a distinctively discoursal process which needs to be grasped in
terms of its own logic, as well as its connection with others. Marx does not, 
of course, say any of this (perhaps because he doesn’t see discourse/text/
language as separate from the rest of human existence), but his critical 
method includes a sophisticated, developmental critique of discourse that
calls for it.
Developing CDA in this direction is not a purely ‘academic’ challenge. A
widely noted feature of contemporary social life is its ‘fragmentation’, and a
widely noted obstacle to formulating alternatives to the new capitalism is its
opacity as system which goes with and is sustained by that fragmentation.
This opacity is not lessened merely by awareness of its existence. There is
surely truth still in Marx’s insight that it takes a certain level of development of
the new system of social, a certain accumulation of experience, to be able to see
the relations which underlie its appearances and to go beyond these. From this
point of view, if CDA is to engage in the critique of language in the new capit-
alism, we need to be in tune with the most developed work in contemporary
political economy and other political and social sciences. Nevertheless, unlike
in Marx’s time, the visibility of the system to those who live within it, suffer
from it, and would wish to change it, is conditioned by elaborate networks of
mediation.
The task is not only a critique of our own ‘bourgeois economists’, but 
also a critique of our government agencies, our armies of ‘experts’ (including
academics), our ‘news’, our ‘entertainment’, our corporations, and so forth.
But connectivity and the relational logic thereof is a focal concern throughout.
Just to take one banal example: the defence of the spokesperson for a company
accused on one of the many ‘consumer affairs’ slots within the media of 
Marx as a critical discourse analyst
337


producing foods for children which damage their health: ‘Our concern is to
ensure that parents have a wide choice’. ‘Choice’ appears pervasively as what
Marx might have called an ‘empty phrase’ whose emptiness comes from its
conﬁnement to ‘appearances’, its abstract and equivocal nature, the historical
baggage it carries, and crucially the failure of indeed many contemporary 
discourses to register underlying relationships which connect ‘choice’ to rela-
tions of production, extortion, and monopoly, rather than just fragmented
(and frenzied) consumption.
14 Marx as discourse analyst
On one level it is simply anachronistic to suggest that Marx was a discourse
analyst. Discourse analysis did not exist in his time. On another level, 
however, it is a claim that has some substance: Marx’s view of language and
mode of language critique are similar to those of some contemporary critical
discourse analysts.
Let us ﬁnally try to justify this claim about his view of language by referring
to a section of the Grundrisse, from the chapter on money:
Every moment, in calculating, accounting etc., that we transform com-
modities into value symbols, we ﬁx them as mere exchange values, making
abstraction from the matter they are composed of and all their natural 
qualities. On paper, in the head, this metamorphosis proceeds by mere
abstraction; but in the real exchange process a real mediation is required, 
a means to accomplish this abstraction. . . . In the crudest barter, when 
two commodities are exchanged for one another, each is ﬁrst equated with a
symbol which expresses their exchange value, e.g., among certain Negroes
on the West African coast, = x bars. One commodity is = 1 bar; the other =
2 bars. They are exchanged in this relation. The commodities are ﬁrst trans-
formed into bars in the head and in speech before they are exchanged for
one another. They are appraised before being exchanged, and in order to
appraise them they must be brought into a given numerical relation to one
another. . . . In order to determine what amount of bread I need in order 
to exchange it for a yard of linen, I ﬁrst equate the yard of linen with its
exchange value, i.e., = 1/x hours of labour time. Similarly, I equate the
pound of bread with its exchange value, = 1/x or 2/x hours of labour time. I
equate each of the commodities with a third; i.e., not with themselves. This
third, which differs from them both, exists initially only in the head, as a
conception, since it expresses a relation; just as, in general, relations can be
established as existing only by being thought, as distinct from the subjects
which are in these relations with each other. . . . For the purpose of merely
338
Methodology in CDA research


making a comparison – an appraisal of products – of determining their value
ideally, it sufﬁces to make this transformation in the head (a transformation
in which the product exists merely as the expression of quantitative rela-
tions of production). This abstraction will do for comparing commodities;
but in actual exchange this abstraction in turn must be objectiﬁed, must be
symbolized, realized in a symbol. . . . (Such a symbol presupposes general
recognition; it can only be a social symbol; it expresses, indeed, nothing
more than a social relation.) . . . The process, then, is simply this: the 
product becomes a commodity, i.e., a mere moment of exchange. The com-
modity is transformed into exchange value. In order to equate it with itself
as an exchange value, it is exchanged for a symbol which represents it as
exchange value as such. As such a symbolized exchange value, it can then in
turn be exchanged in deﬁnite relations for every other commodity. Because
the product becomes a commodity, and the commodity becomes an
exchange value, it obtains, at ﬁrst only in the head, a double existence. This
doubling in the idea proceeds (and must proceed) to the point where the
commodity appears double in real exchange: as a natural product on one
side, as exchange value on the other (i.e., the commodity’s exchange value
obtains a material existence separate from the commodity).
(The material in which this symbol is expressed is by no means a matter
of indifference, even though it manifests itself in many different historical
forms. In the development of society, not only the symbol but likewise 
the material corresponding to the symbol are worked out – a material 
from which society later tries to disentangle itself; if a symbol is not to be
arbitrary, certain conditions are demanded of the material in which it is 
represented. The symbols for words, for example the alphabet etc., have an
analogous history). (1857/1973: 142–145).
There is a dialectical view of discourse as one element of social life in this
extract. Money ‘expresses a relation’; relations ‘can be established as exist-
ing only by being thought’, but the relation of value is only ‘established’ by
thought when people begin to engage in exchange (e.g., barter). While the
value relation continues to work as an ‘abstraction’, a relation established 
‘in the head and in speech’ and ‘on paper’, in the appraisal of products, for 
the actual exchange of commodities the ‘abstraction’ must be ‘objectiﬁed’,
‘symbolized, realized in a symbol’ – ‘exchange value obtains a material existence
separate from the commodity’. This is a constitutive view of discourse: 
discourse shapes the development of ‘real exchange’ as the value relation, a
relation in thought/speech – a discourse – becomes ‘objectiﬁed’. It is not, how-
ever, an idealist view of discourse, but a dialectical one: ‘real exchange’ shapes
the development of discourse – it is only at a certain stage in the development
of ‘real exchange’ that the value relation is ‘established in thought’ – which
Marx as a critical discourse analyst
339


shapes the development of ‘real exchange’. The constitutive work of discourse
is not viewed idealistically as ideas being realised in material reality: the value
relation as an ‘abstraction’ is already material – language is the ‘matter’ which
the mind is ‘burdened with’, as the German Ideology put it – and the ‘abstrac-
tion’ is ‘objectiﬁed’ as a ‘symbol’, itself a synthesis of idea and matter.
Moreover, there is a non-arbitrary relationship between money as a symbol
and ‘the material in which this symbol is expressed’ – it has to be ‘divisible at
will’, for instance.
15 Conclusion
We claim that Marx was a discourse theorist avant la lettre because he had a
discourse view of language as one element of social life which is dialectically
interconnected with others, and an element which is thoroughly present in the
dialectical movement between consciousness, ‘real exchange’, and material
(in the sense of physical) existence overall. Marx was also a discourse analyst
avant la lettre because he put this dialectical view of discourse to work in 
his economic, political and historical analyses. Perhaps in one sense he was a
better discourse analyst than many of us are now: although his work does not
obviously stand up well to contemporary expectations (in linguistics journal
articles, for instance) of a sustained and systematic focus on language, nor
does it suffer from the reifying and idealising consequences of abstracting lan-
guage from the social process, if only to connect it back to the social process 
in analysis.
But perhaps the clearest message that Marx has left us as discourse analysts
is that we must analyse the relationships that characterise this period as
unique, the relationships that deﬁne it as such: are we even living in capitalist
societies; or have the relationships changed so drastically as to make this 
new global system deﬁnable as something else, as a ‘new’ economy or a ‘post’
capitalist society? What are the implications of global organisations, both 
of the entrepreneurial (i.e., transnational corporations) and governmental
(WTO, IMF, ILO, OECD, EU, etc.) kind? What are their relationships?
What are the consequences of global ‘shareholder’ capitalism, ‘social capital’
in Marx’s words? What does the waning of national power mean for people
from different walks of life? What does it mean for democracy? How do 
new media change the kinds of relationships and representations that we 
can have? How do we interact to do what we do (productive activity), and 
how does this deﬁne our social roles and institutions? What do we value and
how? These are the questions left to us by Marx. These are the challenges for
CDA.
340
Methodology in CDA research


Notes
1. While much is made of Feurbach’s materialist inﬂuence on Marx, we 
concur with Colletti (1975: 24) that to overstate the case is ‘naïve’. Marx 
was an avowed Aristotlean, and as such thoroughly familiar with Aristotle’s
thought, as well as that of the ancient Greeks in general (Fenves 1986: 433).
Feurbach’s move, while clearly approved of by Marx, was merely another
variation on ‘one of the most profound and ancient themes in philo-
sophical history, and recurs constantly in the debate between Idealism and
Materialism’ (Colletti 1975: 24). We can assume that Marx was quite aware of
all this, well before Feurbach formulated his abstract materialist theses
against neo-Hegelianism (cf. Fenves 1986).
2. Aristotle used the terms ‘aphairesis’ and ‘korismos’ which he used in different
ways to describe the process of concept formation by abstracting form from
matter (Weinberg 1968: 1). The term ‘abstaction’ is again a contribution of
the scholastics.
3. The primary concern of both Plato and Aristotle was to explain how it was
that people were able to consider, in universal terms, the properties of an
object – a brass ring for instance – and consider ‘circularity’ as a universal
property without taking into account any other sensuous aspects of the 
matter. For Aristotle, abstraction is the method by which people come to
know Universal characteristics of categories, such as the mathematical char-
acteristics of ‘circle’ or ‘triangle’ (Weinberg 1968: 2). Abstraction rests on the
assumption that the abstracted forms (formal) elements of matter, as such,
exist only in the mind, and that these are the ‘fundamental elements of
thought which are the referents of the verbal elements of spoken discourse’
(page 2).
4. Even though Kant’s debt to the scholastic doctrine is negative in this respect.
5. Those more familiar with Aristotle might well argue that his concept of
abstraction was not static in the ﬁrst place, and that the scholastic inﬂuence
has more to do with this. While the point is clearly arguable, here is not the
place to take that argument up. We can note, though, that as well as treating
‘substance’ or ‘essence’ in terms of abstraction, Aristotle also treats causes
in the same way (1998: 440–452), although this remains an undeveloped
aspect of The Metaphysics. ‘OK. OK. Enough examples of what happens 
on this theory. Many more could be marshalled, but enough. The endless,
endless difﬁculties about production, the total non-obtaining of any mode of
schematizing, which afﬂict Form numbers are surely plausibly construed as a
sign. They are a sign that [abstractions] DO NOT EXIST IN SEPARA-
TION FROM PERCEPTIBLE OBJECTS (as widely advertised) and 
that PRINCIPLES OF THIS KIND GIBT ES NICHT’ (Aristotle 1998:
452).
6. We note with a sense of irony that such a view is now widely adopted by
techno-fetishists throughout the developed world. Its expression can be seen
Marx as a critical discourse analyst
341


in such terms as ‘knowledge economy’ and ‘perfect information’ (cf. Graham
2000).
7. We note here that abstraction is not necessarily a perjorative term, either in
Marx or anywhere else. For Marx, it is how we predispose ourselves to our
own abstractions (e.g., our attitudes to religion) that make them more or less
damaging.
8. Readers familiar with Bourdieu (e.g., 1990, 1991, 1998c) will be familiar
with the concept, if not its foundation.
9. There is absolutely no foundation whatsoever for suggesting that Marx held
a conception of class as a static immutable ‘substance’ that properly belongs
to a particular group of people. According to Marx, even at its most well-
developed, ‘class articulation does not emerge in pure form . . . From this
point of view . . . doctors and government ofﬁcials would also form two
classes, as they belong to two distinct social groups . . . The same would
hold true for the inﬁnite fragmentation of interests and positions into which
the division of social labour splits’ (Marx 1981: 1025–1026, emphasis
added). Class, like capital, is not a ‘thing’; it is the dynamic result of things
people do.
10. Entia have four aspects – as Accident, as Truth of Falsehood, as Potential 
or Actual, or as Categorically deﬁned subject matters – but are ‘not species
under a common genus’; neither are they in ‘co-ordinate’ (paratactic/
co-meronymous) or ‘subordinate’ (hypotactic/co-hyponymous) relation-
ships (Grote 1872: 86). They merely have ‘a relationship with a common
term’ (the fundamentum or ‘First Essence’ or Subject) but ‘no other neces-
sary relation with each other’ (page 86). For the dialectic, however, it is the
last of these aspects of Entia that concern us, that which is deﬁned under the
ten Categories outlined by Aristotle, to be outlined presently, and in which
Aristotle ‘appears to blend Logic and Ontology into one’ (page 88).
11. Aristotle’s ten categories were reduced, via a multitude of historical inter-
pretations, to ‘four principle Categories – Substance, Quantity, Quality, and
Relation’, yet ‘[e]ven these four cannot be kept clearly apart: the predicates
which declare Quantity or Quality at the same time declare Relation; while
the predicates of Relation must also imply the fundamentum either of
Quantity or of Quality’ (Grote 1872: 129).
12. Those familiar with critical theory will recognise contemporary notions and
deﬁnitions of ‘ideology’ and ‘hegemony’ in the deﬁnitions of Endoxa.
13. Dialectic does not proceed from ﬁrst principles. Rather, its purpose is to
‘open a new road to the ﬁrst principia of each separate science’ (page 391). 
In any case, the ﬁrst principia of a science ‘can never be scrutinized through
the truths of the science itself, which presuppose them and are deduced from
them’ (page 391, our emphasis).
14. Propositions and problems fall under four Heads, or categories, which are
types of predicates that belong to the subject matter (Ens or Entia): Genus
342
Methodology in CDA research


and Differentia; and Proprium or Accident (Grote 1872: 398). Aristotle
deﬁnes ‘four sorts of matters (Entia)’ which are distinguished ‘in reference 
to their functions as constituent members of propositions’ (page 83): that
which is part of the subject matter (essential predicate); that which is
‘afﬁrmable of a Subject’ but is not actually part of the subject matter (non-
essential predicate); that which is ‘both in a Subject and afﬁrmable of a
Subject’ (essence); and that which is neither part of a subject nor afﬁrmable 
of it (accident) (page 83). Ens ‘is not a synonymous or univocal word’ 
(page 84), it is, rather, ‘multivocal . . . having many meanings held together
by multifarious and graduated relationship to one common fundamentum’ 
(pages 84–85).
15. The speciﬁc type of essence or Ens with which Aristotle’s dialectic is 
concerned is the form in which Ens is deﬁned most completely: ‘Ens, in its
complete state – concrete, individual, determinate – includes an embodiment
of all these ten Categories; the First Ensbeing the Subject of which the rest are
Predicates’ (Grote 1872: 93). Anything which may be said about a subject,
according to Aristotle, must fall ‘under one or more of these ten general
heads; while the full outﬁt of the individual will comprise some predicate
under each of them’ (page 93). These categories – which Aristotle suggests
are exhaustive – are (1) Essence or Substance; (2) How Much; (3) What
Manner or Quality; (4) Ad Aliquid – in relation to something (Relatum and
Correlatum); (5) Where; (6) When; (7) In what posture (How); (8) To have
(attributes); (9) Activity (what is the subject doing); (10) Passivity (what is
being done to the subject) (page 93). Each of these categories has ‘more or
fewer species contained under it, but not being itself contained under any
larger genus (Ens not being a genus)’ (page 94).
16. The difference between what is in, or part of a subject, and what is predicated
of (i.e., logically follows from, or naturally associated with) the subject
depends entirely on the actual relationships between a ‘subject’ and its 
‘predicates’, and, in a formal sense, this turns on the grammatical status of 
the predicate (Grote 1872: 91). Such sensitivity to linguistic, grammatical,
and discursive subtlety ought not be overlooked in Marx’s most favoured
classical scholar (Fenves 1986: 433), especially when Marx makes much 
of how humanity tends to objectify its linguistic abstractions and place 
particular of them ‘in charge’ of society (e.g., God, the Church, Money, The
Market, ‘Globalisation’, Technolgy, etc.). The linguistic tendency towards
‘thinginess’ is, as Adorno (1966/1973: 56) and Halliday (1993: 11) quite
rightly point out, a function and tendency of language-in-use. As such, it goes
directly to the foundations of dialectic method.
17. Thomas Jefferson translated De Tracy’s Elemens de Ideologie into English in
1816.
18. Kennedy points out that Marx considered Tracy, because of his ‘labour 
theory of value’ and his theory of the ‘concours de forces’, ‘to a certain point
Marx as a critical discourse analyst
343


a light among the vulgar economists’ (in Kennedy 1979: 376). However,
Kennedy ignores Marx’s scathing comments directed towards Tracy in 
Vol. 2 of Capital (1978: 556–564).
19. Kennedy is concerned to emphasise that Tracy was a materialist. Even
though his Ideology contained ‘a strain of idealism’, this was ‘virtually nulli-
ﬁed’ by Tracy’s fundamental conception of ideology as part of ‘zoology’. It 
is also nulliﬁed for Kennedy by the fact that Tracy set himself in opposition 
to the idealisms of Malebranche and Berkeley (1979: 364).
20. These are Latin terms developed by the scholastics, although their pedigree
is clearly Aristotlean (Lawson-Tancred 1998: xxx–xxxi).
21. Today, the use of authoritative quotations as the basis of arguments is con-
ventional. In Marx’s day, argument from authority was considered to be the
weakest form of argumentation. His manner of using quotes in Capital, we
think, indicates that by the time Marx wrote Capital, he felt he had argued out
a sufﬁciently developed and entirely new apprroach to political economy by
means of his earlier dialectical ‘counter syllogising’. It is such an unusual
method of using quotes that in the preface to the third edition of Capital,
Engels feels the need to explain ‘Marx’s manner of quoting, which is so little
understood’ (in Marx 1976: 108).
22. Aristotle details four ‘helps’ for proceeding with dialectical engagement. The
dialectician must: (i) ‘have a large collection of propositions’ on the subject;
(ii) ‘study and discriminate the different senses in which the Terms of these
proposition are used’; (iii) ‘detect and note Differences’; and (iv) ‘investigate
Resemblances’ (Grote 1872: 401). On the ﬁrst point, propositions may 
be collected ‘out of written treatises as well as from personal enquiry’. If the
proposition is ‘currently admitted as true in general or in most cases, it must
be tendered . . . as a universal principle’ (page 401). In fact, ‘[a]ll proposi-
tions must be registered in the most general terms possible, and must then be
resolved into their subordinate constitute particulars, as far as the process 
of subdivision can be carried’ (page 402). On the second protocol, terms 
must be investigated for ‘Equivocation’ because, often, they have different,
double, or multiple meanings in common usage; their usage and therefore
their predicates may differ vastly (page 402). On the third and fourth proto-
cols, terms must be studied for Differences and Resemblances because terms
that seem closely allied may, because of their usage or equivocation, have
vastly different meanings. Conversely, ‘subjects of great apparent difference’
may bear resemblance for precisely the same reason: context of usage; if the
different meanings of terms are not known, then dialecticians ‘cannot know
clearly’ what they are saying (page 406). The third and fourth ‘helps’, the
investigation of Differences (Differentia) and Resemblances among pre-
dicates, are useful for ascertaining, in the case of Differences, ‘the essence or
deﬁnition of any thing; for we ascertain this by exclusion of what is foreign
thereunto, founded on the appropriate differences in each case’ (page 407).
344
Methodology in CDA research


From Resemblances, we can inductively derive counter-syllogisms: from the
‘repetition of similar particulars a universal is obtained’, and we are ‘entitled
to assume as an Endoxon or doctrine conformable to common opinion, that
what happens to any one’ element in a string of similar cases ‘will also hap-
pen to the rest’. On these bases, we can develop the major proposition of a
counter-syllogism, an assertion that contradicts the endoxic thesis.
23. It might well be argued that ‘family’ etc. are abstractions, and rightly so. But
Marx explicates his materialist formulation shortly thereafter: ‘. . . men [sic],
who daily remake their own life, begin to make other men, to propagate their
kind: the relationship between man and woman, parents and children. The
family, which to begin with is the only social relationship, becomes later,
when increased needs create new social relations and the increased popula-
tion new needs, a subordinate one . . . , and must then be treated and ana-
lysed according to the existing empirical data, not according to “the concept
of the family,” as is the custom in Germany’ (Marx 1846/1972a,b: 120–121).
24. This point is made most clearly in The German Ideology (1846/1972a,b),
wherein Marx identiﬁes ‘the language of real life’ as ‘the material activity and
the material intercourse of men’ (1846/1972a,b: 118).
25. Grote calls this method a form of ‘Sokratic brachiology’ because of the
branching, relational complexity that such an aproach entails.
26. ‘Organic’, we propose, is best understood here as ‘instrumental and essential
constituents’, in this case, of ‘the state, the political consitution’. That is 
why Marx says that, in Hegel, the ‘organic is the Idea of the differences and
their ideal determination’, but that ‘their reality is organic’: the relationships
that constitute the state – family, civil sentiment, social institutions, political
sentiment, political institutions, etc. – are the state’s essential elements; they
are functionally, antagonistically, and instrumentally related to the state and
are inseparable from it; they both deﬁne and create the state, and are thus its
organic constituents.
27. Throughout the whole of his work, Marx’s method is marked by a ‘working
out’ process in his texts. For instance, ‘when Marx wrote the Critique of
Hegel’s Doctrine of the Statehe had not yet arrived at theoretical communism.
He arrived at this goal in the course of writing it’ (Colletti 1975: 45).
28. Note here the sensitivity to nominalisation and its implications which ‘goes
without saying’: the person who accepts ‘intuition’, a nominalised thing, has
already presupposed an abstraction from real activity, intuiting.
29. In introducing Excerpts, Colletti (1975: 259) notes that 84 quotes have been
edited from the original manuscript. Thirteen remain in the text.
30. ‘Accidental’ here is meant in the formal Aristotlean sense; i.e., it could belong
to other forms of social organisation, but it is construed by Adam Smith et al.
as deliberately deployed by capitalists to break up the monopolies of mer-
cantilist states (see Smith 1776/1997: 251).
31. ‘No land without a master’.
Marx as a critical discourse analyst
345


32. This passage is from Excerpts from James Mill’s ‘Elements of Political
Economy’ (1844/1975b) which Marx wrote at the same time as the EP
Manuscripts.
33. It is worth noting what Marx means by ‘property’: he means the property
rights that stem from legal rights in land. ‘Property ownership’ should not 
be confused with simple possession, a mistake of communists, socialists,
conservatives, and liberals of all stripes.
34. Marx’s use of the fetish concept is central in his critique of alienation and 
can be traced to his earliest work, in particular his critique of religion. In his
critique of political economy, the concept is worked up throughout, from
Economic and Philosophical Manuscriptsonwards: ‘It is the same in religion.
The more man puts into God, the less he retains within himself. The worker
places his life in the object; but now the object no longer belongs to him, but
to the object. The greater his activity, therefore, the fewer objects the worker
possesses. What the product of his labour is, he is not’ (1844/1975a: 324).
35. On ‘ghost’, ‘spirit’, etc. metaphors in Marx, see Derrida (1994).
36. This is especially so where the discourse of ‘choice’ is concerned. It has its
historical content in the State’s urge to dispense with church doctrine against
usury. Interestingly, it was Aristotle’s concept of ‘free will’ – today evolved
into ‘rational choice’ theory – that was ﬁrstly decisive in bringing church 
prohibitions against usury to the status of a lesser sin (Langholm 1998: 74).
The scholastics ﬁrst shifted the burden of sin, by a dubious twist of one of
Aristotle’s comments (‘Forced will is will’), from the person who lent money
to the person who borrowedit: ‘One who pays usury does so voluntarily in the
same sense in which one jettisons cargo when in peril at sea can be said to act
voluntarily, namely, in the sense that he prefers to lose his property rather
than his life’ (page 74). Thus, a newly distorted conception of ‘free will’, and
thus of ‘free’ choice, became currency for mainstream economic thought 
and has remained so ever since. Marx quite rightly savages this particularly
perverse discourse of false freedom (e.g., Marx 1976: 280, Chapter 28).
346
Methodology in CDA research


13. Critical discourse analysis,
organisational discourse and
organisational change
I
am grateful to the editors of Organization Studies for this opportunity to
comment as a relative outsider on developments in the study of organisational
discourse. Not perhaps entirely an outsider, in that I have written on organisa-
tional discourse (e.g., Fairclough 1993, Fairclough and Thomas 2004), and
contributed to conferences, but the discourse of organisations as such has not
been a major focus of my work. Yet there are certainly overlaps. My central inter-
est in discourse as an element in processes of social change, for instance in my
current work on ‘transition’ in Central and Eastern Europe, necessarily raises
issues to do with organisations and organisational change; and CDA, including
my own work, has been inﬂuential within research on organisational discourse.
Let me sum up my argument in this paper. First, studies of organisation
need to include analysis of discourse. Second, however, its commitment to
postmodernism and extreme versions of social constructivism limits the value
of one prominent tendency within current research on organisational dis-
course for organisational studies. Third, a version of CDA based on a critical
realist social ontology is potentially of particular value to organisation studies.
I refer especially to its value in researching organisational change. I agree with
those whose speciﬁc concern is research into organisational discourse that
analysis of organisational discourse should be seen as an important part of
organisation studies. This follows from certain ontological assumptions
about the nature of social (and therefore also organisational) life, namely, that
social phenomena are socially constructed, i.e., people’s concepts of the
world they live and act within contribute to its reproduction and transforma-
tion; and that social phenomena are socially constructed in discourse. As I
have implied above, however, certain extreme forms of social constructivism
should be rejected (I return to this issue below).


Like others, I use the term ‘discourse’ for linguistic and other semiotic ele-
ments (such as visual images and ‘body language’) of the social, but I use it in a
relational way, with a focus on relations between linguistic/semiotic elements
of the social and other (including material) elements. ‘Discourse analysis’ is
generally taken to be the analysis of ‘texts’ in a broad sense – written texts, 
spoken interaction, the multimedia texts of television and the internet, etc. As
I shall explain in more detail later, I take ‘texts’ to be the linguistic/semiotic 
elements of social events, analytically isolable parts of the social process.1 But
some versions of discourse analysis (which are typically Foucaultian in inspira-
tion) limit themselves to identifying the presence and forms of combination 
of recurrent and relatively stable and durable ‘discourses’ in texts, whereas
others carry our various forms of detailed linguistic analysis (e.g., analysis of
grammar, semantics, vocabulary, metaphor, forms of argumentation or narra-
tive, and so forth) and/or detailed analysis of other semiotic features of texts
such as their visual aspects. Some versions of discourse analysis do both, and
that is the position I adopt. More speciﬁcally, I adopt a position of ‘analytical
dualism’ (see note 1, and Sayer 2000) which applies to discourse as well as 
to other elements of the social, which regards ‘discourse’ as subsuming both
linguistic/semiotic elements of social events and linguistic/semiotic facets of
social structures, as well as of the ‘social practices’ which, as I explain below, I
see as mediating the relationship between events and structures. ‘Discourses’
in a Foucaultian sense are for me elements of social practices. ‘Discourse ana-
lysis’ correspondingly has a doubly relational character: it analyses relations
between discourse and other elements of the social, and it analyses relations
between linguistic/semiotic elements of social events and linguistic/semiotic
facets of social structures and social practices, including ‘discourses’.
I shall take a critical stance towards one prominent tendency within the
work which has been carried out in the study of organisational discourse, on
the grounds that it equates a shift in focus towards discourse in organisation
studies with the adoption of postmodernist and extreme social constructivist
positions. My position is that commitment to such positions does not in any
way follow from a commitment to giving discourse analysis its proper place
within organisation studies. I shall argue instead for a critical realist position
which is moderately socially constructivist but rejects the tendency for the
study of organisation to be reduced to the study of discourse, locating the ana-
lysis of discourse instead within an analytically dualist epistemology which
gives primacy to researching relations between agency (process, and events –
see note 1) and structure on the basis of a realist social ontology. I shall argue
that this form of critical discourse analysis has more to offer organisation studies
than broadly postmodernist work on organisational discourse. In the ﬁnal 
348
Methodology in CDA research


section of the paper, I shall justify this argument through a discussion of
organisational change. So, in sum, this paper is simultaneously an argument
that the analysis of discourse is an essential and unavoidable part of organisa-
tion studies, and an argument against certain prominent forms of discourse
analysis which are currently carried out within organisation studies.
1 Organising, organisation and organisational discourse
Research on organisational discourse encompasses various theoretical and
methodological positions. Putnam and Fairhurst (2001) distinguish eight
approaches, and Kieser and Müller (2003) note that a number of distinct
research networks have emerged. I shall not attempt to address or characterise
this substantial and complex body of work as a whole. I want to focus on a 
particular tendency within this research, which has been highly inﬂuential
without being universal, to distance itself from more conventional work in
organisation studies by rejecting conceptions of organisation as organisational
structures in favour of conceptions of organisation as an interactive accom-
plishment in organisational discourse, as ‘organising’ (e.g., Weick 1979,
Mumby and Clair 1997, Tsoukas and Chia 2002, Grant et al. forthcoming).
The theoretical bases for this tendency have come from ethnomethodology
(Boden 1994), actor-network theory (Law 1994) and Foucaultian poststruc-
turalism (Reed 2000). Ackroyd and Fleetwood (2000) suggest that it is asso-
ciated with a reductive opposition which researchers have set up between
positivist and postmodern research – since positivism is unacceptable for
well-known reasons, postmodernism is seen as the only viable possibility. As
these authors argue, it is not: there is a strong tradition of realism in organ-
isation studies which is equally adamant in rejecting positivism without 
embracing postmodernism.
Mumby and Stohl, for instance, argue that researchers in organisational
communication most centrally differ from those in other areas of organisa-
tion studies in that the former problematise ‘organisation’ whereas the latter
do not.
For us, organization – or organizing, to use Weick’s (1979) term – is a pre-
carious, ambiguous, uncertain process that is continually being made and
remade. In Weick’s sense, organizations are only seen as stable, rational
structures when viewed retrospectively. Communication, then, is the 
substance of organizing in the sense that through discursive practices organ-
ization members engage in the construction of a complex and diverse 
system of meanings. (Mumby and Stohl 1996: 58)
Critical discourse analysis, organisational discourse and change
349


Another formulation of this shift in emphasis from organisations as structures
to ‘organising’ (or ‘organisational becoming’ (Tsoukas and Chia 2002)) as a
process is that of Mumby and Clair (1997: 181):
. . . we suggest that organizations exist only in so far as their members 
create them through discourse. This is not to claim that organizations are
‘nothing but’ discourse, but rather that discourse is the principal means by
which organization members create a coherent social reality that frames
their sense of who they are. (1997: 181)
Reed (2004) argues that, despite the disclaimer at the beginning of the second
sentence, this formulation can be seen as collapsing ontology into epistemo-
logy, and undermining the ontological reality of organisational structures as
constraints on organisational action and communication.
From the perspective of critical realism and the realist view of discourse
which I outline below, it makes little sense to see organising and organisation,
or more generally process/agency and structure, as alternatives one has to
choose between. With respect to organisational change, both organisational
structures and the agency of members of organisations in organisational action
and communication have causal effects on how organisations change. Organ-
isational communication does indeed organise, produce organisational effects
and may contribute to the transformation of organisations, but organising is
subject to conditions of possibility which include organisational structures.
Organisational discourse studies have been associated with postmodernist
positions (Chia 1995, Grant et al. 2001, Grant et al. forthcoming), though 
the ﬁeld as a whole is too diverse to be seen as simply postmodernist. Chia
identiﬁes a postmodern ‘style of thinking’ in organisational studies which
‘accentuates the signiﬁcance, ontological priority and analysis of the micro-
logics of social organizing practices over and above their stabilized “effects”
such as “individuals”’ (1995: 581). As this indicates, the focus on organising
rather than organisation is strongly associated with this ‘style of thinking’.
Like the dialectical–relational ontology I advocate below, this ‘style of think-
ing’ sees objects and entities as emergent products of processes. The key 
difference is that this ‘style of thinking’ tends towards a one-sided emphasis 
on process, whereas the realist view of discourse analysis I advocate centres 
on the tension between process and pre-structured (discoursal as well as non-
discoursal – see below) objects.
Both Mumby and Stohl (1991) and Mumby and Clair (1997) set up the
contrast between ‘organising’ and ‘organisation’ as a contrast between discourse
(or ‘communication’) and organisational structures. I would argue that the
350
Methodology in CDA research


relationship (or, for some, the choice) is not between organisational discourse
and organisational structures, because organisational structures themselves
have a partly linguistic/semiotic character. So too do the ‘social practices’
which I shall argue mediate the relationship between structures and processes
(and events). It is productive to see organisations at one level of analysis as 
networks of social practices. In the version of CDA I sketch out below, a net-
work of social practices includes an ‘order of discourse’, a relatively stabilised
and durable conﬁguration of discourses (as well as other elements, ‘genres’
and ‘styles’, which I explain below) which is a facet of a relatively stabilised and
durable network of social practices. CDA is concerned with the relationship
and tensions between the relative ‘permanences’ of organisational orders of
discourse as moments of networks of social practices (and, more indirectly,
the languages and other semiotic systems of whose potentials they are a selec-
tive social ordering), and organisational texts conceived as processes of textur-
ing and organising and as the semiotic elements of social events. Thus the 
relations between discourse and non-discursive elements of the social should
not be confused with the relationship between social process (and isolable
social events), and social (practices and) structures.
Viewing discourse as a facet of practices and structures as well as of pro-
cesses/events is in my view important for achieving coherent theories which
can extend our knowledge of organisations and organisational change. Grant
and Hardy (2004: 6) in the Introduction to a recent special issue of Organiza-
tion Studies on organisational discourse state that:
The term ‘discourse’ has been deﬁned as sets of statements that bring 
social objects into being (Parker 1992). In using the term ‘organizational
discourse’, we refer to the structured collections of texts embodied in 
the practices of talking and writing . . . that bring organizationally related
objects into being as those texts are produced, disseminated, and con-
sumed . . . Consequently, texts can be considered to be a manifestation of
discourse and the distinctive unit . . . on which the researcher focuses.
Accordingly, discourse analysis is the systematic study of texts.
The papers in the special issue ‘identify and analyse speciﬁc, micro-level
instances of discursive action and then locate them in the context of other
macro-level, “meta” or “grand” discourses’.
One problem I have with this formulation is that contingent effects of texts
(‘bringing organizationally related objects into being’) are collapsed into the
theoretical categories of ‘discourse’ and ‘text’, leaving us no way of analysing
the contingency of these effects: I would argue that texts may have such effects,
depending on certain conditions. Another problem is with the categories of
Critical discourse analysis, organisational discourse and change
351


‘discourse’ and ‘text’. I assume that ‘discursive action’ is equivalent to ‘texts’,
though this is not made clear. I also assume that ‘other’ in the last sentence
implies that ‘discursive action’ (and ‘texts’) are themselves ‘discourses’; this
would also resolve the unclarity of what a particular ‘structured collection of
texts’ is – a discourse? – and the apparent redundancy of (organisational)
‘texts’ both being (organisational) ‘discourse’ and being ‘a manifestation of’
(organisational?) ‘discourse’. If this is the case, it would appear that ‘texts’ are
(micro-level?) discourses and are located ‘in the context of’ (‘macro-level’)
‘discourses’. I am not sure that the authors would go along with this attempt 
to spell out relations between the categories; my point is rather to suggest that
the relations are opaque in a way which undermines theoretical coherence,
and that this opacity is at least in part due to a failure to explicitly and clearly
differentiate levels (processes/events, practices and structures).
The other editors of the special issue refer in a concluding paper (Keenoy
and Oswick 2004) to some papers focusing on ‘big “D” discourse (that is a
Grand Discourse or Mega-Discourse approach)’ whereas others focus on
‘small “d” discourse (that is, a micro- or meso-discourse approach)’. This is
inconsistent with the claim of Grant and Hardy that all of the articles ‘identify
and analyse speciﬁc, micro-level instances of discursive action and then locate
them in the context of other macro-level, “meta” or “grand” discourses’. In
fact neither seems to be accurate: there are articles which include detailed 
textual analysis which also identify ‘big “D” discourses’ (e.g., Iedema et al.
(2004) show how the ‘doctor-manager’ their analysis is focused on weaves
three ‘big “D” discourses’ together); there are also articles (e.g., Maguire
2004) which discuss ‘big “D” discourses’ without any detailed textual ana-
lysis. In terms of the version of CDA I shall describe below, one cannot choose
between ‘big “D”’ and ‘small “d”’ approaches in discourse analysis: dis-
course analysis is concerned with the relationship between processes/events
and practices (as well as structures), texts and discourses (as well as genres and
styles), and therefore, in the terms of the distinction used by Keenoy and
Oswick, the relationship between ‘big “D”’ and ‘small “d”’ discourses. This
entails the claim which I shall elaborate below, that analysis of organisational
discourse should include detailed analysis of texts, both analysis of linguistic
and other semiotic features of texts, and the ‘interdiscursive’ analysis of texts
which I discuss next.
Grant et al. (forthcoming) emphasise the increasing importance of the 
category of ‘intertextuality’ in research on organisational discourse, and this 
is the particular focus of Keenoy and Oswick (2004). They propose the 
notion of ‘textscape’ to ‘refer to the multiplex intertextualities which inform
and underpin the meaning(s) of any given piece of discourse’. They see 
352
Methodology in CDA research


intertextuality as supporting their ‘preference to approach the social phe-
nomenon of “organization” as a (discursive) process – “organizing”’, again
privileging of processes over structures. Does it? I think not. The general con-
cept of ‘intertextuality’ includes relations between actual texts (and events),
one obvious example of which is ‘reported speech’, which are indeed complex
and ‘multiplex’. But it also includes what I call ‘interdiscursivity’: one 
important way in which (types of ) texts are different from one another and 
distinctive is in how they draw on and combine together relatively stable 
and durable discourses (as well as ‘genres’ and ‘styles’, as I explain later), 
and this feature of texts can only be investigated in terms of relations between
processes (and events) and the networks of practices and associated orders of
discourse which mediate the relation between process and structure (as I
argued in, for instance, Fairclough 1992a, 1995, 2003). This entails an ‘inter-
discursive’ as well as linguistic/semiotic analysis texts, i.e., an analysis of how
they articulate different discourses (as well as genres and styles) together.
Intertextuality is indeed an important aspect of any research on discourse, but
this does not provide support for an overemphasis on process at the expense
of structure.
Let me close this section by referring to one particularly good and the-
oretically sophisticated paper in the special issue of Organizational Studies
(Iedema et al. 2004) to elaborate what I have been saying about the relation-
ship between organisation and ‘organising’. It is an analysis of how a ‘doctor-
manager’ in a teaching hospital in Australia manages ‘the incommensurable
dimensions’ of his ‘boundary position between profession and organization’
by positioning himself across different discourses, sometimes in a single utter-
ance (Iedema et al. 2004: 15). The authors identify a heteroglossia ‘that is too
context-regarding to be reducible to personal idiosyncracy, and too complex
and dynamic to be the calculated outcome of conscious manipulation’. They
see the doctor-manager’s talk as a ‘feat’ of ‘bricolage’, not as a display of
‘behaviours that are pre-programmed’. Nor is it an instantiation of a ‘strategy’,
for ‘strategies’ are, they assume, ‘conscious’. Although the authors recognise
that organisations can ‘set limits’ on what workers can say and do, impose 
‘closure’, they see the doctor-manager as successfully ‘deferring closure on 
his own identity and on the discourses that realize it’ (2004: 29).
One can take this as an interesting and nuanced study of organisation as the
‘organising’ that is achieved in interaction (nuanced in that it does not exclude
organisational structures, though it does suggest that they are more ‘ﬂuid’ and
less ‘categorical’ than they have been taken to be, and in that it does recognise
their capacity to impose ‘closure’). I would like to make a number of con-
nected observations on this paper.
Critical discourse analysis, organisational discourse and change
353


First, one might see the doctor-manager’s ‘feat’ in this case as a particular
form of a more general organisational process, the management of contradic-
tions. Second, discourse ﬁgures differently in different types of organisation
(Borzeix 2003, referring to Girin 2001). The type of organisation in this case
seems to be in Girin’s terms a ‘cognitive’ (or ‘learning’, or ‘intelligent’) organ-
isation, in which the normative force of (written) texts (rules, procedures) is
limited, and there is an emphasis on learning in spoken interaction. There
seems to be, in other terms, a relatively ‘network’ type of structure rather than
a simple hierarchy, where management involves a strong element of particip-
atory and consultative interaction with stakeholders. Third, connecting the
ﬁrst two points, spoken interaction in this type of organisation accomplishes
an ongoing management of contradictions which contrasts with the manage-
ment of contradictions through suppressing them by imposing rules and 
procedures, which one ﬁnds in certain sorts of organisation, and one might
perhaps ﬁnd in this sort of organisation in certain situations. Fourth, the 
doctor-manager’s ‘feat’ can be seen as a performance of a strategy as long as 
we abandon the (somewhat implausible) claim that all aspects and levels of
strategic action are conscious – the doctor-manager would, one imagines, be
conscious of the need to sustain a balancing act between professional and
managerial perspectives and priorities, and of certain speciﬁc means to do so,
but that does not entail him being conscious of all the complex interactive
means he uses to do it.
Fifth, while particular performances of this strategy (or, indeed, any strat-
egy) are not ‘pre-programmed’, the strategy is institutionalised, disseminated,
learnt, and constitutes one might say a facet of the networks of social practices
which characterise this type of organisation, i.e., a facet of organisational
structure. Sixth, it strikes me that bringing off a sense of creative bricolage is
perhaps itself a part of the managerial style of this type of organisation, i.e.,
part of the strategy, the network of social practices, the order of discourse. My
conclusion is that, even given the nuanced position taken on the relationship
between organising and organisation in this paper, there may be undue em-
phasis on organising rather organisation, performance rather than practice,
‘feat’ rather than strategy.2
2 A critical realist approach to discourse analysis
I shall begin this section with a brief sketch of certain central features of critical
realism, and then move on to outline, still brieﬂy but more fully, a critical real-
ist approach to discourse analysis.
354
Methodology in CDA research


2.1 Critical realism
Realism is minimally the claim that there is a real world, including a real social
world, which exists independently of our knowledge about it. Critical realism
is a particular version of realism which is particularly associated with the work
of Bhaskar (Bhaskar 1986, Archer 1995, Sayer 2000). Critical realists argue
that the natural and social worlds differ in that the latter but not the former 
is dependent on human action for its existence – it is socially constructed. 
The social world is pre-constructed for any human being, and its socially 
constructed nature does not preclude there being aspects of it which human
beings have no or limited or mistaken knowledge of. So for critical realists
ontology must be distinguished from epistemology, and we must avoid the
‘epistemic fallacy’ of confusing the nature of reality with our knowledge of 
reality. This does not at all imply that reliable knowledge about reality is easy
to come by, but it does mean a rejection of ‘judgemental relativism’ – of the
view that all representations of the world are equally good – and a search for
grounds for determining whether some representations constitute better
knowledge of the world than others.
Critical realists assume a ‘stratiﬁed ontology’, which sees processes/events
and structures as different strata of social reality with different properties. A
distinction is drawn between the ‘real’, the ‘actual’, and the ‘empirical’: the ‘real’
is the domain of structures with their associated ‘causal powers’; the ‘actual’ 
is the domain of events and processes; the ‘empirical’ is the part of the real 
and the actual that is experienced by social actors. The ‘actual’ does not in 
any simple or straightforward way reﬂect the ‘real’: the extent to which and
ways in which the particular causal powers are activated to affect actual events
is contingent on the complex interaction of different structures and causal
powers in the causing of events. Causal powers, moreover, are not exclusively
the properties of structures: social agents also have causal powers which affect
the actual. The view of causality therefore is not a (Humean) ‘constant con-
junction’ view according to which a causal relation between x and y entails 
a regular (and in principle predictable) relation such that where x appears, y
will appear. On the contrary, the production of such ‘constant conjunctions’
require human intervention, notably in the form of experiments (which are
generally more possible in natural than in social sciences).
As I have already indicated, critical realism claims that mediating entities
are necessary to account for the relationship between structures and processes/
events. These mediating entities are ‘social practices’, more or less durable
and stable articulations of diverse social elements, including discourse, which
Critical discourse analysis, organisational discourse and change
355


constitute social selections and orderings of the allowances of social structures
as actualisable allowances in particular areas of social life in a certain time and
place. Social practices are networked together in distinctive and shifting ways.
Social ﬁelds, institutions and organisations can be regarded as networks of
social practices.3 Critical realist ontology is also ‘transformational’: human
agency produces effects through drawing on existing structures and practices
which are reproduced and/or transformed in action. Critical realism aims at
explanation: at explaining social processes and events in terms of the causal
powers of both structures and human agency and the contingency of their
effects.
Social research proceeds through abstraction from the concrete events of
social life aimed at understanding the pre-structured nature of social life, and
returns to analysis of concrete events, actions and processes in the light of this
knowledge. Thus, for instance, it is through investigation of sets of concrete
events and texts in contemporary ‘marketised’ universities that one arrives at a
knowledge of the pre-structured networks of social practices which constitute
them as ‘marketised’ organisations, which have discoursal facets which I shall
refer to as ‘orders of discourse’ (see below). Analysis of concrete events and
texts then centres on the relationship between them as occasioned and situ-
ated events and texts and pre-structured networks of social practices and
orders of discourse, which both constitute preconditions for them and are
open to transformation by them (Fairclough 1995a). This form of realism is
not subject to the tendency within modernist social research which is criti-
cised by Woolgar (1988) to take the objects it arrives at through abstraction
(which would include in the case of CDA orders of discourse, as well as 
languages and other semiotic systems) to be exhaustive of the social reality it
researches. The key difference in this case is whereas this form of modernist
research moves from the concrete to the abstract and then ‘forgets’ the con-
crete, the dialectical–relational form of realism I advocate crucially makes the
move back to analysis of the concrete. Thus a critical realistic discourse ana-
lysis is not merely concerned with languages and orders of discourse; it is
equally concerned with texts as (elements of) processes, and with the relations
of tension between the two.
Realist discourse analysis on this view is based in a dialectic-relational
social ontology which sees objects, entities, persons, discourses, organisa-
tions and so on as socially produced ‘permanences’ which arise out of 
processes and relations (Harvey 1996) and which constitute a pre-structured
reality with which we are confronted, and sets of affordances and limitations
on processes. The concern in research is with the relationship and tension
between pre-constructed social structures, practices, identities, orders of 
356
Methodology in CDA research


discourse, organisations on the one hand, and processes, actions, events on
the other. People with their capacities for agency are seen as socially pro-
duced, contingent and subject to change, yet real, and possessing real causal
powers which, in their tension with the causal powers of social structures and
practices, are a focus for analysis. Discourse analysis focuses on this tension
speciﬁcally in textual elements of social events.
2.2 Critical discourse analysis4
This version of discourse analysis has been developed in connection with trans-
disciplinary research on social change. Transdisciplinary research is more
than a short-term collaboration of disciplines around particular research 
projects; it is a long-term dialogue between disciplines and theories with each
drawing on the concepts, categories and ‘logics’ of the others in pursuing its
own theoretical and methodological development (Fairclough 2003, 2005d).
Critical discourse analysis speciﬁcally contributes to such research a focus on
how discourse ﬁgures in relation to other social elements in processes of social
change. This includes the integration of detailed analysis of texts into research
on social change.5
This version of CDA views discourse as an element of social processes and
social events, and also an element of relatively durable social practices, though
neither are reducible to discourse: they are articulations of discourse with
non-discoursal elements. ‘Discourse’ subsumes language as well as other forms
of semiosis such as visual images and ‘body language’, and texts (the dis-
coursal elements of social events) often combine different semiotic forms (e.g.,
the texts of television characteristically combine language and visual images,
and in many cases music or various ‘sound effects’). But the use of the ‘term’
‘discourse’6 rather than ‘language’ is not purely or even primarily motivated 
by the diversity of forms of semiosis; it primarily registers a relational way of
seeing linguistic/semiotic elements of social events and practices as inter-
connected with other elements. The objective of discourse analysis, on this
view, is not simply analysis of discourse per se, but analysis of the relations
between discourse and non-discoursal elements of the social, in order to reach
a better understanding of these complex relations (including how changes in
discourse can cause changes in other elements). But if we are to analyse rela-
tions between discourse and non-discoursal elements, we must obviously see
them as different elements of social reality – as ontologically (and not just epi-
stemologically, analytically) different. They are different, but we might say that
they are not discrete, in the sense that other elements of the social (e.g., the
social relations and material division and structuring of space in organisations),
Critical discourse analysis, organisational discourse and change
357


in being socially constructed through discourse, come to incorporate or
‘internalise’ particular discursive elements (including particular discourses)
without being reducible to them. The relations between them are dialectical,
in Harvey’s sense (Harvey 1996, see also Chouliaraki and Fairclough 1999,
Fairclough 2003, Fairclough, Jessop and Sayer 2004).
As I have indicated, I adopt the ‘stratiﬁed’ view of ontology characteristic 
of critical realism, along with the claim that the relationship between struc-
tures and events is mediated by social practices. This means that discourse
analysis has a doubly relational character: it is concerned with relations
between discourse and other social elements, and relations between texts as
discoursal elements of events and ‘orders of discourse’ as discoursal elements
of networks of social practices (and, ultimately, languages and other semiotic
systems as social structures). Networks of social practices include speciﬁcally
discoursal selections and orderings from languages and other semiotic sys-
tems which I call ‘orders of discourse’, appropriating but redeﬁning Foucault’s
term (Foucault 1984, Fairclough 1992a).
Orders of discourse are social structurings of linguistic/semiotic variation or
difference. That is to say, linguistic and semiotic systems make possible (can
‘generate’) texts which differ without limit, but the actual range of variation is
socially delimited and structured, i.e., through the ways in which linguistic
and semiotic systems interact with other social structures and systems. An
order of discourse can more speciﬁcally be seen as a particular combination of
different discourses, different genres and different styles, which are articu-
lated together in a distinctive way.
A discourse is a particular way of representing certain parts or aspects of the
(physical, social, psychological) world; for instance, there are different polit-
ical discourses (liberal, conservative, social-democratic, etc.) which represent
social groups and relations between social groups in a society in different ways.
A genre is a particular way of acting socially, which means acting together, i.e.,
interacting; for instance, there are different genres for consulting, discussing
or interviewing. A style is a particular way of being, i.e., a particular identity;
for instance, there are distinguishable ways of managing or ‘leading’ in organ-
isations which can be characterised as different styles. Whereas one can see
ways of representing as having a purely discoursal or semiotic character, 
ways of acting and ways of being have only a partially discursive character, and
entail relations between discoursal and non-discoursal social elements. In
some forms of social action (e.g., certain commodity production processes)
discourse is secondary to material action, in others (e.g., meetings) action 
consists almost entirely of discourse; and particular ways of managing include
bodily habits and dispositions as well as ways of communicating.
358
Methodology in CDA research


An order of discourse is not adequately speciﬁed simply in terms of the sets
of discourses, genres and styles it comprises; the relations between them –
how they are articulated together – are crucial. So the order of discourse of 
a particular organisation will include discourses, genres and styles whose 
distribution is complementary, corresponding to different parts and facets of
the organisation, but also discourses, genres and styles which are potentially
conﬂicting alternatives, whose relations are deﬁned in terms of dominance,
resistance, marginalisation, innovation, and so forth. If an order of discourse
constitutes a system, it is a system which may be more or less stable and
durable, or stable in some parts and unstable in others, more or less resistant
to change or open to change.7
I shall use the term ‘text’,8 in a generalised sense (not just written text but
also spoken interaction, multi-semiotic televisual text, etc.) for the discoursal
element of social events. Texts are doubly contextualised, ﬁrst in their relation
to other elements of social events, second in their relation to social practices,
which is ‘internal’ to texts in the sense that they necessarily draw on orders of
discourse, i.e., social practices in their discoursal aspect, and the discourses,
genres and styles associated with them. However, events (and therefore texts)
are points of articulation and tension between two causal forces: social prac-
tices and, through their mediation, social structures; and the agency of the
social actors who speak, write, compose, read, listen to, interpret them. The
social ‘resource’ of discourses, genres and styles is subject to the transforma-
tive potential of social agency, so that texts do not simply instantiate dis-
courses, genres and styles; they actively rework them, articulate them together
in distinctive and potentially novel ways, hybridise them, transform them.
The ‘interdiscursive’ analysis of texts (Fairclough 1992a; Chouliaraki and
Fairclough 1999) in this version of CDA shows how texts articulate differ-
ent discourses, genres and styles together, potentially drawing from diverse
orders of discourse, and potentially showing the capacity of social agents to
use existing social resources in innovative ways which, subject to certain con-
ditions, may contribute to changing the character of and relations between
social practices.
The causal powers of social agents in social events are thus conditional on
pre-structured properties of social life, knowledge of which can only be pro-
duced by abstraction, and knowledge of which is necessary for analyses of
concrete events which can show the socially transformative and constructive
powers of social agents. Interdiscursive analysis allows the analyst to assess the
relationship and tension between the causal effects of agency in the concrete
event and the causal effects of practices and structures, and to detect shifts in
the relationship between orders of discourse and networks of social practices
Critical discourse analysis, organisational discourse and change
359


as these are registered in the interdiscursivity (mixing of genres, discourses,
styles) of texts. The interdiscursive properties of texts can be seen as ‘realised’
in their linguistic and semiotic features.9 Analysis of texts comprises both
interdiscursive analysis and linguistic/semiotic analysis.
Texts can be seen as product and as process. Texts as products can be
stored, retrieved, bought and sold, cited and summarised and so forth. Texts
as processes can be grasped through regarding what we might call ‘texturing’
(Fairclough 2003), the making of texts, as a speciﬁc modality of social action,
of social production or ‘making’ (of meanings, understandings, knowledge,
beliefs, attitudes, feelings, social relations, social and personal identities).
Halliday (1994) has used the term ‘logogenesis’, seeing the text itself as a time-
frame within which entities (objects, persons, spaces) can be constructed 
or ‘textured’. For instance, an important logogenetic process in the texts 
of organisations is ‘nominalisation’, which is linguistically a shift from verbs
(and the subjects, objects, tense and modal operators and so forth which 
are co-constructed with verbs in sentences) to a particular class of nouns in the
representation of actions and processes (for instance, from ‘I commenced
work’ to ‘job commencement’).
Nominalisation is associated with a shift from the representation of actions
and processes situated in the ‘here and now’, involving speciﬁc persons in
speciﬁc places at speciﬁc times, a disembedding, dedifferentiation and time–
space distantiation of actions and processes from concrete and particular situ-
ations to an abstract representation of them as applicable ‘wherever, whenever
and involving whoever’ (Iedema 2003: 73). Iedema argues that ‘organisation
is contingent upon people being able to produce and reproduce these kinds 
of “distanced meanings”’ (2003: 79). Nominalisation transforms processes
and actions into a type of pseudo-entities, but at the same time has potentially
(re)constructive effects on organisational identities and social relations.
Analysis of nominalisation in organisational texts constitutes one case where a
speciﬁc and focused form of linguistic analysis can be connected to questions
about social construction in organisations.
From the perspective of this version of CDA, the general case for incor-
porating discourse analysis into social and organisational research includes
the claim that such research should include detailed analysis of texts. The
argument is a rather obvious one: one cannot research relations between 
discourse and other social elements, including the constructive effects of 
discourse, in the absence of methods for analysing linguistic, semiotic and
interdiscursive features of texts in some detail. This, of course, is widely
recognised as a problem for many social researchers who wish to undertake
discourse analysis without a background in linguistics or language studies,
360
Methodology in CDA research


and it is one good reason for developing transdisciplinary collaboration in
social and organisational research.
The approach to research methodology associated with this version of 
discourse analysis sees methodology as the process through which one 
constructs ‘objects of research’ (Bourdieu and Wacquant 1992) from research
topics. One should not assume that the research topic is transparent in 
yielding up coherent objects of research. The process of constructing them
involves selecting theoretical frameworks, perspectives and categories to
bring to bear on the research topic. It is only on the basis of such theorisation
of the research topic and the delineation of ‘objects of research’ that one can
settle on appropriate methods of data selection, collection and analysis. In 
certain cases, this would be the work of an interdisciplinary research team; 
in others it may be a matter of a discourse analyst drawing on literature 
from other disciplines and theories. This means that discourse analysis on this
view involves working in dialogue with particular bodies of social theory and
approaches to social research, identifying speciﬁc research questions for 
discourse analysis within the object of research, and seeking to ensure that
relations between discourse and other social elements are properly addressed.
For example, Fairclough (2000b) addressed the political phenomenon of
‘New Labour’ from a discourse analytical perspective, formulating research
questions in dialogue with objects of research constructed by political
researchers. Critical realism is a philosophy of (social) science, not a (social)
theory, and a critical realist approach is consistent with diverse social scientiﬁc
theories which CDA might productively enter dialogue with (see for instance
the dialogue with Jessop (2002) in Fairclough 2005d).
3 Discourse analysis in a critical realist approach to
organisational studies and organisational change
I shall begin this section with a brief discussion of critical realist approaches 
to organisational studies, and then focus on how the version of discourse ana-
lysis I have set out above can contribute to research on organisational change
which is consistent with a critical realist position.
3.1 Critical realist approaches to organisational studies
Ackroyd and Fleetwood (2000) address the tendency within organisation 
and management studies towards a polarisation between positivist and post-
modernist research. The objection of the authors in this collection is that 
this polarisation of positions has ignored both the claims of realism (and 
Critical discourse analysis, organisational discourse and change
361


particularly critical realism) to be an alternative to both positivism and post-
modernism in organisation and management studies, and the substantive
body of existing research which is based on realist principles. The critical 
realist critique of postmodernist research in organisational studies focuses 
on two interconnected issues which have already featured in my discussion
above: the view of organisations as consisting of only discourse, and a ‘ﬂat
ontology’ which makes no ontological distinction between process (and
agency) and structure. These features of postmodernist positions are held 
to cause various problems for organisation and management studies which
critical realist positions can overcome.
Without a dualist ontology, methodological examination of conditions 
for organisational stability or organisational change becomes impossible.
Collapsing the distinction between agency and structure, far from leaving
researchers free to account for neglected aspects of agency, makes the causal
powers of agents and their actualisation impossible to analyse: the capacity of
social agents to radically transform organisational structures, and the condi-
tions under which that capacity can be actualised; differences between agents,
according to their positions within the social relations of organisations, to
effect changes; and so forth. Furthermore, texts may have disorganising as well
as organising effects on organisations (Ackroyd 2000), but one cannot assess
the effects of texts on organisations, or indeed whether changes in texts have
any wider effects at all, unless one can look at relations between discourse and
other social elements and between process (and agency) and structure. One
limitation of critical realism with respect to the incorporation of discourse
analysis into organisational studies is that it has tended to give little systematic
attention to language and discourse. However, a recent paper by Fairclough,
Jessop and Sayer (2004) has tried to go some way towards redressing this
neglect, and has argued that certain work in CDA (particularly the sort of
approach I have described above) is consistent with critical realism.
3.2 CDA and organisational change
The tendency within research on organisational discourse which I have 
criticised above, privileging ‘organising’ over organisation, is also evident in 
a recent paper on organisational change by Tsoukas and Chia. The authors
argue that:
Change must not be thought of as a property of organization. Rather, organ-
ization must be understood as an emergent property of change. Change is
ontologically prior to organization – it is the condition of possibility for
362
Methodology in CDA research


organization . . . we argue that change is the reweaving of actors’ webs of
beliefs and habits of action as a result of new experiences obtained through
interactions. . . . Organization is an attempt to order the intrinsic ﬂux of
human action, to channel it towards certain ends, to give it a particular
shape, through generalizing and institutionalizing particular meanings and
rules. At the same time, organization is a pattern that is constituted, shaped,
emerging from change. (Tsoukas and Chia 2002: 567)
The view that organisations, like all objects or ‘permanences’, are emergent
effects of social process, and that change is inherent in social process, is con-
sistent with the dialectical–relational version of critical realist ontology I have
been advocating. But once constituted, such objects as organisations become
durable entities with their own causal powers to shape processes and events,
though always in contingent ways which are conditional among other things
on the causal powers of social agents and the unpredictable character of
events. Tsoukas and Chia recognise this. Part of their argument, however, is
that the categories and practices which are institutionalised in organisations
are inevitably subject to adaptation and change as organisational agents engage
in a range of processes and events which is inherently too complex and ﬂuid 
to be anticipated or pre-programmed. This is clearly the case.
My ﬁrst problem with their account of organisational change, however, is
that it does not address the relationship between ‘organisational becoming’
(change as ongoing in organisational interaction) and change in organisational
structures. They do acknowledge that much of the change in organisational
interaction does not become ‘institutionalised’, but this is in the context of 
a discussion of organisational resistance and inertia. But it is not just a matter
of organisations sometimes failing to change when there are good reasons 
for arguing that they need to. One can argue rather that it is a property of 
organisational structures – and not merely a fault – that they can remain rela-
tively stable despite the change and variation which organisational processes
routinely produce, even despite radically disorganising processes (Ackroyd
2000). From the perspective of analytical dualism, structures and processes
(and agency) have different properties, including different properties of con-
tinuity and change,and a theory of organisational change needs to clarify these
differences, and in so doing clarify the relationship between change as an
inherent feature of organisational processes and change in organisational
structures. The authors’ view that ‘organisation scientists need to give theoret-
ical priority to microscopic change’ (Tsoukas and Chia 2002: 572) strikes me
as an obstacle in this respect: neither ‘microscopic’ change nor structural
change should be given theoreticalpriority; what theory needs to address is the
relationship between them.
Critical discourse analysis, organisational discourse and change
363


I would argue that research on organisational change beneﬁts not only from
adopting analytical dualism, but also from a clear and coherent account of the
difference and relations between discourse and other elements of the social.
This brings me to my second problem with Tsoukas and Chia’s paper. It
strikes me that they merge together (for instance in the quotation above)
aspects of change which need to be analytically teased apart: change in dis-
course (which they do not explicitly distinguish or address as such), ‘new’
experiences, change in beliefs, change in habits of action, and change in organ-
isation. The metaphor of ‘reweaving’ is a congenial one for the version of 
discourse analysis I have set out above. But I was suggesting there speciﬁcally
that change in discourse is a matter of novel interdiscursive relations, the
‘reweaving’ of relations between different discourses, genres and styles. One
can certainly relate this to new experiences. But it is necessary to distinguish
such change in discourse from change in beliefs, change in habits of action and
(as I have already indicated) change in organisation. Whether or not change in
discourse leads to change in beliefs or habits of action, as well as change in
organisations, is a contingent matter. Change in discourse may for instance be
rhetorically motivated, to do with persuading others without necessarily
implying change in one’s own beliefs. Or even if it is not rhetorically motivated
it can be ephemeral, without durable effects on beliefs or habits of action.
Whether it does or does not have such effects is contingent on other factors,
including long-term (‘habitus’) and short-term characteristics of social actors,
and the latitude available within the ‘pattern’ of organisation for variation in
habits of action. Changes in discourse certainly can and do contribute to
change in beliefs, habits of action, and indeed organisations, but it is only by
consistently regarding the difference between such social elements that one
can investigate the relations between them.
The issues can be formulated in terms of evolutionary theory, which 
Jessop (2002) has integrated into a theoretical framework for researching
changes in governance and the state which is consistent with critical realism
and a dialectical–relational ontology. Social interaction inherently produces
changes in discourse which add to social variation. But to account for the rela-
tionship between such change and change in pre-constructed objects such as
persons (with their beliefs and habits of action) and organisations, one needs
to address the factors and conditions which determine how particular variants
are selected and retained, whereas others are not.
I have argued above that the version of discourse analysis I am advocating 
is best deployed within transdisciplinary research on social change, provid-
ing a speciﬁcally discourse analytical perspective in researching ‘objects of
research’ which are constituted on a transdisciplinary basis. This entails
364
Methodology in CDA research


working as a discourse analyst in dialogue with the particular theoretical
resources and frameworks drawn on in constituting objects of research for
research topics. Let me refer to three examples in my own work. I have already
mentioned the study of ‘New Labour’, in which the particular research ques-
tions formulated for a discourse analytical approach to New Labour were
established through dialogue with social and political theories of which
related change in the political ﬁeld to economic globalisation and the asso-
ciated political project of neo-liberalism. Chiapello and Fairclough (2002)
was an attempt to set up a dialogue between the ‘new sociology of capitalism’
(Boltanski and Chiapello 1999) and CDA, interpreting what Boltanski 
and Chiapello identify as the ‘new spirit of capitalism’ in discourse analytical
terms as being in part a change in orders of discourse within business organ-
isations, including for instance changes in the styles of managers and ‘leaders’.
Fairclough (2005c) is a study of ‘transition’ in post-communist countries
focusing on Romanian strategies for building an ‘information society’ and
‘knowledge economy’, which formulated speciﬁc objects of research and
speciﬁc research questions for discourse analysis on the basis of a theorisation
of ‘transition’ in terms of ‘new’ or ‘cultural’ political economy. None of these
studies has addressed change in particular organisations, but they do I think
begin to set out an approach to incorporating discourse analysis into trans-
disciplinary research on change which can be productively extended to 
organisational change.
From what I have said so far, two central principles for such research have
emerged: (1) that while change in discourse is a part of organisational change,
and organisational change can often be understood partly in terms of the con-
structive effects of discourse on organisations, organisational change is not
simply change in discourse, and relations between change in discourse and
change in other elements of organisations are matters for investigation, which
entails a clear and consistent analytical distinction between discourse and
other social elements; (2) that while ongoing change in social process, in social
interaction, can contribute to organisational change, the relationship between
change in social interaction and change in organisational structures is com-
plex and subject to conditions of possibility which need to be investigated, which
entails a clear and consistent distinction between social process (including
texts), social practices (including orders of discourse) and social structures.
One cannot proceed without theoretical assumptions about organisational
change. Proposing a general theory of organisational change is clearly beyond
the scope of this paper (not to mention my own capabilities), but I do need to
make a number of assumptions about organisational structures and organisa-
tional change in order to consider them from a discourse analytical perspective.
Critical discourse analysis, organisational discourse and change
365


These assumptions draw from the version of cultural political economy I used
in Fairclough (2005c), and especially from Jessop (2002).10
1. Organisational structures are hegemonic structures, structures which are
based in and reproduce particular power relations between groups of
social agents, which constitute ‘ﬁxes’ with enduring capacity to manage the
contradictions of organisations in ways which allow them to get on with
their main business more or less successfully.
2. Organisational structures may come into crisis, generally as a result of a
combination of both external and internal changes and pressures, when
the ‘ﬁx’ is perceived as no longer viable.
3. In situations of crisis, groups of social agents develop their own particular
(and opposing) strategies for achieving a new ‘ﬁx’, and through a process
of hegemonic struggle a new hegemonic ‘ﬁx’ may emerge.
4. Strategies have a partly discoursal character, including particular dis-
courses and narratives11 which represent in particular ways what has 
happened and is happening, and construct imaginaries for what could
happen. Discourses and narratives may be ‘recontextualised’ from other
organisations.
5. Change in the social process, including change in texts, may have trans-
formative effects on organisational structures in so far as it becomes 
incorporated within successful strategies.
6. The implementation of a successful strategy is a matter of the operation-
alisation of new representations and imaginaries (new discourses and 
narratives) in new ways of acting and being and new material arrangements.
An important part of these assumptions is that the category of ‘strategies’ 
is seen as mediating the relationship between the change which is inherent 
in social interaction and texts, and change in organisational structures. 
With respect to my reference to evolutionary theory above, the selection and
retention of variants is a matter of their being incorporated into successful
strategies. Strategies constitute imaginaries for changes in the networks of
social practices of organisations, changes in organisational structure, includ-
ing changes in the orders of discourse of organisations; and in so far as 
strategies are successful, such imaginaries may be realised in actual changes.
In connection with these assumptions, I would suggest that there are 
four broad sets of research issues which can productively be addressed
speciﬁcally by discourse analysts in transdisciplinary research on organisa-
tional change: the problems of emergence, hegemony, recontextualisation and 
operationalisation:
366
Methodology in CDA research


Emergence: the processes of emergence of new discourses, their constitu-
tion as new articulations of elements of existing discourses. 
Hegemony: the processes of particular emergent discourses (and not others)
and associated narratives becoming hegemonic in particular organisations.
Recontextualisation: the dissemination of emergently hegemonic dis-
courses across structural boundaries (e.g., between organisations) and
scalar boundaries (e.g., from local to national or international scale, or vice
versa).
Operationalisation: the operationalisation of such discourses, their enact-
ment in new ways of (inter)acting, including genres, their inculcation in
new ways of being or identities, including styles, their materialisation as
objects and properties of the physical world.
Emergence
The problem of emergence is approached on the principle that nothing 
comes out of nothing – new discourses emerge through ‘reweaving’ relations
between existing discourses. These may include ‘external’ discourses existing
elsewhere which become recontextualised in an organisation – recontextual-
isation (see further below) involves questions of reception and appropriation,
working ‘external’ discourses into relations with internal discourses. These
processes of ‘reweaving’ can be identiﬁed in analysis of texts as processes (as
‘texturing’). There is an analysis of a speciﬁc example in Fairclough, Jessop
and Sayer (2004: 35–36). And Iedema et al. (2004) show how the doctor-
manager ‘reweaves’ relations between different discourses (a process of 
‘bricolage’, as they describe it). An emergent new discourse may be ‘institu-
tionalised’ within a changed order of discourse, a process which is conditional
on it being incorporated into a successful strategy (see the discussion of 
‘hegemony’ below). What ‘reweaving’ goes on, which new discourses emerge,
are not dependent on internal properties of social process and text alone – they
are not socially arbitrary, not merely an effect of the normal ﬂux or ‘play’ of
interaction. As Iedema et al.point out, the doctor-manager’s ‘feat’ (as they see
it) is conditional on the particular contradictions thrown up by organisational
restructuring in public services such as medicine, and the marketisation 
and managerialisation of organisations such as hospitals. In other words, new
discourses which may contribute to changes in organisational structures 
have their own conditions of possibility in the structures of organisations, 
the strategies of social agents, the habitus of social agents, and so forth.12
Therefore, while problems of emergence can be researched through analysing
change in social processes, social interaction and text, including chains and
Critical discourse analysis, organisational discourse and change
367


series of interconnected texts over time and across organisational space, they
also require reference to these structural, strategic and other factors.
Hegemony
The effect (or lack of effect) of emergent phenomena in social process and text
depends on whether they are selected for incorporation into the strategies of
social groups, and the success or failure of competing strategies in processes
of hegemonic struggle. Researching the hegemony problem entails carrying
out discourse analytical research in dialogue with social scientists who invest-
igate relations between social groups in organisations and the strategies of
social groups. This is a matter both of textual analysis, and of seeking to 
identify what distinctive discourses and narratives are associated with par-
ticular strategies (which shifts the focus towards emerging social practices 
and associated orders of discourse), as well as analysing texts with a focus on
contradictions and struggles between competing discourses and strategies.
This entails what one might call strategic critique (as opposed to the ideolo-
gical and rhetorical critique which are also familiar within CDA), focusing on
how discourse ﬁgures within the strategies pursued by groups of social agents 
to change organisations in particular directions. Strategies effect distinctive
articulations of discourses, often organised around a dominant ‘nodal dis-
course’ (the discourse of ‘new public management’, or ‘total quality manage-
ment’ might be examples) which organises relations between other constituent
discourses ( Jessop 2002, Fairclough 2005c).
The success or failure of strategies depends on various conditions, some 
of which have a discoursal character: for instance, some discourses are more
‘resonant’ than others (Fairclough et al. 2004b), better able to capture and
encapsulate the experiences of social agents, better able to complement or
organise existing discourses. The success or failure of strategies also depends
on the resilience, resistance or inertia of existing organisational structures,
including how well embedded existing discourses are.
Recontextualisation
The concept of recontextualisation is taken from Bernstein’s sociology of 
pedagogy and has been operationalised as a category in CDA (Bernstein 
1990, Chouliaraki and Fairclough 1999), a case of internal theoretical devel-
opment through transdisciplinary dialogue. Recontextualisation identiﬁes
the (‘recontextualising’) principles according to which ‘external’ discourses 
(and practices) are internalised within particular organisations – particular
368
Methodology in CDA research


organisations (schools, businesses, media organisations) constituted in 
particular ways have their own distinctive ways of internalising ‘external’ dis-
courses. Chouliaraki and Fairclough see recontextualisation as a colonisation-
appropriation dialectic: organisations may be seen as colonised by external
discourses, but they actively appropriate them (setting the new in relation 
with the old) in ways which may lead to unpredictable transformations and
outcomes. Given that contemporary organisations are characteristically
embedded within complex networks of organisations which render them sub-
ject to powerful external pressures which affect trajectories of internal change,
and given that these inter-organisational processes are often ‘discourse-led’,
researching the recontextualisation of discourses is an important part of dis-
course analytical research on organisational change. For instance, research on
‘transition’ in the post-communist countries involves questions about how the
neo-liberal discourses which were so salient in the interventions of external
agencies in the early years of ‘transition’ have been recontextualised within
post-communist countries and within particular organisations and institu-
tions. Linking the problem of recontextualisation with the problem of 
hegemony, one might argue that such external discourses have substantive
internal effects only on condition that they are incorporated within successful
strategies, i.e., that the effectivity of the ‘ﬂow’ of discourses across structural
boundaries between organisations and across scalar boundaries between
‘global’, ‘macro-regional’ (e.g., EU), national and local boundaries (speciﬁc
organisations would be ‘local’ in this sense) is conditional on how they enter
into internal social relations and social struggles.
Operationalisation
I have referred so far only to discourses, without mentioning the other 
categories which constitute orders of discourse (genres, styles), or how dis-
courses are dialectically transformed into other social elements. These are
interconnected. Successful strategies may be operationalised, i.e., cease to be
merely imaginaries for change, and effect real change. Operationalisation
includes enactment: discourses may be dialectically transformed into new ways
of acting and interacting. For instance, the discourse of ‘appraisal’ entered
higher educational organisations in Britain as a discourse, an imaginary 
for change, which was then enacted as universities negotiated and adopted
procedures for appraising staff. And, as this example indicates, enactment
includes the dialectical transformation of discourses into genres: these pro-
cedures included new genres, including the ‘appraisal interview’, which was
designed to regulate interaction between appraiser and appraisee in particular
Critical discourse analysis, organisational discourse and change
369


ways (see Fairclough (2003) for analysis of a particular organisation).
Operationalisation also includes inculcation – the dialectical transformation
of discourses into new ways of being, new identities, which includes new
styles. For instance, the emergent hegemony of the discourse of ‘new public
management’ in such organisations as local government authorities includes
changes in the identities of public service managers and workers, including
changes in their communicative styles. Finally, operationalisation includes
materialisation: a new management system in an organisation may include
changes in the structuring of organisational space, e.g., in the design of ofﬁce
space. Through these forms of operationalisation, networks of social practices
and the orders of discourse which are parts of them may be transformed.
I have formulated these four problems in general terms to give a general
view of the sort of contribution CDA can make to research on organisational
change. They are, of course, not alternatives. For any particular research pro-
ject, discourse analysts can contribute in dialogue with other researchers to
the constitution of objects of research for research topics, and the likelihood is
that the particular research questions it contributes will involve a combination
of versions of some or all of the problems. For instance, my research on New
Labour (Fairclough 2000b) addressed the emergence of the discourse of the
‘third way’, its incorporation within a hegemonic strategy for change, its
recontextualisation (e.g., from UK domestic politics to international politics),
and to some extent its operationalisation through the formulation and imple-
mentation of policies.
4 Conclusion
I have argued that a commitment to discourse analysis in organisational stud-
ies entails neither a reduction of organisations to organisational discourse, nor
a reduction of organisational analysis to the ‘organising’ that goes on in organ-
isational processes. Discourse analysis is consistent with a realist approach 
to organisational research which distinguishes organisational process and
agency from organisational structures, and focuses research on the relations
and tensions between them. Incorporating discourse analysis into a realist
approach both ensures that questions of discourse are properly attended to in
organisational studies, and avoids these forms of reductionism. Within such 
a realist approach, discourse analysis can make a signiﬁcant contribution to
researching organisational change, and addressing such general concerns as
the following: When organisations change, what is it that changes? What
makes organisations resilient in the face of change, resistant to change, or open
370
Methodology in CDA research


to change? How are external pressures for organisational change internalised
in organisations; how may organisational members respond to them, and what
outcomes are possible? Such questions cannot of course be addressed by dis-
course analysts alone, but my argument is that effectively researching them
does depend on a substantive element of discourse analysis in transdiscip-
linary research on organisational change.
Notes
1. I take an analytically dualist position, as I explain later in the paper, which 
distinguishes ‘social process’ and ‘social structure’ as ontologically distinct
though interconnected facets of the social, and focuses research on the rela-
tionship between them. Analysis of social process includes analysis of
agency, so another way of formulating the fundamental ontological distinc-
tion is ‘agency v structure’. As Fairclough, Jessop and Sayer (2004) argue, the
analytical isolation of distinct events and chains of events in the social process
is itself an interpretative accomplishment which involves and depends on 
discourse, even where the events concerned do not have a mainly discursive
character (e.g., a football match, as opposed to a lecture, which does have 
a mainly discursive character).
2. The authors state that ‘the portrait painted’ in the paper ‘celebrates this one
person’s talk as a performativity’. As conversation analysts have shown, there
is a sense in which any talk is a performativity or feat to be celebrated, and that
surely applies to the more-or-less skilled performances of managers in any
form of organisation. I suspect the authors are confusing novelty with per-
formativity – yet there are no doubt already managers for whom performances
of this sort are rather routine.
3. Or perhaps more adequately, social ﬁelds can be regarded as conﬁgura-
tions of institutions, and organisations can be regarded as institutions of a
distinctive type, where organisations and other types of institution are
conﬁgurations of social practices (Ackroyd 2000).
4. Together with a broad consensus which is sufﬁcient to identify CDA as a dis-
tinct research tradition, there are substantial differences on certain issues
within the ﬁeld (Fairclough and Wodak 1997), as well as shifts over time in
the positions of individual researchers, including my own. If we bring into
the picture the rapidly expanding applications of CDA in a great many dis-
ciplines and ﬁelds in social science (see Fairclough, Graham, Lemke and
Wodak 2004), then the positions and approaches which count as, or claim to
be, CDA expand considerably. Since I believe that research in CDA is most
fruitfully carried out in transdisciplinary dialogue with other disciplines, 
theories and forms of research, this proliferation of CDA within various areas
of social scientiﬁc research is a welcome advance on the earlier situation of
Critical discourse analysis, organisational discourse and change
371


CDA often camping precariously on their borders. But it does pose some
problems in making what counts as CDA. See note 5.
5. Critical discourse analysis has been one of a number of methodological
inﬂuences within research on organisational discourse (others include con-
versation analysis, linguistic pragmatics, sociolinguistics, and systemic func-
tional linguistics). What counts as ‘critical discourse’ analysis is subject to the
same diversity in this area of research as in others. It should be clear from
what I have said that my position does not constitute a blanket endorsement
of all the research on organisational discourse which has identiﬁed itself as
critical discourse analysis.
6. There are arguments for using the term ‘semiosis’ rather than ‘discourse’ in
the abstract sense as an element of the social in relation to other non-discoursal
elements of the social, given the widespread confusion between ‘discourse’ 
in this sense and (particular) ‘discourses’, and the widespread reduction of
‘discourse’ to ‘discourses’ which I discuss later (Fairclough, Jessop and
Sayer 2004). However, I shall use the more familiar term ‘discourse’.
7. Languages and other semiotic systems as social structures, and orders of 
discourse as facets of networks of social practices, are in critical realist 
terms both objects with particular generative mechanisms or causal powers.
Languages have the causal power to contribute to the production of a limit-
less set of semiotic (elements of) events, far beyond the actual. Orders of dis-
course can in part be seen as constructs which account for the gap between
the causal powers of languages (and other semiotic systems) and the semiotic
actual. But a distinction must still be drawn between the causal powers of 
an order of discourse and the semiotic actual – the latter is in a sense both 
less than and more than the former, for the extent to which the former are
actualised is conditional on contingencies, and the fact that texts are effects 
of the causal powers of objects other than orders of discourse (or languages)
means that may exceed the possibilities deﬁned by orders of discourse.
8. The term ‘text’ is not really felicitous for the general sense of the discoursal
element of events, because it is so strongly associated with written language.
However, I have not found a more satisfactory alternative.
9. I subsume a variety of particular forms of analysis under ‘linguistic’ analysis,
including grammatical analysis, semantic analysis, analysis of vocabulary and
metaphor, analysis of argumentation and other forms of rhetorical analysis,
narrative analysis, pragmatic analysis, conversational analysis and other
forms of interactional analysis. See Fairclough 2003.
10. Jessop’s concern is with change in political economies (interconnected
changes in economic systems and systems of governance), not with change in
organisations. There are clearly difﬁculties in simply extrapolating from the
one to the other, but I think that nevertheless this set of (tentative) assump-
tions will allow me to indicate schematically how I envisage the contribution
of discourse analysis to research on organisational change.
372
Methodology in CDA research


11. Narratives are distinctive both with respect to discourses and with respect to
genres – they involve particular ways of representing the social and organisa-
tional world (discourses) and particular ways of telling stories about them
(genres). For my present purposes, the focus is on the discourses associated
with particular narratives rather than questions of genre.
12. In Fairclough and Thomas (2004) we argue for instance that structural 
factors as well as the strategies of groups of social agents are germane to
explaining the emergence of the discourse of ‘globalisation’ in the past few
decades, especially given that globalisation is widely regarded as a process
which is centuries old. ‘Why here, why now?’ are pertinent questions to ask.
Critical discourse analysis, organisational discourse and change
373


This page intentionally left blank


S e c t i o n  E
Political discourse


This page intentionally left blank


Introduction
T
he papers in this section, published between 1998 and 2006, address
diverse aspects of and issues in analysis of political discourse. The ﬁrst
paper is a previously unpublished English version of a paper published in the
Romanian journal Secolo 21. It gives a condensed account of the analysis of the
political discourse of New Labour in Britain which is more fully developed in
my book New Labour, New Language?(2000b). The second and third papers
are concerned with the political public sphere, understood as a sphere of 
politics outside government and the political system, in which the privileged
actors are citizens. And the fourth paper is a discussion of the controversy
around ‘political correctness’, which I treat as a recent political controversy of
some signiﬁcance. Political discourse has been a focus throughout my work
within CDA, and readers should note that a number of papers in other 
sections of the book also address questions of political discourse analysis,
including Papers 6, 7, 8, 11, 12 and 19.
The ﬁrst paper (‘New Labour: a language perspective’) can be seen as a 
partial account of the political ﬁeld in its semiotic dimension (the political
‘order of discourse’) in Britain around the turn of the twenty-ﬁrst century, 
partial in that the focus is one major position within the political ﬁeld – New
Labour. To a degree it builds upon the analysis of the political discourse of
Thatcherism in Language and Power (1989a). The language of New Labour
is presented as having three main dimensions or facets: political discourses
(representations and imaginaries of diverse ﬁelds and domains of social 
life which are subjected to government, as well as government itself ), govern-
mental genres (ways of acting and interacting in the processes of government,
or ways of regulating these processes in their discourse aspect), and political


styles (ways of being, identities, of New Labour politicians and ministers,
including the Prime Minister Tony Blair).
The second paper is entitled ‘Democracy and the public sphere in critical
research on discourse’. There is a widespread contemporary perception that
democracy is in decline if not in crisis, and that the travails of democracy can
be productively understood in terms of the weakness of the political public
sphere. Major theorists of the public sphere, including Jürgen Habermas 
and Hannah Arendt, have indicated that the strength of public spheres
depends upon their discursive features, and this suggests that CDA may 
have a signiﬁcant contribution to make to this area of political research. For
reasons explained in the paper, I develop a framework for a CDA approach 
to researching public spheres on the basis of Arendt’s position in particular. 
I suggest that any discursive practice is simultaneously a regulative practice, 
a space of emergence, a principle of recontextualisation, and a constituent of
action, and that taken together these can constitute both a framework for
description and a normative template for evaluation of public dialogue in
terms of its quality or success in instantiating or creating a public sphere.
The third paper (‘Critical discourse analysis and citizenship’), co-authored
with Simon Pardoe and Bron Szerszynski, arose out of an EU-funded research
project (the PARADYS project) on ﬁeld trials of genetically modiﬁed crops in
several European countries. The focus of the project was citizenship, but
more precisely citizenship as a communicative achievement within the process
of authorising and regulating farm trials. In this paper we present a CDA
approach to citizenship as a communicative achievement and illustrate it from
the material we collected and analysed as part of the section of the PARADYS
project devoted to the UK. A central argument of the paper is that a simple
shift from concerns with what citizenship is to concerns with how citizenship
is communicatively achieved or doneis not feasible, because the ways in which
people enact citizenship are always oriented to, reﬂective of and often in tension
with diverse coexisting preconceptions about and pre-constructions of 
citizenship. In the light of this argument, we address the question of how 
people position themselves as subjects (and speciﬁcally as citizens) by focusing
on struggles over genre, switches in and struggles over voice and style, and 
discourses around public participation in public meetings concerned with the
ﬁeld trials.
The fourth paper (‘Political correctness’) takes the controversy around
‘political correctness’ (PC) as a political controversy in which both sides are
engaged in a politics that is focused upon representations, values and identities
– in short, a ‘cultural politics’. The objective on both sides is cultural change
as a trigger for broader social change. And because changing culture is 
378
Political discourse


conceived on both sides as partly a matter of changing language, the ‘PC’ 
controversy is partly, but only partly, a controversy over language. I focus here
on the language aspect in addressing three questions. First, what explains the
apparently increasing focus in politics on achieving social and political change
through changing culture and changing language (a ‘cultural turn’ in politics)?
Second, how are we to understand the relationship between culture, language
and other elements of social life, and the relationship between change in 
culture and language, and social change? Third, for those who are politically
committed to substantive change, what place can a politics centred around
culture and language have in a political strategy?
Introduction
379


14. New Labour: a language perspective1
T
he UK Labour Government which was elected under the leadership 
of Tony Blair in 1997 differentiated itself from its predecessors by 
identifying itself as ‘New Labour’. Being ‘New Labour’ was associated with
making a break from the history and traditions of the Labour Party, most
notably by renouncing the commitment to ‘the common ownership of the
means of production, distribution and exchange’ in Clause 4 of the Labour
Party Constitution. It can be seen as an accommodation with the ‘New Right’,
neo-liberal agenda of Thatcherism, an inﬂection of the Thatcherite agenda
rather than a rejection of it. New Labour also had a new ‘modern’ political
style, including a sophisticated use of mass media which came to be widely
disparaged as the cultivation of ‘media spin’.2
It is remarkable how much political and journalistic commentaries on 
and analyses of New Labour have focused upon questions of language. The
political discourse of the ‘Third Way’, New Labour’s political discourse, has
been criticised for instance for the ‘vagueness’ of its language, New Labour’s
‘media spin’ has been satirically associated with endless collocations with ‘new’
(‘New Deal’, ‘New Britain’, ‘new Europe’, ‘new partnerships’ and so forth –
giving rise to scurrilous additions such as ‘new underpants’), and Blair’s 
political leadership style has been identiﬁed and criticised for its cultivation 
of a merely apparent sincerity and artlessness.
I wish to argue that analysis of language (or ‘discourse analysis’ see below)
can substantially enhance political analysis. The focus of people who are 
not language specialists on the language of New Labour perhaps provides a
prima facie justiﬁcation for approaching the politics of New Labour from a
language perspective. But there are also more substantive reasons, which one
can perhaps see commentators, critics and satirists as implicitly responding


to. First, the political philosophy, strategy and values of New Labour are not
pre-given; they have been and continue to be, so to speak, talked and re-talked
into being in speeches by Blair and in other New Labour texts. This has led
some commentators to question whether they can properly be said to exist as
coherent objects at all. But what this means is that attending to the shifts in the
language of New Labour is analytically important in arriving at an analysis 
of the politics of New Labour. Second, the ‘modernisation’ or ‘reinvention’ of
government which New Labour has associated itself with, including some
devolution of government to unelected advisery groups which entails new
forms of control by the centre, places an enhanced emphasis on public rep-
resentations and construals of government and politics (and ‘media spin’)
which again calls for close linguistic analysis. Third, contemporary politics
centres upon the personality of political leaders such as Blair, whose com-
municative style is professionally designed, and demands linguistic and 
semiotic analysis.
1 Critical discourse analysis
The theory and method used in my study of New Labour are drawn from
CDA.3‘Discourse’ is used, as an abstract noun, for language and other semiotic
modes (such as ‘body language’ and visual images) seen as an element of social
events and, more abstractly, social practices, which is dialectically4 related 
to other elements (forms of activity, social relations and institutional forms,
persons with knowledge, beliefs, attitudes and values, and elements of the
material world). These diverse elements are seen as different without being
discrete – elements ‘internalise’ other elements5 (the ‘external’ dialectics of
discourse). At the level of social practices, discourse in this abstract sense
ﬁgures in three main ways: as ways of (inter)acting (or ‘genres’), as ways of 
representing (or ‘discourses’ used as a concrete noun), and as ways of being or
identities (‘styles’). The relationship between genres, discourses and styles is
also dialectical (the ‘internal’ dialectics of discourse): discourses may be
enacted as genres (as well as non-discoursal facets of activity), and inculcated
as styles (as well embodied). I see CDA’s research agenda as focusing on how
discourse ﬁgures in (and often, in the ‘knowledge’ or ‘information’ society,
‘drives’) more general processes of social change, especially contemporary
changes associated with ‘new capitalism’, ‘neo-liberalism’ and ‘globalisation’,
with respect to social relations of power and domination. Methodologically, it
analyses text and talk ‘interdiscursively’, i.e., in terms of how different genres,
discourses and styles are drawn upon and ‘textured’ together, and in terms 
of how these articulations are realised in the meanings and forms (generic,
New Labour: a language perspective
381


grammatical, lexical, phonological, as well as those of non-linguistic semiotic
modes) of texts. It makes connections between texts in their linguistic detail
and social processes and change via the mediation of shifting articulations 
of genres, discourses and styles. This form of CDA is designed as a resource
for social scientists and social research.6
2 CDA of the language of New Labour
The focus of analysis is New Labour in government, and the concern is there-
fore both with the language of a political party, and the language of the style of
government practised under the auspices of that political party. The aim is to
delineate a social practice in its discourse aspect – or an ‘order of discourse’.
An ‘order of discourse’ is a particular relatively durable articulation of dis-
courses, genres and styles. Orders of discourses constitute the social regulation
of linguistic and semiotic difference or variation. The ‘order of discourse’ in
this case is properly the politico-governmental order of discourse, including
the discourse of diverse political positions within the Labour Party and of
other parties, but my focus here is exclusively on New Labour.
The language of New Labour includes political discourses (representations
and imaginaries of diverse ﬁelds and domains of social life which are subjected
to government, as well as government itself ), governmental genres (ways of
acting and interacting in the processes of government, or ways of regulating
these processes in their discourse aspect), and political styles (ways of being,
identities, of New Labour politicians and ministers). The ‘external’ dialectics
of discourse is a matter for instance of how imaginaries of a new order of 
social welfare, or ‘partnerships’ between government, business and non-
governmental organisations,7 are enacted in new institutions and procedures,
and inculcated (more or less) in new subjects, as well as materialised, for
instance architecturally. The ‘internal’ dialectics of discourse is a matter, for
instance, of how such imaginaries are enacted as genres and inculcated as
styles. An interesting insight into the dialectics of discourse within the politics
of New labour is given, from a practical perspective, by Philip Gould, a political
consultant who was one of Blair’s leading advisers, in a memorandum writ-
ten in 1994 called ‘Consolidating the Blair identity’: Blair ‘must build on his
strengths, and build an identity as a politician that is of a piece with the political
positions he adopts’. We might gloss this as follows in the terms I am using: the
construction of Blair’s political identity is a matter of the inculcation of aspects
of the political discourses of New Labour (particularly their associated 
‘values’) in a communicative style, and a form of embodiment. I shall not
explore these dialectical relations much further in this short paper, but brieﬂy
382
Political discourse


discuss in turn: the political discourse of the ‘Third Way’; New Labour’s 
genres of government; and the political style of Tony Blair.
3 The political discourse of the ‘Third Way’
Discourses (and the same is true of genres and styles) can be differentiated 
on different levels of generality or abstraction. The political position of New
Labour has been identiﬁed by Blair and others as the ‘Third Way’. On a 
relatively high level of generality, we might approach the ‘Third Way’ as the
political discourse of New Labour, though with certain provisos. First, its
unity and coherence as a discourse are a matter of dispute. Second, we have 
to grasp it as an emergent discourse, a discourse in process of formation, as 
I indicated earlier. Third, at a lesser level of generality one can identify many
different discourses within the political discourse of the Third Way, both in
terms of the diverse areas of social life which are represented and imagined
(e.g., social welfare, governance through partnerships, crime), and in terms of
the diverse perspectives on these areas of social life. With respect to the latter,
I want to highlight one recurrent feature of representations of the ‘Third Way’
which is illustrated in the following extract from a speech by Blair:
Third Way – our values
There is a clear theme running through the annual report. It is the third way.
There is something genuinely new about the politics of this government.
When you look at the record of the past year ask yourself:
What other government this century would have cut corporation tax to help
business yet introduced a minimum wage to help the poorest paid?
What other government would have given ﬁnancial independence to the
Bank of England as well as setting up a unit to deal with homelessness?
What other government would work so hard to offer jobs, and new skills to
young people as well as cracking down on youth crime?
What other government would reform the workings of government to make
the centre of government stronger and more strategic, yet devolve power
dramatically to local people throughout Britain?
What other government would put huge extra resources into health and
education yet still keep to tough overall spending ceilings?
This is the third way. A belief in social justice and economic dynamism,
ambition and compassion, fairness and enterprise going together.
The third way is a new politics that helps people cope with a more insecure
world because it rejects the destructive excesses of the market and the intru-
sive hand of state intervention. It is about an enabling government that gives
people the chance of a better future in which all people can play their part.8
New Labour: a language perspective
383


One aspect of such representations is marking out the relationship and 
difference between the ‘Third Way’ and the political positions it is represented
as displacing and transcending – in one formulation, the ‘old-style interven-
tion of the old left and the laissez-faire of the new right’,9 or in the example
above, ‘the intrusive hand of state intervention’ and ‘the destructive excesses
of the market’. The pamphlets, speeches and newspaper articles of New
Labour politicians are full of descriptions of how the ‘Third Way’ differs 
from the ‘old left’ and ‘new right’, often in the form of extended lists, as in this 
case, in which what had hitherto been seen as incompatible opposites are 
represented as reconciled. The meaning ‘not only . . . but also’ pervades the
political discourse of New Labour, realised in a variety of expressions (‘yet’
and ‘as well as’ in this case, but also others: ‘enterprise yet also fairness’, 
‘enterprise as well as fairness’, ‘enterprise with fairness’, ‘enterprise and fair-
ness’, with and stressed), which both draw attention to assumed incompata-
bilities, and deny them: what has been seen as mutually exclusive, belonging
to either left (e.g., ‘social justice’) or right (e.g., ‘economic dynamism’), is not.
A new political discourse is in part constituted as a hybridisation of elements
of existing political discourses, those of the social democratic left and the
Thatcherite right.
Political and journalistic commentaries on the discourse of the ‘Third Way’
often question the relationship between what New Labour says and what it
does, the ‘rhetoric’ in one sense of that term, whether it is ‘mere words’ at odds
with action. Indeed the central controversy about New Labour is whether its
‘Third Way’ is indeed a new form of centre-left politics as it claims, or a some-
what disguised continuation of the neo-liberal politics of the New Right. 
For instance, is the claim to ‘reject the destructive excesses of the market and
the intrusive hand of state intervention’ mere words, or are actions being taken
which prevent the destructive excesses of the market without recourse to state
intervention? What are these actions – indeed, what could they possibly be? Is
there any way except the power of the state for preventing these excesses? Of
course, we cannot answer the question about ‘rhetoric’ simply by reference to
language, for it asks about the relationship of language to other elements. But
language is a signiﬁcant focus in such a political analysis – for instance, one
aspect of the pervasive meaning ‘not only . . . but also’ is that the two previously-
incompatible terms that are made compatible (e.g., ‘social justice and economic
dynamism’) are construed as having equal weight. In actuality, there may be
policies oriented to ‘social justice’, but they may be secondary or marginal in
comparison with policies oriented to ‘economic dynamism’. Moreover, the
paratactic, listing syntax which is pervasive in constructions of the ‘Third
Way’ constructs equivalences which are contentious as contestable (e.g., in
384
Political discourse


what way are ‘giving ﬁnancial independence to the Bank of England’ and
‘cracking down on youth crime’ equivalent?). It is easy to be carried along 
by the ‘rhetoric’, the persuasive patterning of the language (in this case, the
repeated questions beginning ‘What other government would . . . ?’), which
some commentators have seen as papering over the incoherence and contra-
dictions of New Labour.10
I have only touched on one aspect of the discourse of the third way among
many which are of interest – for instance its representation of ‘work’, or ‘rights
and responsibilities’, of ‘values’, or ‘social exclusion’ and social inclusion.
Quantitative corpus studies of collocative patterns can enhance the more 
qualitative text analysis of CDA in these cases.11 For instance, a comparison
between corpora of New Labour and earlier Labour Party texts showed that
‘into’ and ‘back to work’ are frequent collocations in the former, whereas 
‘out of work’ is a frequent collocation in the latter. The former also include 
as frequent collocative patterns such as: ‘(from) welfare to work’, ‘seeking’
work, ‘encouraging’ work, ‘opportunities’ to work, ‘desire’ to work. The latter
include: ‘right to work’, ‘democracy at work’, ‘health and safety at work’,
‘equality of opportunity’ at work. These collocative patterns are indicative 
of the signiﬁcance of textual ‘work’ in embedding questions of employment
and unemployment is radically different policy frames.
4 Genres of government
Democratic government depends upon achieving a sufﬁcient measure of 
consent for particular intended changes in social life. There are various ways
in which consent can be achieved. It can be achieved politically, through 
dialogue in which disagreement and dissent can be expressed. One of the 
criticisms of New Labour has been that it is intolerant of dissent, and that it
takes active measures to silence dissent within the Government and the
Labour Party as well as more widely.12 Although New Labour constantly 
initiates ‘great debates’ and calls for debate and discussion around its policy
initiatives (e.g., welfare reform), it seems in broad terms that it sets out to
achieve consent not through political dialogue but through managerial methods
of promotion and forms of consultation of public opinion (e.g., in focus groups)
which it can control. The Government tends to act like a corporation treating
(and ‘testing’) the public as its consumers, rather than as citizens.
The New Labour way of governing is in part a way of using language. One
issue is ways in which New Labour’s language of government is promotional
rather than dialogical. Let me take the process of reforming the welfare system
as an example, and note three ways in which language works promotionally
New Labour: a language perspective
385


within that process, and therefore in a way which discourages dialogue 
and debate (see also Paper 7, pages 167–201). Firstly, the overall process was
carefully stage-managed. For instance, the Green Paper (the Government’s
consultation document) on welfare reform was published in March 1998;13
its publication was preceded by a series of meetings around the country
addressed by the Prime Minister and a series of papers published by the
Department of Social Security making the case for welfare reform. These were
widely seen as preparing the ground. Each initiative was accompanied by a
press release. The management of the process was partly the management of
language – there was a constant process of summarising the proposed welfare
reform, selecting particular representations of it, particular wordings, which
would be most effective in achieving consent – what has been called media
‘spin’. The process is promotional, not dialogical, although it was referred to
as a ‘debate’.
Secondly, the Green Paper itself is univocal, monological. In the real world
of welfare, there are many voices, many opinions on what the problems are and
how they should be resolved. Yet a striking feature of the language of the Green
Paper is that there is very little reported speech – very few reports about what
various relevant people or groups have said or written on the issue of welfare
reform. Certain central ‘players’ in the real world of welfare are virtually and in
some cases totally absent from the document – the staff who ‘deliver’ welfare,
the professional experts who work within the welfare system or write about 
it, various claimant or campaigning organisations.
Thirdly, the Green Paper does not engage its readers in dialogue. Of
course, there are few direct readers of such ofﬁcial documents, but millions of
indirect readers (so to speak), people who hear or read reports about it in the
media. The document is organised with such indirect readers in mind – its
ﬁrst chapter is a Summary of the whole document which many journalists
would draw upon, and there is also a press release about the document, as well
as a foreword by the Prime Minister – more summaries. The focus throughout
is upon promoting the Government’s proposed solutions to what it takes to be
the problems of the welfare system. This is evident in certain features of the
language. Although there are in the nature of things a great many unanswered
questions in undertaking such a huge policy change, there are virtually no
questions in the Green Paper – readers are hardly ever asked, they are 
told. And although in the nature of things there is a great deal of uncertainty,
readers are told things as if they were certain – statements are predominantly
categorical assertions or denials; there are few which are modalised as 
possibilities or probabilities (with modal markers such as modal verbs or
adjuncts like ‘perhaps’). The following brief paragraph gives some idea of the
promotional ﬂavour of the document:
386
Political discourse


3.7 Our comprehensive welfare to work programme aims to break the
mould of the old, passive beneﬁt system. It is centred on the ﬁve aspects of
the New Deal for:
young unemployed people;
long-term unemployed people;
lone parents;
people with a disability or long-term illness; and
partners of the unemployed.
The Government speaks in the ﬁrst person plural (‘our’) rather than being
referred to in the third person; its programme is positively evaluated (it is
‘comprehensive’, it aims to ‘break the mould’) and the existing system 
negatively (‘old’, ‘passive’, and a ‘beneﬁt’ rather than ‘welfare’ system), and the
common promotional device of bullet points is used – a device which may be
‘reader-friendly’, but is by the same token reader-directive, and does not
encourage dialogue.
5 Blair’s political style
Tony Blair’s style has been immensely successful, though critiques have
intensiﬁed recently. Perhaps the clearest example before the NATO war against
Yugoslavia, and more recently the ‘War on Terrorism’, was his widely acclaimed
success in ‘capturing the popular mood’ after Princess Diana’s death in the
autumn of 1997. Here is the beginning of the short statement he made on that
occasion:
I feel like everyone else in the country today – utterly devastated. Our
thoughts and prayers are with Princess Diana’s family – in particular her two
sons, two boys – our hearts go out to them. We are today a nation, in Britain,
in a state of shock, in mourning, in grief that is so deeply painful for us.
Why were these words so effective in ‘striking a chord’ with many people?14
One important point is that it was not just his words but his overall bodily 
performance, the way he looked and acted as well as what he said. But the lan-
guage was an important factor. Notice in particular that it is a mixed language.
There are two threads running through it. Let me ‘extract’ one of them:
Our thoughts and prayers are with Princess Diana’s family, in particular her
two sons, our hearts go out to them. We are today a nation in mourning.
This is the conventional sort of language which leaders use to speak on
behalf of the nation on such occasions. Blair uses the ﬁrst person plural (‘we’),
and predictable pre-constructed expressions (clichés) – ‘thoughts and prayers’,
New Labour: a language perspective
387


‘our hearts go out to them’, ‘a nation in mourning’. But threaded into this 
conventional public language there is a more personal language (Blair begins
speaking for himself, in the ﬁrst person singular, and about his own feelings)
and a more vernacular language. It is as if Blair (and his advisers) had started
with the ofﬁcial form of words, then personalised and informalised it. He uses
a vernacular language of affect as well as a public one – ‘utterly devastated’, 
‘in a state of shock’. Notice also the way he rewords ‘her two sons’ as ‘two
boys’, which again is a shift between a more formal way of referring to them in
terms of their relationship to Diana and a more intimate, family way. Blair says
he feels ‘like everyone else’ – he is not only speaking formally for ‘the nation’,
he is also speaking informally for ordinary people; and part of the power of his
style is his ability to combine formality and informality, ceremony and feeling,
publicness and privateness.
A crucial part of the success of Blair’s style is his capacity to, as it were,
‘anchor’ the public politician in the ‘normal person’ – the necessary posturing
and evasions of politics are it seems at least partially redeemed by Blair’s
capacity to constantly reassert his normal, decent, likeable, personality. In 
his speeches and interviews, there is always a mix between the vernacular 
language of the normal person, and the public language of politics. The sort 
of ‘normal person’ that comes across is very much ‘middle class’ and ‘middle
England’ in values, outlook and style – Blair’s communicative style might be
said to have inculcated the discourse of the ‘Third Way’ in this respect, as also
in the way he has learnt how to be (i.e., talk as well as act) ‘tough’ (well evidenced
in the course of the ‘War on Terrorism’), which he was initially not very good
at, and how to assert moral authority in the way he speaks.
Blair’s leadership personality and style are not pre-given, they are carefully
constructed. For instance, according to Gould,15 New Labour learnt the 
political advantage it could gain from being and talking ‘tough’, and talking
about being ‘tough’, from his research on focus groups – Blair’s ‘toughness’
has been self-consciously built into his communicative style as a matter of 
policy and strategy. Blair’s apparent and claimed preference for acting on the
basis of his political ‘instincts’ is at odds with the careful calculation of effects
on ‘public opinion’ which goes into every move that he and New Labour
make.16Blair is according to his biographer Rentoul an accomplished showman,
an actor. Of course, the circumstances of contemporary politics are not of 
his making – all politicians have to act, to pretend, or to put it more harshly
(though not perhaps unfairly) to ‘live a lie’. Though one might argue that 
individual leaders can nevertheless respond to those circumstances in various
ways – by trying to be more accomplished at pretending than others, or by
doing what they can to change the circumstances.
388
Political discourse


I alluded above to the Kosovo war and the post-September 11 ‘war on 
terrorism’. Blair has become an international statesman, and wartime leader,
of some considerable stature, largely on the basis of his actions during these
international crises. His political style changed to a degree, though these
changes were already established at the time of the Kosovo war. The changes
are partly a matter of ‘body language’ – for instance I ﬁrst saw a new style of
photographic image of Blair in the German newspaper Die Zeit in early 1999
which makes him look much harder, more formidable and more forbidding
than hitherto. But it is also partly a matter of language. Here is a short extract
from a very inﬂuential speech on ‘the doctrine of the international community’
which Blair made in Chicago in April 1999:
This is a just war, based not on any territorial ambitions but on values. We
cannot let the evil of ethnic cleansing stand. We must not rest until it is
reversed. We have learned twice before in this century that appeasement
does not work. If we let an evil dictator range unchallenged, we will have to
spill inﬁnitely more blood and treasure to stop him later . . . Success is the
only exit strategy I am prepared to see.
The force of this language is based upon a combination of Blair’s claims to
moral authority (e.g., judgements of ‘evil’) and his toughness (notably in the
last sentence, where he implicitly claims a personal veto over what he ironic-
ally calls the ‘exit strategy’). He claims to speak for the whole alliance and
indeed the international community as a whole (the import of the ﬁrst per-
sonal plural pronoun), making categorical assertions (e.g., ‘this is a just war’),
using morally powerful strong deontic modalities (e.g., ‘we cannot let the evil
of ethnic cleansing stand’) and making explicit claims for the moral high
ground (the war is ‘just’, based on ‘values’), and drawing upon an archaic
political language in a Churchillian tradition (‘spill . . . blood and treasure’,
and indeed the moral–religious term ‘evil’).
Tony Blair may stand for New Labour in the popular imagination, but 
New Labour is, in fact, a rather disparate alliance of different political posi-
tions associated with different communicative styles (that of his deputy, 
John Prescott, for example). Another important issue is how distinctive New
Labour is, both from its predecessors in Britain and from similar political
positions in other countries. What similarities for instance are there between
Margaret Thatcher and Tony Blair, or Bill Clinton and Tony Blair? Is the Blair
rhetorical style a purely local and individual achievement, or is it part of a
wider cultural change? Is the new political style of Blair perhaps comparable
with the new management style represented for instance in Britain by the man
New Labour: a language perspective
389


who was reputedly Margaret Thatcher’s favourite businessman, Richard
Branson? Such issues can be approached in terms of what Alistair MacIntyre
has called the distinctive ‘characters’ of the new capitalism.17
6 Conclusion
The signiﬁcance of language, or discourse, in social life and social change has
been extensively documented in recent social research. For instance, Bourdieu
and Wacquant have written in recent years of the signiﬁcance of neo-liberal
discourse in what they see as the neo-liberal political project for removing
obstacles to economic ‘globalisation’.18 Yet social researchers have lacked
both the theoretical elaboration of discourse as an element of the social, 
dialectically interconnected with others, and the methodological resources to
produce analyses of discourse which go much beyond mere lists of vocabulary
items. Critical discourse analysis aims to ﬁll these gaps, and create a bridge
and a dialogue between language studies and social science.
Notes
1. See Fairclough (2000b) for a more extended treatment.
2. On New Labour, see Brown (1994), Barratt and Coates (1996), Rentoul
(1997), Blair (1998a), Driver and Martell (1998), Giddens (1998), Gould
(1998), Hall (1998), Levitas (1998), Marquand (1998), Jones (1999),
Fairclough (2001a).
3. Fairclough (1992a, 1995, 2000a, 2001c), Chouliaraki and Fairclough
(1999), Fairclough and Wodak (1997), Chiapello and Fairclough (2002).
4. Dialectical thinking has a long tradition which goes back to the Greeks and
includes major ﬁgures such as Leibniz and Hegel, as well as Marx. In focusing
upon dialectics, I am making the ontological assumption the processes, 
relations and ﬂows have primacy over entities and things (see further, Harvey
(1996)). I certainly do not have in mind the sterile, rigid and mechanical 
version of ‘dialectical materialism’ which became the ofﬁcial credo in, for
instance, Romania during the Ceausescu regime.
5. Harvey (1996), Fairclough (2001c).
6. See, for instance, Chiapello and Fairclough (2002), Preoteasa (2002),
Fairclough, Jessop and Sayer (2004).
7. Fairclough (2000b), Platt (1998).
8. Blair (1998c).
9. Blair (1998c).
10. Hall (1998), Marquand (1998).
11. Fairclough (2000b).
12. Barnett (1998), Hall (1998).
390
Political discourse


13. Department of Social Security (1998).
14. See Montgomery (1999) for a fuller analysis of this speech. Montgomery 
discusses how Blair’s hesitancy and pausing in delivery may contribute to the
impression that he is sincere.
15. Gould (1998).
16. Rentoul (1997).
17. MacIntyre (1985), Boltanski and Chiapello (1999), Chiapello and
Fairclough (2002).
18. Bourdieu and Wacquant (2001).
New Labour: a language perspective
391


15. Democracy and the public sphere in
critical research on discourse1
I
n a recent study of the discourse of focus groups, Myers (1998) notes that
they can be seen as experiments in constituting a public forum, which have
the characteristic of constituting people as individuals bearing opinions. It 
is the objective of focus groups to elicit the fullest possible range of these 
opinions. An opinion is construed as an attribute of a person, like age, gender
or region origin. The practical interest in using focus groups may be social
research, but increasingly it is economic (as in market research) or political 
(as in the use of focus groups by parties to test their policies against public
opinion – by New Labour in Britain for instance).
Myers suggests that if you analyse what actually goes on in focus groups 
it is difﬁcult to sustain the idea of opinions as pre-existing attributes of 
individuals ready to be elicited by social scientiﬁc methods. For despite the
fact that the people involved are usually strangers to each other, and despite
the control exercised over the interaction by the ‘moderator’, things emerge 
in the course of and through the dialogical interaction of the participants, 
and these things arguably include opinions (as well as topics, identities, 
and so forth). It seems generally more plausible to see opinions as ‘things’ 
that are communicatively and collectively developed in interaction, rather
than pre-existing attributes of individuals which are simply expressed in 
interaction.
How are we to interpret these experiments in public forums for the elicita-
tion of pre-given opinions? I want to focus on their use within politics, and ask
how it is related to the question – and the crisis – of the public sphere. That
question can be summed up as follows: is it possible to overcome the formid-
able structural obstacles (such as the structural relations between mass media
and other ﬁelds) in contemporary societies to people deliberating together as


citizens on matters of common concern, in ways which shape the formation of
policy and the directions societies take? Is it possible, that is, to reconstruct
the public sphere under contemporary social conditions? For it cannot be a
matter of reviving past forms of the public sphere (Athenian or early capitalist)
whose structural conditions of possibility have gone.
I’ll come back to the example of focus groups shortly in a circuitous way via
two further questions about the public sphere: why should it be (as I believe it
should) at the centre of critical social research on politics? And what speciﬁc
contribution has CDA to make to that research?
I take it that critical social research has, as Habermas put it in his earlier
work, a ‘knowledge interest’ in emancipation which is in contrast with the
instrumental and technical knowledge interest of much social research –
though that critical knowledge interest needs to be construed in a broad way
to include the new politics of recognition as well as the old politics of emancipa-
tion (Fraser 1995). The objective is to deepen understanding of the obstacles
to emancipation as well as discerning possibilities in the unrealised potential
of the present. The agenda for critical research has to be ongoingly redeﬁned
as social life changes and presents people with new possibilities and constraints.
I take it that critical social research at present needs to focus on the new global
form of capitalism and its ideology of neo-liberalism. One formulation comes
recently from Bourdieu in a series of politically engaged writings (1998a,
1998b) in which he argues that although the new economic regime projected
in neo-liberal discourse is pervasively construed as immovable fact-of-life, it is
rather a rational utopia for ﬁnance capital which the latter is trying to impose
upon reality and make real. Obstacles to realisation – especially collective
institutions with the capacity to resist, notably nation states but also, for
instance, trade unions – are relentlessly dismantled or disabled. In the process
the existing structures and forms of democracy are being destroyed and not
being effectively replaced – for instance, national parliaments and parties are
losing power and legitimacy without effective supranational replacements,
e.g., within the EU. Touraine puts the problem in terms of a pincer movement
on the political space: ‘squeezed between a globalised economy and aggres-
sively introverted cultures that proclaim an absolute multiculturalism implying
a rejection of the other, the political space is fragmenting and democracy is
being debased’ (Touraine 1997: 2).
There are two provisos here. First, one can be alive to the deep ﬂaws of 
contemporary democracy yet still regard the current dangers it faces with 
dismay – it is not a question of idealising it. Second, nation states still have con-
siderable power if they can be persuaded to use it in concert – it has been after 
all reversible decisions by nation states on deregulating currency markets,
Democracy and the public sphere in critical research on discourse
393


GATT, and most recently the Multilateral Agreement on Investment, that
have largely shaped global capitalism.
Recent literature on the troubles of democracy (e.g., Benhabib 1996,
Touraine 1997) has linked the debasement of democracy to the debasement of
the public sphere, and seen the reconstruction of democracy as hinging upon
the reconstruction of the public sphere. This link is not simply contemporary:
it has been widely aired in the wake of Habermas’s analysis of the rise and 
fall of the bourgeois public sphere (Habermas 1989/1962). So there are good
reasons for locating the question of democracy and within that the question of
the public sphere at the centre for critical social research on politics. What
then is the speciﬁc contribution CDA can make to this research? The founda-
tional work of Arendt and Habermas has made it clear that the question of the
public sphere is centrally – though as I shall argue shortly, not exclusively – the
question of what discursive practices, what forms of dialogue, are available for
civic deliberation. What CDA can contribute is a linguistically and semiotic-
ally sophisticated but still socially framed understanding of the properties of 
practices of public dialogue. This can help in evaluating existing practices and
discerning potential alternatives from the perspective of the public sphere.
There are three broad contributions CDA can make: (a) describing the
dynamic structuring of social orders of discourse in ways which locate diverse
discursive practices of the public sphere in relation to other discursive practices
and to each other, and the tendencies of insulation and ﬂow affecting those
locations; (b) analysing particular discursive practices (actions) conjuncturally
in terms of their selective interdiscursive articulation of practices (permanencies)
from across social orders of discourse; (c) providing a framework for ‘internal’
analysis of any particular discursive practice which highlights properties 
germane to their functioning within the public sphere. I should add that just as
democracy and the public sphere are at the centre of critical social research on
politics, so also they should in my view be at the centre of critical analysis of
political discourse.
CDA is always by implication a critique of certain discursive practices in
favour of alternative practices – though the alternatives are usually left implicit.
In this case, an explicit identiﬁcation of properties which make for effective
public sphere dialogue is called for. Where do we get these from? For present
purposes, I am going to short-circuit the process and draw upon Hannah
Arendt’s account of the public sphere – I will explain that choice shortly. 
But I also want to suggest a more satisfactory process which goes to the heart
of what CDA is about. I see CDA as a theoretical practice which produces 
theoretically based accounts of a range of other social practices with a focus on
discourse, in a way that is informed by emancipatory struggles within those
394
Political discourse


practices, and oriented to generating resources for those struggles whose uptake
depends upon the practical politics of those practices. CDA neither invents
problems nor produces solutions. In the particular case of the public sphere,
both a critique of what is and a sense of what is needed are produced within the
practical political struggles of the social practices CDA theorises; that is where
we should ultimately look for a sense of what properties dialogue needs in
order to work within the public sphere.
Let me return brieﬂy to focus groups before discussing Arendt. I just 
want to make two comments. First, political uses of focus groups might be
seen as attempts to stimulate and simulate public sphere dialogue which are
apparently in some cases at least also attempts to legitimise parts of the political
system at a point where its legitimacy is seriously compromised. Is this a move
to systemically colonise the public sphere? Secondly, however, Myers’s analysis
suggests as we have seen that despite this participants in focus groups are 
dialogically productive of topics, knowledges and opinions, evoking Arendt’s
observation that public spheres can be constituted in the most unpromising of
circumstances, ‘wherever men (sic) are together in the manner of speech and
action’ (Arendt 1958), even in this case perhaps where the action they are
jointly embarked upon is cooperatively producing ‘opinions’ for mediators.
My reason for drawing more on Arendt than Habermas is that although
Arendt’s political theory has major weaknesses which Habermas himself
among others has pointed to (Habermas 1977, d’Entreves 1994), it is also
suggestive of ways of overcoming some of the problems which have been
identiﬁed in Habermas’s work on the public sphere by feminists and others
(Benhabib 1992, 1996, Calhoun 1992, Meehan 1995). The following is a
summary in point form of questions which have come out of recent debates 
on the public sphere which are by implication critical of Habermas’s founda-
tional work on the bourgeois public sphere.
1. Are there not many public spheres rather than one? But if so, how is 
dialogue achieved between them?
2. Isn’t the line between public and private (as witnessed by the emergence
within public spheres of ‘private’ issues such as sexuality) inherently 
problematic?
3. Are public spheres just for reaching consensus? Are they not in culturally
diverse contemporary societies also about constituting and negotiating
identities, winning recognition, etc.?
4. Is not democratic dialogue a pervasive need in contemporary societies, for
instance in work and personal relationships as well as politics (Giddens
1994)?
Democracy and the public sphere in critical research on discourse
395


5. Don’t we need pubic spheres at various levels of social organisation,
including now international and even global public spheres? How could
they work?
6. Is the public sphere just a matter of talk or also a matter of action, people
acting together to change the world?
I shall proceed as follows. First, I summarise Arendt’s account of the 
public sphere drawing on d’Entreves (1994). Second, drawing on Arendt,
Habermas, past work in CDA, and Bernstein’s work on pedagogic discourse
(1990, 1996), I shall sketch out a framework for critical discourse analysis of
public sphere discourse. Third, I shall brieﬂy illustrate it with an example.
Fourth, I shall argue equally brieﬂy that discourse analytical research on
European identity should focus upon the emergence of a European public
sphere, and obstacles to that process.
1 Arendt on the public sphere
Arendt contrasts action with labour and work: ‘Labour is judged by its ability
to sustain human life, work is judged by its ability to build and maintain a
world ﬁt for human use and for human enjoyment, and action is judged by its
ability to disclose the identity of the agent, to afﬁrm the reality of the world, to
actualize our capacity for freedom and to endow our existence with meaning.’
(D’Entreves 1994: 65–66). D’Entreves’s summary of how these different
activities are evaluated suggests the primacy given to action by Arendt. Action
has two essential features: it instantiates freedom, in the sense of the capacity
to do the unexpected, to create; and it presupposes plurality – it inherently
involves other people, and, moreover, instantiates a dialectic between what
they have in common and what makes each individual unique. Action inher-
ently goes with speech – it involves in another terminology a reﬂexive loop
through which discursive constructions of action are part of action. Action 
is based upon consent between participants, and speech ﬁgures within it as
persuasion. Action is the locus of power, which Arendt understands as the
capacity of people to act in concert for public–political purposes, and which
depends upon the synthesis of action with speech already alluded to. This 
‘living power of the people’ is the source of legitimacy for public institutions –
without it they petrify and decay. In action/speech, people ‘disclose’ them-
selves, ‘reveal actively their unique personal identities and thus make their
appearance in the human world’, not in the sense of showing what is already
there but in the sense of only becoming who one is through action with others.
The stories that people tell about action retrospectively determines meanings
396
Political discourse


and identities, as well ensuring the remembrance of action and so its capacity
to be a resource for the future. Action is unpredictable in its outcomes, and
this applies with respect to the individual and collective identities that are 
disclosed in action. It is only through action that people develop the judge-
ment, the capacity to see things ‘not from one’s own point of view but in the
perspective of all those who happen to be present’, which converts mere 
opinions into public discourses.
The public sphere is deﬁned by on the one hand being based in a shared
world, ‘a world in common’, and on the other hand by the emergence of
‘spaces of appearance’ understood as both shared spaces and shared practices
‘wherever men are together in the manner of speech and action’. Modernity
has undermined the ‘world in common’ through its one-sided emphasis on
labour and economic production, so we are now faced with the task of trying
to reconstruct the public sphere. Spaces of appearance are contingent, often
short-lived, and can emerge in the most unlikely places and circumstances.
Political action in the public sphere is based in a logic of identity – it crucially
involves not negotiation between pre-given identities but the ongoing con-
struction of a ‘we’, a collective identity.
Let me very brieﬂy identify some virtues of this account of the public sphere
in the light of recent debates. First, it ﬁrmly links speech to action and to
power. Second, it focuses on the emergence of collective and individual 
identities. Third, in its view of plurality it suggests a dialectic of universal 
and particular, collective and individual identities. There are also as I have
indicated a number of problems. There is, as D’Entreves puts it, an unre-
solved duality between two theories of action in Arendt’s political theory, 
an expressive theory in which the emphasis is on the disclosure of individual
identities, and a communicative theory where the emphasis is upon the 
collective nature of action; and this duality carries over into Arendt’s view 
of the public sphere (as a dramatic setting for outstanding individuals, or as a
discursive space) and citizenship (as heroic, or participatory). The expressive
tendency in the theory has led to charges of elitism. And Habermas (1977) has
argued that Arendt’s Aristotelian separation of action from labour and work
leads to the political being exclusively seen as praxis, action in the public
sphere, losing sight of the strategic, structural dimensions of politics and its
links to the economic and the social.
2 Framework for CDA of the public sphere
Drawing on Arendt and other sources I mentioned earlier, I propose in sum-
mary form ﬁve analytical focuses, the ﬁrst four of which constitute the basis for
Democracy and the public sphere in critical research on discourse
397


evaluating particular discursive practices as public sphere dialogue. The ﬁfth
locates public sphere discursive practices within social orders of discourse.
1. A discursive practice as a regulative practice.
2. A discursive practice as a space of emergence.
3. A discursive practice as a principle of recontextualisation.
4. A discursive practice as a constituent of action.
5. Public sphere discursive practices within social orders of discourse.
2.1 A discursive practice as a regulative practice
The ﬁrst focus links to the concern in Habermas’s work on the public sphere
with the procedural properties of public sphere communication. The concern
is to specify the regulative properties of a discursive practice in the sense 
of how contributions are controlled. I use here Bernstein’s concepts of
classiﬁcation and framing (1990, 1996). Classiﬁcation is a matter of which
categories (which discourses, subjects, voices) are included in a practice, 
and of whether they are strongly or weakly insulated from each other – whether
the classiﬁcation is strong or weak. Framing is a matter of how interaction is
managed – if it is jointly managed then framing is weak, if it is asymmetrically
managed then framing is strong. Effective public space dialogue entails a 
regulative practice which is maximally open to diverse discourses and sub-
jects, where insulations between these categories are weak, and where there 
is jointly managed control of interaction, i.e., weak framing. The sociological
categories of classiﬁcation and framing translate into the discourse analytical
categories of genre, discourse and voice (or style) – what I mean by that is 
that working in a transdisciplinary way (Halliday 1993, Fairclough 1997) as
opposed to a merely interdisciplinary way means that the logic of one theory
can be put to work within (the logic of ) another without the one being reduced
to the other. It means for instance that discourse analytical conceptions of
genre are enriched by thinking genre in terms of Bernstein’s categories, as
Chouliaraki has shown (1998).
2.2 A discursive practice as a space of emergence
Looking at discursive practices as regulative practices is a familiar exercise in
CDA, looking at them as spaces of emergence is perhaps less so. Working from
Arendt’s concept of disclosure, the point is to assess to what degree individual
and collective identities, social relations, and knowledges are collectively 
constituted in dialogue. Public space dialogue has this property of joint 
398
Political discourse


production, emergence. Referring speciﬁcally to identities, Touraine (1997)
like Arendt suggests a dialectic of individual and collective identities, but 
with a further differentiation of universal and particular moments of collective
identity. The suggestion is that in effective public sphere dialogue there is a
process of becoming in which people’s individual identities, their collective
identities as members of particular and diverse groups, and their universal
identities-in-common as citizens and human beings are collectively consti-
tuted simultaneously through a complex weaving together of different facets 
of the self.
2.3 A discursive practice as a principle of recontextualisation
The concepts of recontextualisation and recontextualising principle are also
taken from Bernstein (1990, 1996). Particular discursive practices assimilate
other discursive practices in ways which are speciﬁc to them – they have their
own distinctive principles of recontextualisation. Recontextualised practices
are always transformed, but the particular ways they are transformed depend
upon the speciﬁc logic, the recontextualising principle, of the recontextualising
practice. Bernstein suggests that in being recontextualised, discursive practices
are cut off from their embeddedness in action and transformed into discourses
which are articulated together in new ways according to the logic of the recon-
textualising practice; and transformed from real to imaginary, and brought
into the space of ideology.
I am introducing the concept of recontextualisation here as a way of
addressing the question I brieﬂy raised earlier about the implications of
accepting that there are many public spaces: how then are diverse public
spheres brought in relation with each other? I want to suggest that certain 
public sphere discursive practices recontextualise others. The point is of 
particular relevance in relation to what Habermas has referred to as the
‘abstract’, mediated public spheres of especially television, which extensively
recontextualise others. The issue here is one of the ‘terms of exchange’ when
different public spheres are brought together: the concept of recontextualisa-
tion draws attention to the transformations, reductions, and ideological
appropriations public spaces may undergo – for instance, to the price social
movements may have to pay for the privileges of accessing the virtual public
spheres of television. Actually there is a complementarity between the concept
of recontextualisation and the concept of ‘colonisation’, associated with
Habermas (1984): the former focuses on the bringing of external practices
into the space of the recontextualising practice, the latter on the incursion 
into a particular practice of external practices. As against both, the focus on
Democracy and the public sphere in critical research on discourse
399


effective public sphere discourse seeks to specify how different discursive
practices might be dialogically hybridised to form a new practice which is
reductive of neither.
2.4 A discursive practice as a constituent of action
Arendt says that ‘power is actualised only where word and deed have not
parted company, where words are not empty and deeds not brutal’. The danger
of empty words is a real one in respect of the public sphere. Effective public
sphere discourse is a constituent of action and tied into power in Arendt’s
sense, but much dialogue-in-public seems more like ‘mere words’. We need a
theoretical and analytical apparatus here such as the one proposed by Harvey
in his discussion of the ‘dialectics of discourse’ (1996 – see also Hennessy
1993): discourse is one moment in the social process, others are material 
practices, power, social relations, institutions/rituals, and beliefs/desires/
values; these moments are in a dialectic; discourse internalises all the other
moments, so it is possible and fruitful to analyse discourse as power, as insti-
tution, as material practice etc.; and all other moments internalise discourse;
but no moment is reducible to any other. This framework can be combined
with the concept of articulation (Laclau and Mouffe 1985). Analysis of any
social practice involves showing the practice of articulation which structures
it: how discourse is articulated with non-discursive moments; how each of
these moments is articulated from relative permanencies which constitute
resources for action (in the case of discourse: genres, discourses, voice or
style); how different social agents with different resources are conjuncturally
articulated together within a particular social activity. A public sphere is not
just discourse, it is an articulation of diverse moments within which discourse
constitutes an effective constituent of action.
2.5 Public sphere discursive practices within social orders of
discourse
Current thinking stresses the diversity of public spheres along various dimen-
sions. Habermas, for instance, in a recent book (Habermas 1996) differentiates
between episodic (e.g., transitory conversations in bars), occasional (e.g.,
public meetings) and abstract (i.e., mediated, virtual, where people are not
physically co-present) public spheres; and as I suggested earlier we need to
conceive of global or international as well as national and more local public
spheres. A contribution CDA can make is not only in tracing the diversity of
forms of public sphere but also in specifying how these practices are located
400
Political discourse


within orders of discourse in relation to other discursive practices – for
instance, how public sphere discursive practices are dispersed within the
complex network of diverse discursive practices in television, not only in terms 
of for instance questions of sequencing and scheduling, but also in terms of
embedding relations (e.g., the incidence of public sphere discursive practices
within soaps), and in terms of the representations of diverse public spheres
both within and outside television in different television genres (e.g., news
programmes, comedy programmes). CDA can also specify intertextual chain 
relations which connect public sphere discursive practices with for instance
discursive practices within the political system – what systematic relations of
transformation ‘carry’ public space discourse into other discursive practices.
This is one factor in the embedding of discourse within action, and it also 
connects to the concept of recontextualisation. CDA is not concerned with
producing static representations of structural relations – there is an orientation
towards the dynamism of orders of discourse, to ﬂows between different 
public sphere discursive practices, but also to shifting relations between public
sphere discourse and other discursive practices (bearing in mind for instance
Giddens contention (1994) that ‘dialogical democracy’ now transcends 
divisions between political, economic and intimate spheres). Finally, there 
is a concern throughout with reﬂexivity – with how representations of the 
discursive practices of the public sphere are reﬂexively assimilated into and
transform these practices.
3 Example: monarchy – the nation decides
A number of changes in the mode of operation of the British monarchy were
announced in March 1998. According to a Times report:
The Palace has long accepted the need for a change of style; but there are
three main factors behind the present ﬂurry of activity. The ﬁrst is a Blair
Government intent on creating a ‘people’s monarchy’; the second is the
wave of public dissatisfaction at the present monarchical style after the
death of Diana, Princess of Wales; and the third is a series of ‘focus group’
discussions held with members of the public by MORI, which showed 
that the monarchy was widely held to be too distant and to have too many
unnecessary trappings. (The Times, 9 March 98)
We might gloss the three factors referred to here as: government policy, action
in the public sphere, and opinions elicited in a simulated public sphere (focus
groups). The death of Diana appears to have been marked by the conjunctural
Democracy and the public sphere in critical research on discourse
401


emergence of an abstract public sphere in Habermas’s sense (as well as
episodic and occasional public spheres). Its scale and dispersion make it
difﬁcult to discern in detail, but there was an articulation of speech and action
which has had material effects.
My example (an extract from which is transcribed in the Appendix, 
pages 407–11) stands somewhat outside that, but it does make the point that
the remarkable reaction to the death of Diana did not come out of nowhere. It
is a much-publicised two-hour long TV ‘debate’ on the future of the monarchy
which was simultaneously a ‘referendum’ by telephone on the question 
‘Do you want a monarchy?’ (‘debate’ and ‘referendum’ are the producers’ 
self-descriptions). It was unprecedented in publicly raising this question, but
also experimental in format (‘the biggest live debate ever staged on television’,
according to the journalist who anchored the programme), and there are sug-
gestions that it was seen as a straw-in-the-wind for some form of ‘electronic
democracy’ which would raise again the question of simulation of the public
sphere. There were sharp criticisms of the format from participants during the
course of it (‘this is not debate, it is licensed cock-ﬁghting’) and subsequently
in the media.
The format is based upon rapid and carefully scheduled and timed shifts
between the following elements:
Openings and closings from the ‘anchor’ in the studio
Filmed reports by ‘columnists’
Studio panel of ‘experts’ etc. ‘crossing swords’
Studio reporter: results of a public opinion poll about the monarchy
Polls of opinions of studio audience (presented by ‘anchor’)
Reporter soliciting studio audience members’ opinions
Commercial breaks.
The introduction to the programme (Extract 1 in the Appendix, page 407)
depicts it in terms of the audience casting their votes after rationally weighing
up the evidence and opinions and arguments provided in the programme – in
fact, the rational sequence of deliberation then action was practically impossible
given that all votes had to be cast before the programme ended, and the lines
were jammed from the moment it started. There is also an implication (‘we’ll
be assessing the outcome and asking what the royals should do next’) that the
referendum is a part of a process of constitutional change, and may thus have
material effects. Thus the programme seems to claim to be constituting a public
sphere drawing citizens into speech and action. How do its claims stand up to
scrutiny – and how, in particular, does it rate as public sphere discourse in
402
Political discourse


terms of the framework I have suggested? I shall just brieﬂy comment on the
ﬁrst four analytical focuses within the framework.
3.1 Regulative practice
The programme is broadly characterised by weak classiﬁcation and strong
framing – notably in the panel of experts (Extract 2) and the soliciting of 
audience opinions (Extract 3). The classiﬁcation is weak in the sense that a
wide range of discourses, subjects and voices are assembled, and insulations
between them are generally weak – so, for instance, the audience includes
many celebrities who might equally have been on the panel, and the panel
includes columnists who produce ﬁlmed reports; on another level, Roger Cook
who chairs the panel shifts between chairing a debate, conducting interviews,
cross-questioning a witness, and aggressively challenging an antagonist in
argument – and this articulation of diverse positions entails an interdiscursively
hybrid discourse. Carpignano et al.(1990) seem to have weak classiﬁcation in
mind in their upbeat assessment of the democratic potential of the television
chat show:
More than any other television genres the new talk shows exemplify the
transformation of these relationships (i.e., between performance and audi-
ence) which radically shifts the framework within which the apparatuses of
mass communication and popular culture operate. They call into question
the very structure of the separation between production and consumption
of cultural products, they problematize the distinction between expert and
audience, professional authority and layperson. Ultimately they constitute
a ‘contested space’ in which new discursive practices are developed in con-
trast to the traditional modes of political and ideological representation.
But what their analysis overlooks is that weak classiﬁcation in such shows 
is generally accompanied by strong framing (though there are cases where 
framing is weakened), which means that the dynamics of the interaction are
not under the joint control of its participants. Where this is the case, claims
about democratisation have to be treated with caution. In this case, the strong
framing is linked to the elaborate format and the time pressure this generates,
which is in turn linked to the pressure to make the programme work aesthet-
ically as an entertainment in the context of a competitive market – journalists
often refer to the pressure on time and are constantly trying to curtail con-
tributions and move on.2 But another aspect of framing is control of topic: in
neither the panel nor the elicitation of audience views are contributors allowed
to decide for themselves what aspects of the topic of debate to address; they are
Democracy and the public sphere in critical research on discourse
403


asked by the journalists to address speciﬁc topics.3In the elicitation of audience
views, this means that contributions are disconnected – there is virtually no
dialogical connection between them. We are back to eliciting pre-given opinions
– the programme indeed celebrates the rich variety of opinions assembled,
and actually construes this disconnected airing of opinions as ‘debate’. But
debate only takes place – in the panel – in so far as participants ignore the 
control of contributions built into its exchange system.4 This illustrates again
that people do manage to come into dialogue even in the most unfavourable of
circumstances. But Roger Cook does let this happen to an extent – the break-
ing of the rules of exchange makes for a good televisual spectacle.
3.2 Space of emergence
Emergence requires dialogue, and since the strong framing of this programme
inhibits dialogue there is little by way of emergence. Take the emergence of
collective identities. There is no space for the emergence of a ‘we’ in the discon-
nectingelicitation of audience opinions. There is, one might say, the emergence
of a ‘we’ in the studio audience through their collective reactions to contribu-
tions (applause, shouting, jeering etc.), sometimes a matter of taking collective
reactive action through the limited options available to show their frustration
with the programme. But this is tenuous and marginal. This is not otherwise a
space in which people acting and talking together can collectively constitute
identities, relations or knowledges. In that sense it is not a public space.
Principle of recontextualisation
I want to focus here on one contribution in the elicitation of audience views 
in Extract 3, including the journalist’s elicitation and response.
John Stapleton: OK . gentleman over here gentleman over here in our
Manchester camp you said e: no these scandals haven’t damaged the 
country’s reputation why do you take that view
Audience 2: for the simple reason (unclear) for centuries the ordinary 
working class out there couldn’t care less what royalty do they’ve got more
to think about trying to make ends meet ﬁnd a job than worry about what the
royal family’s doing
John Stapleton: OK let me let me introduce you all to someone who I 
suspect we could describe as Britain’s most ardent royal family
The audience member here (‘Audience 2’) is a working-class man from
Manchester. I want to focus on his contribution because of its apparent 
404
Political discourse


incoherence – it’s not obvious how it coherently connects with the discourse it
is embedded within, or how it coherently answers the question the journalist
puts to him. The point is that to see it as a coherent contribution requires some
understanding of a practice which this fragment is recontextualised out of and
uprooted from – a local working-class practice of public sphere discourse
whose spaces are localities of face-to-face, small group interaction (pubs, 
trade union meetings etc.) which is not easily, or comfortably, recontextualised
within an abstract televisual public sphere. Expressions which can appear to
be merely empty clichés if we see this only as an individual audience member’s
contribution to this programme (couldn’t care less, more to think about, trying
to make ends meet) appear rather as condensations of a particular life experience
from the perspective of the public sphere they originate from. I would suggest
that one aspect of the recontextualising principle of television is that it gener-
ally selects for recontextualisation those practices which are relatively easy to
assimilate into its own, which, of course, is also a principle of exclusion.
One rarely comes across recontextualisation of this sort of public sphere
discourse in serious political television. It is also evident from this example
how recontextualisation works ideologically: this fragment slides easily onto
an old media stereotype of the northern working man – quaint, colourful, but
not making much sense. A general observation on this programme – and this
is an aspect of its strong framing – is that it ruthlessly converts practices into
discourses which it assembles according to its own logic and purpose (including
the eliciting of opinions). There is no space for the coming together of different
public spaces and practices of public space discourse in a mutually exploratory,
dialogical way.
Discourse as a constituent of action
We might wonder in what sense there is action at issue here, in that this is not
a matter of people coming together ‘in the manner of speech and action’, but
being brought together within an ostensibly political event which is, of course,
also an entertainment and in a broad sense an aesthetic event. But as I have
indicated, people can produce action in the most unpromising of circumstances,
though this happens here only in marginal ways I have referred to above.
This programme does not rate very highly as public sphere discourse. But
it does raise the question of what the object of research should be here – where
one should look to ﬁnd the abstract public sphere Habermas refers to. In so far
as there are public spheres associated with the broadcast media, should we 
not be looking for them not just within television or radio programmes but
also within the practices those programmes enter into? How do people use
Democracy and the public sphere in critical research on discourse
405


television programmes like this? What do they do with them? Modern 
societies are increasingly mediated societies, and if we think of that in dis-
coursal terms it means that people live their lives in what Dorothy Smith has
called ‘textually-mediated’ ways (Smith 1990). This would imply that in 
constituting public spheres people bring to the conjunctural assembly of 
persons and resources a range of mediated including televised practices which
they in turn recontextualise as discourses. This points to a complex dialectic
of colonisation and appropriation which ties together abstract public spheres
and more local (episodic, occasional) public spheres: the latter are resources
for mediation, but they also appropriate mediated practices as resources for
their own.
4 Conclusion
I shall conclude by linking the question of public space and the public sphere
to the question of European identity, with reference to some observations 
of Bourdieu (1998a) which contrast the project of a neo-liberal Europe, a
banker’s Europe, with a ‘really European’ Europe in terms which connect
with the question of public space:
Resistance to the banker’s Europe . . . can only be European. And it can only
be really European, in the sense of freed from interests, assumptions, pre-
judices and habits of thought that are national and still vaguely nationalistic, if
it is the deed of all Europeans, in other words a concerted combination of
intellectuals from all the European countries, of trade unions from all the
European countries, and of the most diverse associations from all the
European countries. That is why the most urgent task at the moment is not
the composition of common European programmes, but the creation of
institutions – parliaments, international federations, European associations
of this or that: truckers, publishers, teachers, and so forth, but also defenders
of trees, ﬁsh, mushrooms, pure air, children and all the rest – within which
some common European programmes can be discussed and elaborated.
Although he does not use the term, the task Bourdieu is prioritising here is 
the creation of European public spheres. From this point of view, the Euro-
pean identities essential to a ‘really European Europe’ can only emerge from
the large-scale involvement of people from the European countries in public
spheres on a European scale, perhaps ultimately at a higher level a unitary
European public sphere (as an articulation of particular public spheres). It is
upon this process and the obstacles to it that a critical discursively oriented
analysis European identity should perhaps centre.
406
Political discourse


APPENDIX
The following sample from the TV programme Monarchy – the Nation Decides
includes the opening of the programme by the ‘anchor’ Trevor McDonald
(Extract 1), extracts from the studio panel of ‘experts’ chaired by Roger 
Cook (Extract 2), and a reporter, John Stapleton, soliciting audience opinions
(Extract 3).
Extract 1
Trevor McDonald: welcome to Monarchy – the Nation Decides – good evening .
there’s only one thing the country’s been talking about and that’s this pro-
gramme and your role . in the future of the monarchy . it’s been headline news
for the past week . and that shows the importance of your vote . at home .
tonight we’re inviting you to take part in a unique royal referendum . these two
telephone numbers will stay on screen throughout the programme . as we 
ask . do you want a monarchy . we’ll be examining the costs, the beneﬁts, the
scandals and analysing the most comprehesive opinion poll ever undertaken .
on the royal family – gathered here tonight hand-picked is the biggest studio
audience ever assembled . they too will be canvassed for their views in a series
of instant polls . and to help you decide we have exclusive reports from 
some of the country’s top columnists . like the Mirror’s royal-watcher James
Whittaker Andrew Neale former editor of the Sunday Times and the king of
gossip columnists Nigel Dempster of the Daily Mail . . .
that then is the challenge for the next ninety minutes and after News at Ten
which I won’t be doing tonight we’ll be assessing the outcome and asking what
the royals should do next now though we ask how deep is the crisis facing the
House of Windsor our ﬁrst report comes from a royal correspondent for three
decades the Mirror’s James Whittaker
Extract 2
Roger Cook: Stephen Haseler as chairman of the Republican Movement e 
do you as James Whittaker suggests e: are you about to lead the storming the
ramparts
Stephen Haseler: no we’re not going to storm anything but we – we’re increas-
ingly em attracting more and more people to our cause and republicanism is
now on the agenda of British politics really for the ﬁrst time since the nine-
teenth century this <audience: ‘rubbish’> show is an is an example of that and
Democracy and the public sphere in critical research on discourse
407


republicanism can only grow but contrary to James Whittaker who has spent
most of his life prying into the royals poking around them and now wants to
defend them contrary to him I don’t think that the issue is simply the scandals
of the royal family e: there have been enough of those we have an insensitive
Prince and so on that’s not the real issue the real issue I think is that the British
public are increasingly wanting to choose their next head of state (unclear)
Roger Cook: that they may well do and that they may get a chance to indicate
this evening – Frederick Forsyth is the monarchy . in terminal decline
Frederick Forsyth: no I don’t think it is e:m it’s going through an extremely
troubled period that actually has happened oh twenty thirty forty ﬁfty times .
in the course of em the the monarchic history of this country which goes back
nearly a thousand years e: it’s been troubled e:m these past few years but I
think that one has to get one thing quite certain if we are talking about . the
royal family OK I don’t know what we are talking about on this programme by
the way but I’d like you to adjudicate are we talking about the royal family
because if we are OK . there are thirty ﬁve members of them all descended from
three dukes
Roger Cook:
we’re talking about the monarchy
Frederick Forsyth: right or are we talking about the monarchy if we’re 
talking about the monarchy and the monarch then let’s do that let’s talk 
about a magniﬁcent Queen who has been forty four years a monarch and 
put no foot wrong . you sir are not British . you are not (unclear) Mr Haseler .
(SH: this country) because every family every family with thirty ﬁve members
in it in this country has got a couple . (SH: th-) that they really would prefer not
to have
Stephen Haseler: this country is not no no
Roger Cook:
the Queen the Queen can’t reign for ever we
have to look forward . and that’s where that’s where the problems lie surely
Frederick Forsyth:
no no no let’s be let’s
be realistic the Queen
SH:
we
we’re facing Frederick we’re facing Charles the Third the real
reason
RC: hold on hold on
FF:
you’re not facing (unclear)
you’re not facing
anything
SH: the real reason why this programme’s on and why republicanism is 
growing is because we’re facing the prospect of Charles the Third now I admit
when the Queen
FF:
when when
SH: I’ll tell you I’ll tell you when the Queen when the Queen when the Queen
FF:
you haven’t the faintest idea
408
Political discourse


SH: came to the throne she came with a united country when Charles the
Third takes over he is going to divide this country and that is why people are
now thinking about this issue and they want to choose their next head of 
state they don’t want
FF:
no
SH: him imposed on them
Peter Hitchens: a fat a fat lot Stephen a fat lot Stephen Haseler cares about
dividing this country if his movement is successful the country will be divided
exposed to all kinds of dangers and left unprotected the the monarchy the
monarchy is one of our human rights in this country it it defends it defends this
country against people who want to tear away tradition property the family
(someone on the panel laughs) loyalty honour all the things that are funda-
mental as far as human nature is
RC:
is that right Claire is that right Claire Rayner
PH: concerned
Claire Rayner: it is it is precisely the reverse it is because the people of this
country want want to have the freedom to be citizens rather than subjects of a
particular individual
PH: but we are
CR: we want
PH: we are citizens in this country
CR:
no listen please
PH: Claire we’re among we’re among the freest people we’re among the freest
people in the world
CR:
forgive me we are not we are not the freest
PH:
we’ve been so free for so long that we don’t realise
(unclear)
CR:
we have so much secrecy so much deference so much bowing and
scraping
RC:
Roz Miles what does history tell you about this . Claire
CR:
that’s what we must get rid of
RC:
Roz Miles what does history tell you about this
PH:
what the republicans what the republicans want to do is to use (Roz
Miles: British history) the popularity of Princess Diana (RC: hold on hold on)
as a battering ram against the institution they hate
RC: right Roz Miles please
Extract 3
John Stapleton: OK let’s ﬁnd out some views behind those votes from our
audience here and on the day when the Queen has been to Sandringham
Democracy and the public sphere in critical research on discourse
409


where better to start than th- with our friends from East Anglia you said yes
you did think that these scandals have e damaged the country’s reputation why
do you take that view
Audience 1: well I think like any scandal presidents of the United States these
scandals have damaged and reﬂected badly on our country what we’re doing
here and what Mr S- people like Mr Starkie are doing is turning it our mon-
archy into some kind of royal soap opera trivialising it we’ve got the Duchess
of York being referred to as Fergie and we’re not really addressing the issues
the royal family is not a soap opera and I think we ought to raise the level of
debate and that’s the real problem here we’ve lowered it to real guttersnipe
gutter street level
John Stapleton: OK . gentleman over here gentleman over here in our
Manchester camp you said e: no> these scandals haven’t damaged the coun-
try’s reputation why do you take that view
Audience 2: for the simple reason (unclear) for centuries the ordinary working
class out there couldn’t care less what royalty do they’ve got more to think
about trying to make ends meet ﬁnd a job than worry about what the royal 
family’s doing
John Stapleton: OK let me let me introduce you all to someone who I suspect
we could describe as Britain’s most ardent royal family you’ll know what I
mean when you look around Margaret Tyler’s rather remarkable house
film insert Margaret Tyler voice-over: well I have actually got the Queen and
the Duke on my balcony waving to the neighbours of course and sometimes
you can ﬁnd me sitting on the throne I have to say I suppose you could call me
Queen Margaret of North Wembley I just collect everything about the royal
family and I really love them Charles and Diana are my very favourite couple
and I absolutely loved their wedding day and I do think that one day they
might just get back together again
JS: well . well Queen of North Wembley there was a mixture of cheers and
jeers there do you really mean that
MT: I would like it to happen very much
JS:
I think you might be the only person in the
audience who would Alan Aherst down here former Conservative MP is your
place a shrine to the royal family
AA: no it isn’t the Qu- the Queen is the head of the Church of England she’s 
the richest woman in the world she’s the head of a rotten class-ridden cor-
rupt political and social establishment which is directly responsible for this
nation’s dreadful decline I have no problem with that lady’s royal nick-nacks
but I am just saddened that she should want to glorify people who are basically
parasites and hypocrites
410
Political discourse


JS: isn’t it a rather . if you don’t mind me saying so isn’t it a rather odd posture
for a former Tory MP
AA: no I’ve seen the light this is the truth she is a symbol of everything that is
rotten about this country and the sooner we get rid of her the better
JS: OK just . just a . cheers jeers and boos just a taste of our audience’s views
lots more later on
Notes
1. This is a revised version of Fairclough 1999 which also draws upon Fairclough
1998.
2. The journalists sometimes refer directly to these time pressures (Roger Cook:
you’ve got ten seconds Andrew, I’m afraid I’m going to have to stop you there) or
to the number of people waiting to contribute. Notice that time constraints 
are sometimes worded with modalities which convey externally imposed 
obligations (Roger Cook: I’m going to have to stop you there, and referring to a
shift to the MORI poll we have to pause for a moment). Moreover, Roger Cook
and John Stapleton are constantly working to control pacing, especially to
limit the time taken by contributors – Cook for instance repeatedly tries (not
always successfully) to move to the next contributor before the current one has
ﬁnished (for instance, he makes several attempts to close down the argument
between Peter Hitchens and Claire Rayner and bring in Roz Miles on ‘what
history tells you’ – see Extract 2 in the Appendix).
3. Trevor McDonald orchestrates major topical shifts through the programme in
terms of framing questions (e.g., How deep in the crisis facing the House of
Windsor? Money and the monarchy: are they worth it?), but both Roger Cook
and John Stapleton exercise lower-level topic control in inviting particular
people not to just contribute to the debate but to address particular topics.
4. As in a formal debate, Cook distributes and controls access to the ﬂoor, but this
repeatedly breaks down as the panel members argue, interrupt, shout each
other down, etc. (for instance the sequences in Extract 2 involving Frederick
Forsyth and Stephen Haseler, Claire Rayner and Peter Hitchins).
Democracy and the public sphere in critical research on discourse
411


16. Critical discourse analysis and
citizenship
Norman Fairclough, Simon Pardoe and 
Bronislaw Szerszynski
1 Researching citizenship
H
ow does one empirically research the phenomenon of ‘citizenship’?
And how does one do so when notions of ‘citizen’ and ‘citizenship’ are
highly contested in both theory and practice? The many recent contributions
from political theory, sociology and other disciplines to the reconceptualisa-
tion of citizenship tend to draw only indirectly on empirical research, and are
predominantly normative in character. Against this background, it is useful 
to attend more closely to the practices of citizenship ‘on the ground’. The
PARADYS project was therefore concerned with empirically researching 
and theorising ‘the ways in which participants themselves act and are treated 
by others as citizens’ (Bora and Hausendorf 2001: 4). In particular, the 
project focused on ‘citizenship . . . as an ongoing communicative achieve-
ment’ (Bora et al. 2001: 3), and particularly how concepts of citizenship 
are deployed in ‘the dynamics of social positioning’ (Bora and Hausendorf
2000: 1).
One way of reading this emphasis on citizenship as a communicative
achievement is that it is an attempt to get us away from preconceptions about
what citizenship is, and to force us to look at how it’s done– at the range of ways
in which people position themselves and others as citizens in participatory
events. However, the contrast between preconception and practice, between
the theoretical and the empirical, is not so simple. To illustrate this, let us take,
as an example, the ﬁrst participatory event that the present authors recorded
as part of the PARADYS research – a local public meeting called by a parish
council, held in a village hall near a GM crop site, with three speakers from 
key organisations involved in the procedures and the wider public debate. 


In many ways this was clearly a public sphere event – an occasion where indi-
viduals formally gather together to debate and/or hear about issues of public
concern. Yet during the meeting there was no evidence that participants were
themselves working explicitly with the categories of ‘citizen’ or ‘citizenship’.
The participants certainly did not use these terms, though they did use other
terms one might think of as related, such as ‘consultation’. Even without using
these terms, the participants were nevertheless interacting in ways which ana-
lysts might see as the ongoing communicative achievement of citizenship. So
where is this analytical category of ‘citizenship’ coming from? Whose category
is it?
In the next section we explore this question, and draw out some implica-
tions for the way that participatory events should be studied in order to under-
stand the ways in which citizenship is enacted within them. We begin with the
problem, as addressed by Bourdieu, of constructing the ‘object of research’
(in this case, ‘citizenship’ within and around the procedures for the Field
Scale Trials of GM crops). We argue that constructing citizenship as an object
of research entails (i) recognising ontologically the dialectic between pre-
constructions of citizenship and the performance of citizenship within everyday
practice, and (ii) recognising epistemologically the dialectic between theo-
retical insights on citizenship and empirical research practice, or ‘method’.
Building on a version of critical discourse analysis (CDA),1we then present
an analytical framework for this empirical research of citizenship as a commu-
nicative achievement. The intention behind our developing this framework 
was to suggest a methodological and theoretical approach which would
involve a dialectical relationship between theory and method, able to bridge
the linguistic and sociological dimensions of the project, but would still be
able to accommodate different repertoires of linguistic-analytic tools for
micro-analysis.
2 Constructing the object of research
In a discussion of the construction of the ‘objects of research’, Pierre Bourdieu
notes that:
most of the time, researchers take as objects of research the problems of
social order and domestication posed by more or less arbitrarily deﬁned
populations, produced through the successive partitioning of an initial cate-
gory that is itself pre-constructed: the ‘elderly,’ the ‘young’ ‘immigrants’, . . .
The ﬁrst and most pressing scientiﬁc priority, in all such cases, would be to
take as one’s object the social work of construction of the pre-constructed object.
(Bourdieu and Wacquant 1992: 229, italics in the original)
Critical discourse analysis and citizenship
413


Here Bourdieu is saying that, rather than researchers simply operation-
alising a term such as ‘immigrants’ in their research (by, for example, 
locating immigrants and interviewing and characterising them), part of the 
research process should involve identifying and characterising the processes
whereby the term ‘immigrants’ has been given determinate and/or func-
tional meaning. This shift away from simply using socially pre-constructed
categories or objects, towards exploring the practices involved in their con-
struction and maintenance, is commonplace in disciplines and approaches
germane to the PARADYS research, such as science studies and discourse
analysis.
As Bourdieu puts it, the ‘construction of the object’ is ‘no doubt the most
crucial research operation and yet the most completely ignored’. The con-
ventional sociological division between theory and methodology should be 
‘completely rejected’:
the most ‘empirical’ technical choices cannot be disentangled from the
most ‘theoretical’ choices in the construction of the object. It is only as 
a function of a deﬁnite construction of the object that such a sampling
method, such a technique of data collection and analysis, etc., becomes
imperative. More precisely, it is only as a function of a body of hypotheses
derived from a set of theoretical presuppositions that any empirical datum
can function as a proof or, as Anglo-American scholars put it, as evidence.
(Bourdieu and Wacquant 1992: 225, italics in the original)
Since ‘citizenship’ would seem to be such a pre-constructed object, what
would it mean to follow Bourdieu’s advice? If we were to explore the processes
whereby ‘citizenship’ has been given some determinate and/or functional
meaning (however implicit), this would take us into the ﬁelds of government
and law, as well as into academic theory and research. Yet it would be a mistake
to see the conceptions of citizenship emanating from those ﬁelds either as
‘ﬁnished products’, or as simply being taken up and acted out by individuals
in those situations where they are called upon to act as citizens. If we were to
trace historically the social work of construction of this pre-constructed
object, we would ﬁnd an iterative relationship between these ﬁelds and wider
social practices (such as public participation) where citizenship is enacted.
These iterative relationships might be thought of in general terms in two ways
– as governance relationships (between governing and governed ﬁelds), and 
as theory/practice relationships (between theoretical and practical ﬁelds).
And, of course, governing and theoretical ﬁelds are themselves intricately
interconnected.
414
Political discourse


It is perhaps useful here to illustrate this iterative relationship between 
governing and governed, and to show the ways in which conceptions/
pre-constructions of citizenship may be very implicit and highly embedded
within social practices. The discourses,2practices and materialities of govern-
ance inevitably make available to people a range of resources out of which
speciﬁc instances of ‘citizenship’ can be assembled. Administrative and legal
discourses, as well as popular culture, provide a range of ways of thinking and
talking about oneself as a citizen. Diverse practices such as voting and refer-
enda, letters to newspapers or MPs, jury duty, civil and criminal procedures,
public inquiries and other participatory events, marches and demonstrations,
provide practice-speciﬁc meanings and experiences that can evoke the label 
of ‘citizenship’. A range of material objects and spaces such as public build-
ings and parks, passports and driving licences, tax returns, and even private
property can be seen as a material correlate or condensation of citizenship. 
All of these resources add up to a ‘banal citizenship’ that parallels what
Michael Billig (1995) calls ‘banal nationalism’ – a pervasive but unremarked
set of Discourses, practices and materialities that in different ways serve as
‘signiﬁers’ of citizenship – as indexes of citizenship identity, status or values.
But as well as being signiﬁers they also carry with them determinate, pre-
constructed meanings, meanings which ﬁll the ‘empty signiﬁer’ of citizenship
(Laclau 1996), however temporarily, with speciﬁc content.
When identifying the cultural resources in this way, it is of course important
to emphasise that individual citizens generate their performances of citizen-
ship in relation to these rather than simply acting out pre-constructed scripts.
As ever, these are the product of a tension and negotiation between the power
of the pre-constructed, and the power of situated agency.
It is also important to emphasise that social conceptions and practices of
citizenship are developed and enacted partly within the public sphere and
within the media, and therefore beyond the formal processes of public par-
ticipation in the operations of the state. Inevitably, there is also an interactive
relationship between these. This has important implications for theorising
citizenship: to limit the domain of research to, for example, formal public 
participation would have the effect of limiting the theoretical conceptions of
citizenship that can be developed. Furthermore, performances of citizenship
outside formal institutions and practices are not simply undertaken without
reference to ofﬁcial conceptions and framings. Indeed, within our data it is
notable that conceptions and practices of citizenship are often developed and
enacted in response to the exclusionof the public from governmental decision-
making processes, as well as to its mode of inclusion.
Critical discourse analysis and citizenship
415


This recognition both of the implicit social and governmental concep-
tions/pre-constructions of citizenship, and of the conﬂicts and shifts over time
and across the social, governmental and theoretical ﬁelds, makes it clear that
the empirical study of citizenship as a communicative achievement has to attend
both to the performance of citizenship and to its various pre-constructions.
The research must entail seeing the object of research – citizenship – as a 
continuing focus of thought and debate. The progressive development and
reﬁnement of the empirical insight into citizenship involves (inevitably and
necessarily) a conjoint build-up of social categories, theoretical perspectives
and analytical methods.
In terms of the research process, an exploration of social categories and 
theoretical perspectives is clearly necessary to inform what the analyst looks
for, what s/he is potentially capable of noticing within the data, and the ana-
lytic methods s/he selects. The insights from this empirical research process
will in turn respond to and even challenge these categories and theoretical 
perspectives, and thereby demand both further empirical analysis and some
potential reworking and reﬁning of these. In other words, in terms of the research
process, researching citizenship empirically requires an explicitly reﬂexive
research process; it involves recognising (as both inevitable and necessary) the
dialectic between theoretical insights on citizenship and empirical research
practice.
In terms of the research object – citizenship – Bourdieu’s advice suggests
something more. It suggests that the empirical analysis must explore the
dynamic relationship between normative, social, institutional and theoretical
pre-constructions of citizenship and what is communicatively achieved in 
participatory events. In other words, the research must involve recognising
and researching the dialectic between pre-constructions of citizenship and the
performance of citizenship within everyday practice.
In summary, research into participatory events must therefore not put aside
the social, governmental and theoretical preconceptions about citizenship.
Instead it must be oriented to the tension between those preconceptions 
(plural) and what is achieved in communication. The only alternative is the
problematic one of working as if one knows what citizenship ‘is’ – either 
by uncritically adopting one of the many pre-existing conceptions of citizen-
ship, or by bracketing off all such pre-constructions in the name of a naïve
empiricism. For to attempt to research citizenship without any preconception
of what citizenship might be – to ‘let the facts speak for themselves’, as it were
– can only be unwittingly to implicitly reproduce an unexamined conception
of citizenship, in order to choose which facts are to be allowed to speak in the
ﬁrst place. Even to identify citizenship as whatever happens in a particular
416
Political discourse


kind of participatory procedure is already to have performed an act of 
pre-construction.
While one focus of research has to be the tension between those precon-
ceptions of citizenship and what is achieved in communication, another has 
to be the tension between the various contested pre-constructions within 
and across social, governing and theoretical ﬁelds. The research object is
inevitably formed in the changing interactions between these ﬁelds – between
theory, empirical research, government and the governed.
3 A practical and theoretical framework for the analysis of
participatory events
The fundamental challenge presented by the PARADYS project was to
develop a micro linguistic analysis of subject positioning which was capable 
of offering wider sociological and theoretical insight into citizenship ‘as an
ongoing communicative achievement’ (Bora et al. 2001: 3). The project thus
sought to analyse empirically the many ways in which ‘citizenship [is] consti-
tuted, reproduced and modiﬁed within the very process of communication’ 
in such a way as to enable that analysis to provide a basis for building and/or
contributing to wider sociological ‘theory of communicated citizenship’
(Bora and Hausendorf 2000: 1). It was therefore intended to produce an 
analysis that was (i) empirically accountable and (ii) capable of engaging with 
theoretical perspectives on citizenship within sociology and philosophy, 
as well as current social and political debate.
In this section we describe the practical framework that we developed to
take up this challenge. To do so, we drew on our chosen version of critical dis-
course analysis, which itself offers a practical and theoretical framework
designed to address the question of how micro-linguistic analysis can be used
to develop wider sociological and theoretical insight.3
3.1 The value of CDA in researching citizenship as a
communicative achievement
Critical discourse analysis (CDA) developed as a response to the traditional
disciplinary divide between linguistics, with its expertise in the micro analysis
of texts and interactions, and other areas of social science such as sociology,
with expertise in exploring macro issues of social practice and social change.
The challenge CDA has raised and addressed for linguists is what the empirical
linguistic analysis of patterns in talk and writing can potentially contribute to,
for instance, sociological questions and claims about social and institutional
Critical discourse analysis and citizenship
417


discourses and social change. The challenge it has raised and addressed for
sociologists is how their claims about social discourses and social change can
be grounded in the actual empirical analysis of language in use.
In contrast with many branches of linguistics which deﬁne their research
questions within their own discipline, CDA typically takes up social scientiﬁc
questions and claims about social or institutional change, and explores how
these changes may be taking place at the micro level of texts and interactive
events. Or, to put the point in more general terms: CDA explores how discourse
ﬁgures in relation to other social elements in processes of social or institutional
change. This is our challenge in empirically researching citizenship.
CDA can be brieﬂy characterised as follows (see Fairclough and Wodak
1997, Chouliaraki and Fairclough 1999, Fairclough 1992a, 2001a, 2001c):4
It starts from social scientiﬁc questions, seeking to rework them as ques-
tions partly about discourse (for example, questions about ‘public space’
are in part questions about forms of dialogue). It is used in conjunction with
other methods, such as ethnography and political economy, to address
such social research themes. It aims to show speciﬁcally how discourse
(language, semiosis – ‘texts’ of all kinds) ﬁgures in social processes, social
change, in dialectical relations with other elements of the social. It is critical
in the sense that it aims to show non-obvious ways in which language 
is involved in social life, including power/domination, and in ideology; 
and point to possibilities for change. It works in a ‘transdisciplinary’ not 
just ‘interdisciplinary’ (or even ‘postdisciplinary’) way: it aims to develop
theoretically and methodologically in dialogue with other areas of social
theory and research.
As a heuristic, our version of CDA offers a way of conceptualising social
and institutional practices in terms of three dimensions. These are designed
deliberately to conceptualise the more sociological concepts of discourse,
action and identity in terms which can be explored empirically through reper-
toires of linguistic (in conjunction with non-linguistic) analysis.
• Discourses:5 ways of representing the world from particular perspectives –
in the context of this research, this includes the ways of representing the
issues, the potential beneﬁts, the risks and dangers, the relevant institutions,
the relationships, the concerned and indifferent publics, the protesters, the
farmers, the processes of public participation, the natural and agricultural
environment, the crops, and the herbicides.
• Genres: ways of acting and interacting with other people, in speech or
writing – in this case socially recognisable ways of doing meetings, 
418
Political discourse


interviews, letters, reports, press releases, and so on which effectively
enact, produce, reproduce or counter particular kinds of social relations.
• Styles/voices: ways of identifying, constructing or enunciating the self,
including both social and institutional identities – in this case, styles of 
citizenship (ways of being a citizen), for instance.
Fundamental to the concepts of discourse, genre and style (and indeed to any
research which is oriented both to the macro-sociological and the micro-
linguistic analysis) is the dialectical relationship between concrete individual
events and more abstract (relatively durable and stable) social practices.
Within this dialectic, individual texts and events instantiate, juxtapose and crea-
tively negotiate practices, while these practices are cumulatively developed,
maintained, modiﬁed and challenged by individual texts and events.
This dialectic is the reason why individual texts and events cannot be
regarded as simply representing social practices; discourses, genres and styles
cannot simply be ‘read off ’ from linguistic features of individual texts and
events. The signiﬁcance of individual texts and events, and their relations with
others, and with social practices, is itself a necessary focus of research. Yet
with that focus in mind, this dialectic is what makes the individual texts and
events, and the patterns of similarity and difference within and across these,
interesting in sociological terms. It is what makes it possible to explore social
and institutional change through the analysis of individual texts and events.
CDA is not a toolkit for analysing text and talk (e.g., participatory events)
which can be evaluated against competing toolkits. CDA does not offer 
special forms of ‘micro’ analysis; it is a way of framing any choice of modes of
‘micro’ analysis. It is a resource for tracing relations between the processes 
and relations and patterns one can discern in text and talk, and wider social
(economic, political, legal etc.) relations and processes and practices and
structures. It is a resource for setting up dialogue between analysts of text 
and talk (conversation, interaction) and sociological, political etc. theorists
and analysts. It attempts to work in a transdisciplinary rather than a purely
interdisciplinary way, working with categories and concepts in various areas of
social theory and research to develop ways of analysing text and talk which are
informed by these categories and concepts, and formulating questions and
perspectives from social theory and research in ways which elucidate their
speciﬁcally linguistic/semiotic aspects.
For example, the relationships between practical, theoretical and govern-
mental ﬁelds referred to above can be seen as discoursal relationships (explained
further below). Critical discourse analysis has developed categories for
analysing events (such as public participation events) in their text/talk aspect
Critical discourse analysis and citizenship
419


as parts of chains or networks of events on a concrete level, and mapping such
concrete chains or networks of events onto more abstract (durable, long term,
institutionalised etc.) networks of social practices (see Fairclough 2003).
CDA attends to these different levels of abstraction by oscillating in focus
between analysing text/talk in concrete events, and building an emergent
account of Orders of Discourse understood as the linguistic/semiotic facet 
of networks of practices, or the social structuring of linguistic/semiotic 
difference.6
3.2 Researching the chains of events and texts: intertextuality,
interdiscursivity and recontextualisation
To explain the issues of intertextuality, interdiscursivity and recontextualisa-
tion, it is useful to illustrate these in terms of the events and texts we have 
been analysing in the project. The spoken interactions include interviews,
public–public interactions and public–institutional interactions around the
permitting procedures for the planting of GM crops. In line with the remit 
of this particular project, we have focused on interactions and texts about 
particular sites.
While each GM crop site may be geographically remote in a rural village,
the various interactions about the GM crops are clearly not isolated events.
The participants in an event inevitably draw on their own networks of com-
munication and on a range of information sources. Thus, an interview may 
not be the ﬁrst time people have talked about the issues, or heard others talk-
ing about them; similarly, a public meeting is usually called as a consequence
of requests from local people. So both events may follow other events. People
may have written letters, and asked for information and expressed concern 
in other ways. They may have read various sources of information on the GM
crop trials, and may equate this issue and debate with similar issues and
debates before. They may have attended previous meetings and/or heard from
people attending similar meetings elsewhere. In terms of the issues at hand,
and the ways they are discussed, they have already developed conﬁdence,
anxieties, expectations, priorities, doubts, irritations, assumptions and so 
on. These may be based on their own previous experience, interactions and
correspondence, on the experience of others, and on socially available repres-
entations in society and the media.
In this way a particular text or interview or participatory event is oriented 
to by its participants not as an isolate but as a part of an intertextual chain or
network of texts and events. Different groups of participants may see the event
as located in different chains or networks. What is said and done and written
420
Political discourse


in a particular event or text is intertextually related to other events and texts:
people inevitably draw on, anticipate and respond to other events and other
texts. So we cannot understand particular events or particular texts, or the
signiﬁcance of these for the participants, without exploring (and asking about)
these wider intertextual chains.
In our data collection we tried to follow the intertextual chains of events 
and texts related to each case. We attended public meetings (where these 
took place within the research period), instigated group discussions, and con-
ducted deliberative semi-structured interviews. We sought copies of letters, 
e-mails, press-releases, leaﬂets, magazine and newspaper articles, and so on,
which are related to the particular sites and meetings. We also assembled a
small corpus of media reports, Government statements, website information,
e-mails and so on, which people in particular sites may draw on and respond
to. Together, these intertextual chains provided a basis for exploring the ways
in which particular social practices recur, develop, change, get taken up and so
on, within, between and beyond particular sites.
The exploration of the links within and between these intertextual chains
leads directly to a more fundamental point in sociological and linguistic terms.
This is that in any communication people inevitably draw on, anticipate and
respond to particular social and institutional practices (ways of doing things),
both explicitly and implicitly. They are involved in an interdiscursive process
of creatively drawing on the potential range of established discourses, genres
and styles. For example, the organisers of a meeting do not have to invent the
nature of a meeting, but can selectively draw on and adapt familiar ways of
organising meetings and of interacting within them. Similarly, the participants
in a meeting or interview do not have to invent ways of acting and interacting,
or ways of talking about the issues, from scratch, but can selectively draw on
and adapt familiar and effective ways of doing these. These social practices
may be highly institutionalised, or from the public sphere, or as we have
argued, developed from an interaction between these. The processes of draw-
ing on them, juxtaposing them, negotiating them and/or challenging them
may be implicit or partly observed by the participants.
Within these intertextual and interdiscursive chains, the anticipation of
future texts and events is also important. For example, some participants may
anticipate organisational or ofﬁcial reports or media reports of the interview or
public event in which they are participating, and their contributions to the
event itself may well be differentially shaped by these anticipations.
It is through an analysis of intertextuality and interdiscursivity that the 
particular event becomes potentially interesting in macro-sociological terms.
The analysis involves identifying the available social practices which people
Critical discourse analysis and citizenship
421


may repeatedly draw on, anticipate and respond to in particular kinds of
events and interactions. It also involves exploring the ways in which these
social practices can be included, excluded, juxtaposed, negotiated and played
out within the interactive events. This offers insight into the social practices as
well as the particular chains of events.
It is, of course, fundamental to this kind of analysis that the resources which
people and institutions draw on do not simply get reproduced ‘intact’. (These
resources may include individual words, utterances, scientiﬁc claims, useful
concepts, ways of doing things, and so on, all of which may be embedded
within social and institutional discourses, genres and styles). When these
resources are set in different contexts, and used by different people and insti-
tutions, they are potentially transformed (both deliberately and unwittingly,
but often systematically) by this process of recontextualisation. Discourses
may be recontextualised in particular ways within particular genres and vice
versa.
The sociological concept of ‘recontextualisation’ (Bernstein 1990) has
therefore been operationalised in CDA in order to explore the potentially 
distinctive recontextualising principles associated with different ﬁelds or net-
works of practices (governmental, academic, public sphere etc.) which affect,
at the concrete level, how one type of text or event is transformed into others 
in ﬂows along chains and through networks. These ﬂows are not simply 
unidirectional – there are ﬂows into ‘practical’ events from governmental and
theoretical ﬁelds, as well as ﬂows in the other direction.
In this brief account we are beginning to indicate how we can research prac-
tically, in a discourse-analytical way, the relationships between the governing
and governed, and theoretical and practical ﬁelds, which we have taken above
to be an inherent aspect of citizenship.
4 Three interrelated strands for the analysis
From our experience of attending the participatory events, our experience 
of talking to people in the interviews, and our initial analysis of the texts and
transcripts from these, we identiﬁed three practical and fundamental strands
for our empirical analysis of citizenship as a communicative achievement.
They are represented in Figure 16.1. As the arrows indicate, these three ana-
lytic strands are clearly interrelated and complementary. Moreover, ‘subject
positioning’ is located in the centre of the diagram in order to keep in mind the
intended focus of this empirical analysis of citizenship, and therefore the com-
mon focus of these strands. Within the chains of texts and events in our data,
we were interested in the particular identities and social relations which 
422
Political discourse


participants establish and negotiate – for themselves as participants, for other
participants, for the relevant institutions, and for the wider public beyond. In
particular, we wanted to identify and explore those identities and relations that
may be relevant to citizenship. In the next section we explain each strand and
its contribution to this primary focus.
This framework is intended to provide the kind of rationale and theoretical
understanding necessary to guide and underpin the micro-level linguistic
analysis. By this we mean that the three strands below are intended to give
direction and focus to the empirical analysis, to inform the processes of select-
ing from the range of potential data, from the range of potential avenues for
analysis, and from the vast array of possible linguistic-analytic tools.
4.1 Strand 1: The genre struggles within and around the public
interactions
A focus on the nature of the participatory event is very much central to
researching citizenship as a communicative achievement within the processes
of public participation and public debate. Moreover, the term participatory
event is preferable to the term administrative procedure since it recognises the
inevitably contingent nature of interactive events. Interactive events do not
simply follow or instantiate procedures, and their signiﬁcance for the partici-
pants and institutions is not simply what the organising institution intended.
Similarly, the concept of genre also has important advantages over the notion
of ‘procedure’. It is a concept with which we can address the heterogeneity of
the event, and the ways in which the participants draw on familiar genres in
Critical discourse analysis and citizenship
423
Figure 16.1 Three interrelated strands which provide a framework for a linguistic
and sociolinguistic analysis of the ways in which social relations and identities of
citizenship are constituted, reproduced and modiﬁed through subject positioning
within and around public interactions.
Genre struggles 
within and around the 
meetings/interactions
Subject positioning 
discourses around i  
public participation
Switches in/struggles 
over voice and style


negotiating the nature of this event. Our interest in genres is an interest in the
socially available resources which institutions and publics draw on in devel-
oping and negotiating the participatory events.
In analysing the transcripts of the local public meetings around GM crops
it is evident that there are some interesting battles taking place over the nature
of the event and, speciﬁcally, over the various genres of interaction that partici-
pants appear to be drawing on within it. Key points of struggle include what
kind of event it is, what it is possible to say and do, what the various identities,
social relations and forms of authority are, and the possibility and legitimacy
of drawing conclusions or making decisions within it.
These struggles are, of course, partly prompted by the wider institu-
tional context of current UK Government practice. The local village meetings
we have researched are described by DEFRA (the UK Department for
Environment, Food and Rural Affairs) as providing public information, rather
than as the opportunity for public participation and consultation which many
of the organisations and local people attending the meetings believed they
should be. At the same time, the ‘factual’ information about the GM crop trials
provided by DEFRA is itself regarded as controversial rather than neutral by
many of those attending the meetings. Therefore the very nature and function
of the meeting – as public information or public participation (or public rela-
tions) – is precisely one of the points of contention.
With different views of what the event should be, the participants draw
explicitly and implicitly on potentially competing genres. For example, the
events frequently shift between being a lecture with a subsequent question and
answer session, as envisaged by DEFRA, and a more participatory public dis-
cussion. Speciﬁcally, there are frequent struggles over whether the public are
allowed to provide information and to comment or only to ask questions, and
over whether they can respond to the answers given by the panel. The chair-
person may articulate rules for the event and demand conformity to these, yet
people may insert comments or information as ‘givens’ (or ‘presuppositions’)
within a question. Equally, the audience may demand that members of the
panel answer a question.
Here is one example taken from a public meeting which we recorded in one
site where farm trials took place. The meeting was chaired by a well-known
local ﬁgure; there were several speakers in the ﬁrst part of the meeting, and in
the second part of the meeting members of the audience were invited to put
questions to the speakers. The speakers were experts of different types – a 
government ofﬁcial with expert knowledge of the farm trials, a representative
of a company which produces GM seed for farmers who is a scientist, and a
representative of an organisation which promotes organic farming who has
424
Political discourse


expert knowledge of the implications of GM agriculture for organic farming.
The example is an exchange in the second part of the meeting involving two
male members (M1, M2) of the audience and the government ofﬁcial.
M1: There are two or three problems or concerns really. One really is the
lack of time the parish has been given with respect of when we know. We
don’t know when the site is to be. We only know when the site is to be
drilled. The county council has put a motion through that we would ask
DEFRA to let us know when the site is agreed, and then we could have a
meeting like this if you like before it all gets out of hand. The other thing is
there’s a massive increase in nose problems through spores that are in the air
now. Years ago we used to have hay fever problems at hay time, now we seem
to get them – Is there any difference between the spores of genetically
modiﬁed crops and the conventional crop? I think those are two major 
concerns that locally are causing problems. I don’t know whether there’s an
answer to both but there certainly is an answer in time delay and there may
be an answer to the other.
M2: Could I just make a point as well? I mean the ﬁrst part of that, this year
the ﬁrst we knew about these crops was in the newspaper.
M1: Exactly.
M2: And when we did draw some information off the Internet, it was the day
they’d stated for sowing. So that’s when the parish council knew –
M1: The county council has asked the government to – if we can know –
when the site is decided upon then we need the information. And I think
that will give us a reasonable length of time to evaluate whether it is or isn’t
going to be a problem.
Government ofﬁcial: Can I [unclear word]. Well, I think that I said that our
practice is to write to all parish councils when a trial site is proposed and we
did that –
M1: No, that isn’t what happened –
Government ofﬁcial: Could I just say what we do? [Extended account of 
the notiﬁcation procedure omitted.] So we do our very best to make sure
that the people know.
M1: At what point do you know which site you are going to use?
M1begins by making statements – not asking questions – about the two ‘prob-
lems or concerns’, and then asking a question about the second of them.
Another shift away from the ‘rules’ of such meetings is that M1 and M2 are
working collaboratively to elaborate the ﬁrst problem, against the normative
expectation of ‘one speaker at a time’. Furthermore, M1interrupts the govern-
ment ofﬁcial’s response, challenging what he is saying, and then continues 
in direct dialogue with him by asking a further question, rather than only
Critical discourse analysis and citizenship
425


addressing questions ‘through the chair’ as the ‘rules’ would require. More-
over, M1 would seem to be asking for more than answers to questions; that is,
more than information, he would seem to be asking for solutions to problems
– the ‘answer in time delay’ he is asking for is a change in the ofﬁcial procedure.
One tension in such meetings is thus that while the ‘rules’ limit interaction to
giving and asking for information, contributions from audience members 
are often advocating or calling for action. Such exchanges are frequent in 
this and similar meetings: audience members, usually unostentatiously but
persistently, breach the ‘rules’ about ‘questions’ to get across the points and
criticisms and challenges they want to get across.
Within this process, the institutions and the public are not inventing from
scratch what the meeting is and might be, the roles and responsibilities of the
participants, or the forms of interaction within it. Rather, they are implicitly
and explicitly drawing on known, respected and functional forms of inter-
action from other contexts. At the same time, they are not simply taking these
genres ‘off the shelf’: they are actively and creatively juxtaposing, interweaving
and negotiating them within this particular event. In the example, for instance,
one can see M1 and M2 as drawing upon a genre of open debate or discussion
(between colleagues, for instance), but not simply as a replacement for the
genre of expert–public interaction which is speciﬁed in the ‘rules’ – the two are
interwoven, in that the ‘question–answer’ format of the latter is still drawn
upon.
This process of actively drawing on other genres is reﬂected in the micro-
linguistic features of what people do when they speak, the social relations they
construct and counter, the rules of the meeting they break and follow, and the
identities they construct within the meeting. These are interesting in macro-
sociological terms, both in identifying the apparently available genres which
people draw on, and in exploring how these are played out in practice. We are,
of course, particularly interested in the subject positioning of the participants
as the genres are juxtaposed, interweaved, developed and changed. Particular
genres make particular subject positions more possible or less possible. That
is partly why there is a struggle over genres. Conversely, the invoking, shifting
and constraining of subject positions is a signiﬁcant part of negotiating and
creatively (re)deﬁning the generic nature of the event. In this way, exploring an
event in terms of the genres being invoked becomes a helpful way of guiding,
prompting, understanding and organising our detailed linguistic analysis of
subject positioning.
This kind of investigation of genre needs to be very alert to the subtle 
differences in the social relations within and between events: we know from
experience of analysing other public consultations that subtle differences in
426
Political discourse


the framing and the identities and relations within an event can produce very
fundamental differences in the nature of the interactions. This contingency of
the interactions is, after all, partly why we are talking in terms of genres rather
than procedures.
The contingency of the event also underlines our second focus of interest
within our investigation of genre. This is an interest in the subject positioning
of the event– by which we mean the processes of construing signiﬁcance to the
event itself. Consistent with micro-sociological research in science studies,
applied linguistics and elsewhere, it is important to recognise that there 
can be considerable contingency within a participatory event in terms of 
what the participation is seen as counting for. One cannot assume that this 
is determined by the intended procedure. The signiﬁcance attributed to the
event (and the interactions within it) by the different participants is to be
researched rather than assumed. This signiﬁcance and positioning will be
constituted in the interactions and intertextual chains within and around 
the event. For the different participants, the event may be part of different
intertextual chains.
4.2 Strand 2: Switches in/struggles over voice and style
Within CDA, styles are what we might informally call ‘ways of being’ – or 
identities – in language (as opposed to bodily, somatic aspects). Styles, like dis-
courses and genres, are identiﬁed and differentiated at the (relatively abstract,
durable) level of social practices. In particular events (such as participatory
events) people may have a range of styles available to draw upon, combine,
switch or struggle over.
An analysis of styles provides one important frame for the analysis of sub-
ject positioning. Shifts in styles are one key part of the process of enacting,
challenging and negotiating genres and discourses – through challenging the
subject positioning available within these. But making an analytical separation
between styles (or voices) and the other two categories (genres, discourses)
also allows us to bring in aspects of identity which are not covered otherwise,
especially the relationship between particular persons and the repertoire of
available social identities or roles.
There are two concerns here. The ﬁrst is how people represent themselves
and are represented by others. (Van Leeuwen (1996) offers a useful framework
for a detailed analysis of this.) The second is how they enact particular iden-
tities and social relations in the way they talk. For instance, people may talk
ironically or aggressively, as strategies or resources for dealing with ofﬁcialdom.
In addition, different kinds of statements – descriptive, evaluative, implicitly
Critical discourse analysis and citizenship
427


evaluative, normative etc. – may be used with very different frequencies by the
various participants in an event.
From research of people enacting and negotiating their identities in 
writing, Ivanim(1997) offers three aspects which seem useful to explore within
our research. First, people bring to any event an ‘autobiographical self ’. This
is their personal autobiography up to that moment; it is the life experiences,
the socialisations and the familiar social practices they are able to draw on,
explicitly as well as implicitly. Second, people create a ‘discoursal self ’ in their
talk or writing, from the ways in which they draw on socially available dis-
courses and subject positions. When people use a particular discourse, ‘they
identify themselves with the interests, values, beliefs and power relations 
that are associated with it’ (1997: 138). Third, in different situations people
will, to varying degrees, establish an ‘authorial self ’ – establish themselves as
the authors of what they are saying or writing, and establish their own author-
ity. For instance, in our research people may use unmodalised present tense
assertions for scientiﬁc information, or for reporting local concerns. They
may explicitly identify themselves (individually or collectively) as the source
of value judgements. Or they may avoid these. Inevitably, both experts and
non-experts have to negotiate a ﬁne line between sounding appropriately
authoritative and overstepping the limits of their authority.
Ivanim thereby shows the ways in which identities are negotiated even
within apparently factual and impersonal texts and utterances. The construc-
tions of identity within a text or dialogue link both to the social and personal
histories, and to the socially available discourses, genres and styles.
Styles can be seen as a facet of people’s habitus (Bourdieu 1977, 1984),
which brings variables of life history and life experience into account.
Thinking of styles within the analysis can mean thinking also of the relation-
ship between social role and personality. Styles can be seen to involve a 
tension between social identity and personal identity – social identities, or 
at least those key social identities which MacIntyre identiﬁed as ‘characters’
(MacIntyre 1985, see also Archer 2000), come to be personally invested.
Analysis is oriented to the relationship and tension between personal and
social facets of identities.
When researching citizenship as a communicative achievement, we can
explore this relationship and tension between personal and social facets 
of identities. We may explore the ways in which the citizen (in addition to
MacIntyre’s therapist and manager) may be a character in MacIntyre’s sense.
It may be that a ‘good citizen’ successfully invests the social role with his or her
personality, and does it in a distinct way. Seen as a ‘character’ of the contem-
porary social order, such personal investment of the social role of citizen may
428
Political discourse


be a sine qua nonof people coming to be citizens in a real sense, or as we might
put it, coming to be ‘good citizens’.
It is important to note that this implies a mode of analysis which is not
merely descriptive – we can describe what people do and how they are in par-
ticipatory events, but interpreting this in terms of ‘doing citizenship’ involves
a normative perspective. Further, these points on the personal investment of
social roles apply also to the experts involved in participatory events. For
instance, the speaker from the GM crop industry in the data we have referred
to has a distinctive expert style whose analysis demands attention to how
social identities and roles are personally inﬂected and invested. It is a per-
formance of personality as well as social identity:
Industry representative: Why would the farmer be interested in this tech-
nology? Okay, well I’ve already talked about yield and I’ll come back to that
yet again in a second. But what’s great about this is you can use a particular
sort of herbicide called Liberty. Now normally with oilseed rape what you
do as a farmer is you go in and you put a thin layer of herbicide onto the soil,
okay. This is what they call a pre-emergence herbicide. And what happens
is that as the weeds come through they come into contact with the herbicide
and they die. Okay? . . .
Liberty is different, no point spraying it on the soil, it’s just about inactiv-
ated on contact. What that means is you have to spray it onto the weeds.
There is no point spraying it onto the soil and letting the weeds come
through it. The weeds just carry on growing. Okay? If that’s the case what
we’re looking at now is rather than a ‘just in case’ it’s an ‘if we actually need
it’. So the farmer will come along, look and see those weeds in that crop and
say ‘ok, do I need to spray?’ and ‘if so how much do I need to spray?’ So
there are weeds in that ﬁeld and he’ll make that decision. So we’re moving
away from the idea of ‘oh well I’ll spray it just in case anything comes
through’ to ‘if we need to we’ll use it’. And that’s a very exciting thing for 
a farmer.
While the government ofﬁcial represents himself as ‘explaining’ things in
his presentation, the GM industry speaker says that he aims to give people ‘a
feeling for what it’s all about’. These are two different styles of being an expert.
The company scientist shows a more interactive orientation to the audience,
for instance in this extract by checking (with ‘okay?’) that the statements he
has made have been understood, and asking a question in a simulated question–
answer exchange rather than just making statements. And unlike the govern-
ment ofﬁcial, he also uses explicit evaluative statements alongside statements
of fact (e.g., ‘what’s great about this’, ‘that’s a very exciting thing for a farmer’).
Critical discourse analysis and citizenship
429


He also dramatises his presentation by ‘doing’ the voice of the farmer. In draw-
ing more than the government ofﬁcial upon the resources of colloquial con-
versation to achieve greater dialogicality, the speaker is also opening up spaces
for personally investing his enactment of the role of expert – for instance,
‘doing’ the voice of the farmer gives him the space for his own particular 
dramatic performance.
4.3 Strand 3: The discourses around public participation
The issue of public participation was an explicit focus of much of the dis-
cussion at the public meetings. Some of the interaction concerned why the 
government department DEFRA was not explicitly consulting the public on
the sowing of GM crops, why it was not responding to public opinion, and
why it was seemingly ignoring a local survey or referendum. Yet in many ways
this focus was simply an extension of a theme within government discourses
around the Farm Scale Trials, which seem subtly and effectively to give the 
listener or reader the sense that they have little or no part to play in the permit-
ting procedures.
For example, one section of the publicity material about the Field Scale
Trials that was made available by DEFRA on its website and in a printed leaﬂet
opened as follows:
Q: What is being done to involve people with sites in their locality in the
Farm Scale Evaluation programme?
The Government involves local people in the Farm Scale Evaluation (FSE)
process by providing both information about the release and an oppor-
tunity for the public to comment on the safety assessments that have been
made.
There are various ways in which the choice of words here means that, at the
same time that the text describes a process of public participation, it also
serves to constrain it. For example, the ambivalent word ‘involve’ is used in a
way which renders the public as passive: it is used in the transactive sense of
something which an organisation or person does to people, and therefore,
which people have done to them. The use of the nominalisation ‘sites in their
locality’ represents the GM crop sites as given physical entities, rather than the
product of a decision-making process, representing the choice of sites as prior
to the process of any public involvement. And ‘local people’ casts the popula-
tion as a collection of individuals rather than a political collectivity or citizenry,
effectively backgrounding the democratic power of those involved, and the
430
Political discourse


democratic signiﬁcance of the process. The collective effect of these dis-
coursal choices is to close the space for participation, and to justify and maintain
the existing absence of public participation.
However, the debate about public participation was also played out in a
more implicit and subtle way within the public meetings. In particular, the
institutional discourse(s) of DEFRA at the meetings seemed to construct a
political, administrative, environmental and commercial world of experts,
committees and procedures in which there was no intrinsic need for, and little
place for, public participation.
With this in mind, we are using the phrase ‘discourses around public par-
ticipation’ to refer not only to ways of talking about public participation or 
citizenship, but also to discourses that are ostensibly not concerned with 
participation or citizenship at all, but which routinely get drawn into the pro-
cesses of public participation, or which are inﬂuential in any debate about 
the need and possibilities for public participation. These include discourses
of science, administration, governance, commerce and so on; through the
implicit views of knowledge, expertise, procedures and so on, these bring
with them assumptions about the potential role, nature and limits of par-
ticipation as citizens, and about the possible subject positions (identities 
and relations) within any public–institution interaction. For the participants,
the act of invoking such established institutionalised discourses within an
event can be immensely powerful. Discourses effectively bring with them the
authority relations, the subject positions, and the views of knowledge from 
the contexts in which they have been used.
For example, discourses of science and administration could be used by
government and industrial actors in ways which served to depoliticise the 
trials, reducing them to a simple technical procedure and thus not an appro-
priate topic for political debate. However, during the public meetings there
were also moments when both discourses were drawn upon by members of
the public in order to assert their citizenly rights to be meaningfully consulted.
In the following extract, scientiﬁc principles of openness and peer review are
drawn on in order to call both the government and the biotechnology industry
to account:
F1: My name is [name] and I am a voluntary campaigner based in [name 
of town] for [name of NGO] and I have devoted much of the last year to
campaigning and ﬁnding out all about GM crops.
I have a simple question . . . I would like umm the two speakers from
DEFRA and GM crop and herbicide company tonight, to supply me, by
speaking to you all, the names and reference numbers of any independent
Critical discourse analysis and citizenship
431


research to deal with safety, as regards these two crops, maize and oil seed
rape.
This is for example: umm, if I was to breathe in the pollen, could they tell me
please what tests have been done by independent scientists to say whether
that will leave me totally healthy or whether there may be some risk; if a cow
was to eat some grass, upon which the pollen had dropped in its short life,
coming from these crops. Can we say that these things have BEEN tested, to
see the result of that? That sort of thing. Thanks very much.
Audience: [applause]
Industry representative: Umm, yes. I CAN answer that question. The
answer, when it comes down to INDEPENDENT research, umm I can’t
give you an answer to that.
To my knowledge I’m not aware of INDEPENDENT research. I AM aware
of a lot of research that has been done both by OUR company and by
OTHER companies, which has been looked at INDEPENDENTLY. ALL
the results have been looked at INDEPENDENTLY, on a NUMBER of
occasions, they umm, both in this country and in other countries around
the world. And that is the only reason WHY we are allowed to grow these
things in this country. So I may not be able to answer your question in terms
of INDEPENDENT RESEARCH, but certainly this information that has
been presented has been looked at INDEPENDENTLY, yes.
F1: Have you got the research papers please, so I can read them too? . . .
Can I go on the internet, and actually READ this information. This is what
I want to be able to do.
Industry representative: Okay, if you’re talking about maize you can cer-
tainly look on OUR Internet or on, come to that DEFRA’s Internet, and
look at what safety information there. Yes. And there is safety information
in there.
Chair: All right, next question please.
[While the chair asks for the next question, members of the audience point
out that the question has not been answered by the government repres-
entative. They ask for him to answer it. It becomes evident that the
Government representative is not going to answer. The chair still asks for
the next question. F1 returns to the microphone.]
F1: I have been writing to the government, at least once a month for 
seven months, and before that quite frequently. The Department of the
Environment, Margaret Beckett, Michael Meacher. Written to in parlia-
ment, at one or two addresses that I’ve had for them. I have NEVER had a
reply other than the STANDARD reply, which are just like [the industry
representative] kindly said. Years, dossiers full of it. NEVER have they
answered my question with ONE research paper number or title. I DO not
believe this exists.
[Loud 6 second applause. The chair invites another question.]
432
Political discourse


In the extract, the industry spokesman is using a discourse of science as prod-
uct, as objective fact, one which elides the backstage processes of scientiﬁc
knowledge making by which facts are fabricated, stabilised and made ready 
to circulate in society. By contrast, F1 is framing science as a process – one of
conjecture and refutation, in which scientiﬁc claims are open to scrutiny and
testing, thus seeking to open up the process of scientiﬁc claims-making to 
citizenly intervention (see Latour 2004). The discourse of science is thus a
resource which is drawn on in various ways in our participatory events, ways
which can both close down and open up possibilities of citizenly intervention.
5 Conclusion
As we argued at the beginning of this chapter, one key challenge in researching
citizenship as a communicative achievement is to identify when the identities
and relations produced in communication are potentially relevant to the issue
of citizenship. More fundamentally, this challenge raises the question of how
we understand citizenship within this research.
We suggested that an emphasis on citizenship as a communicative achieve-
ment could be seen as an attempt to get away from preconceptions about what
citizenship is, and look at how it is done – at the range of ways in which people
position themselves and others as citizens in participatory events. In response
to this, we argued that the empirical study of citizenship as a communicative
achievement cannot proceed in isolation from these preconceptions. An
empirical analysis of citizenship as a communicative achievement entails 
seeing the object of the research – citizenship – as a continuing focus of thought
and debate within the research. The progressive development and reﬁnement
of the empirical insight into citizenship involves a focus on social categories,
theoretical perspectives and analytical methods (see above).
Within this process, theoretical perspectives have practical as well as the-
oretical importance. Researchers cannot rely on their informants or data to tell
them what citizenship is, or to indicate which elements of their discourse are
relevant to citizenship; this is, after all, an analysis of things which are implicit
(even ideological) within discourse, and which are communicated implicitly
through subject positioning. Similarly, researchers cannot rely on their own
existing intuitive notions of citizenship as the starting point; the danger is that
these will be limited, highly cultural, and embedded within those current 
discourses of citizenship which should be the focus of analysis. Theoretical
perspectives on citizenship provide at least a starting point for that continuing
process of thought and debate about citizenship as the object of research. This
is a process through which the researcher becomes better able to notice and
Critical discourse analysis and citizenship
433


observe popular and institutional notions of citizenship that are implicit
within the data. It also provides the mechanism by which this empirical
research may in turn contribute to those theoretical perspectives.
However, as we have argued, merely exploring and drawing on theoretical
notions of citizenship is not enough. This would be to ignore the fact that
some notions of citizenship are more salient and currently more powerful 
than others. It would be to ignore the powerful social categories around 
citizenship, and the notions of citizenship pervasive within the ﬁelds of 
governance. To understand citizenship as a communicative achievement, we
therefore need to be able to understand the ways in which the participants may
orientate to, draw on, respond to and counter these powerful and implicit
articulations of citizenship. This is vital in a context where implicit, complex
and contradictory notions of citizenship may be used by government institu-
tions, the GM crop industry and environmental organisations to enrol the
public into their institutional perspectives.
This is the point we argued at the start of this chapter: the empirical
research of citizenship must involve recognising and researching the dialectic
between pre-constructions of citizenship and performances of citizenship
within everyday practice. It must involve an exploration of the dynamic 
relationship between the normative, social, institutional and theoretical 
pre-constructions of citizenship, and what is communicatively achieved in
participatory events.
However, as we argued in our discussion of the ﬁnal analytical strand, dis-
courses of citizenship are also embedded within a wider range of discourses.
They intersect with, and are identiﬁable across, current discourses of science,
governance, administration, commerce, media and so on. Within the particular
events and texts which we research, people may be using, negotiating and 
juxtaposing competing discourses of citizenship. For the researcher, to identify
the apparent discourses of citizenship can be an interesting research process
in itself, but it is particularly interesting when it enables us to explore their
potential functioning and signiﬁcance, within the wider discourse formations
currently associated with science, governance, commerce, media, environ-
mental concern and public participation.
It would be wrong, though, to interpret this emplacement of the participa-
tory event within an overlapping set of institutional discourses as denying the
possibility of agency and change. Linguistic analysis can reveal the participa-
tory event as a moment in which discourses are actively brought together in
potentially innovative ways. Similarly, the discourses around public participa-
tion are important resources for negotiating the genre(s) of the particular
event. They are resources upon which institutions and members of the public
434
Political discourse


draw in the process of guiding, deﬁning, understanding, negotiating and 
contesting (i) the nature of public interactions about GM crops, (ii) the sig-
niﬁcance of these interactions, and (iii) the subject positions the participants
may occupy within them. In turn, the generic nature of the event is critical 
in terms of what discourses are prompted, encouraged and/or excluded. 
For example, heterogeneity in the nature of the event, its unfamiliarity to the
participants, or conversely, the familiarity and conﬁdence of the participants
in the event, can all enable a wider range of public and non-institutional 
discourses to be aired.
This interrelation of genres and discourses inevitably offers possibilities
for a circular impasse, and, conversely, for learning, innovation and change. 
It is often the narrow conception of the potential genres of public participa-
tion that is a key factor in maintaining the established discourses which
devalue and sideline public participation. The sometimes dominant assump-
tion that public participation can mean only (a) oppositional public meetings, 
(b) letter-writing and website responses, or (c) a simplistic referendum, is 
very powerful. This rests on, and then maintains, the assumption that public
participation in decision-making is about adding up individual opinions, 
as opposed to engaging in a debate about the complex issues in order to 
identify the important questions and reach informed judgements (Rawles
1998, O’Neill 2001, Skogstad 2003). It maintains the sometimes dominant 
institutionalised discourses around public participation, in which public 
participation is construed as being of limited value, potentially dangerous, and
contrary to the desired goal of basing decisions on ‘sound science’. Social 
and institutional change therefore involves changes in the discourses, genres
and styles around public participation.
In terms of social learning, innovation and change, it is clear that direct
experience of taking part in public consultation events can radically impact on
the ways in which both institutions and publics come to talk about public 
participation. Moreover, the direct experience of public exclusion from par-
ticular decision-making processes can have a similarly radical impact. Such
experiences can prompt reﬂection and learning about the current practices
and the potential role and value of public participation. And as we have found
in the context of GM crops, the experience of public exclusion can sometimes
also prompt an explicit reﬂection about the wider nature and functioning of
democracy.
In this way, experiences of public participation, or of the absence of it, can
become moments of discoursal realignment and innovation. In particular,
they can prompt social and institutional shifts in the subject positioning of
experts, authorities, self and the public. The contribution of this research into
Critical discourse analysis and citizenship
435


citizenship as a communicative achievement is that it can potentially offer
detailed empirical and theoretical insight into these important aspects of 
current social change.
Notes
1. There are a number of different approaches within critical discourse analysis
(for overviews see Fairclough and Wodak 1997, Wodak and Meyer 2001). 
The version we adopt is that developed by Fairclough and his collabor-
ators in recent publications including Chouliaraki and Fairclough (1999),
Fairclough (2003), Fairclough, Jessop and Sayer (2004). In the event we did
not fully apply this framework in our contribution to the project in the interests
of harmonisation with other contributions to PARADYS.
2. Here we are using the terms Discourse or Discourses to mean particular ways
of representing or constructing particular areas of knowledge and experience
(see below, and Fairclough 1992a: 127–8). For clarity, in this document we 
follow the convention of using (big ‘D’) Discourse(s) in this way, while using
(small ‘d’) discourse as a very general term to refer to spoken, written and non-
verbal interaction.
3. We use the word ‘framework’ deliberately here, to indicate that this is not a
recipe for the analysis, or even a toolbox of methods, but a framework within
which particular forms of linguistic analysis, relevant to the particular data and
context, can be used to develop a wider theoretical insight. It is intended to be
used innovatively in particular research contexts. It is important to keep the
more detailed level of the particular linguistic analyses fairly open: as analysts
we need to draw on and develop our repertoires of linguistic-analytic tools in
the course of the analysis.
4. This characterisation of CDA reﬂects the particular version we are using, but
would be broadly accepted by other critical discourse analysts in terms of the
general positions it includes, if not these speciﬁc formulations of them.
5. As stated in footnote 2, we follow the convention of using (big‘D’) Discourse(s)
in the way explained here, whilst using (small ‘d’) discourse as a very general
term to refer to spoken, written and non-verbal interaction.
6. Orders of Discourse can be conceived as conﬁgurations of Genres and
Discourses and Styles that achieve a relative permanence.
436
Political discourse


17. ‘Political correctness’: the politics of
culture and language
W
e might see the controversy around ‘political correctness’ (PC) as a
political controversy in which both those who are labelled ‘PC’ and
those who label them ‘PC’ are engaged in a politics that is focused upon repres-
entations, values and identities – in short, a ‘cultural politics’. An immediate
caveat is that the homogeneity of ‘PCers’ (those who are labelled ‘PC’) is no
more than a constructed homogeneity produced through the labelling, but I
shall leave that until later. The objective on both sides is cultural change (in a
sense of ‘culture’ I shall explain shortly) as a trigger for broader social change.
This makes sense of the observation, which a number of commentators have
made, that there is a sort of performative contradiction in critiques of ‘PC’
because they would seem themselves to be instances of the sort of cultural 
politics which is the object of critique (see e.g., Cameron 1995). Because
changing culture is conceived on ‘both sides’ as partly a matter of changing
language, the ‘PC’ controversy is partly, but only partly, a controversy over 
language. I shall focus here on the language aspect. It seems to me that in order
to increase our understanding of what has been going on in the ‘PC’ contro-
versy, as well as for those who see themselves as broadly committed to political
change for the enhancement of social justice to learn tactically and strategically
from it, there are several questions which need to be addressed.
1. A question about social history and social change in the socio-historical
context of the ‘PC’ controversy: why this apparently increasing focus in
politics on achieving social and political change through changing culture
and changing language? What has happened socially that can explain the
‘cultural turn’ and the ‘language turn’ in politics, in social and political 
theory, and in other domains of social practice? (Section 1)


2. A question about theory: how are we to understand the relationship
between culture, language and other elements of social life and social prac-
tices (including institutions and organisations, urban or industrial infras-
tructure, social relations)? How are we to understand the relationship
between change in culture and language, and social change? (Section 2)
3. A question about political strategy and tactics: for those who are politically
committed to substantive social and political change (whether on the right
or on the left), what place can a politics centred around culture and lan-
guage have in a political strategy which is to have some chance of success?
(Section 3)
1 Socio-historical context: society, culture and language
The question of the relationships and changing relationships among society,
culture and language is a highly complex question to which I can give only
rather summary attention in this article. I want to follow Williams (1981) in
theorising a culture as a ‘signifying system’ constituted as an articulation of
representations, values and identities. Social analysis is concerned with the
dialectical interrelations between signifying systems and other analytically
separable systems (economic systems, political systems, kinship and family
systems etc.). I call these analytically separate because, although there are 
reasons for seeing them as different, they are not discrete, i.e., the relation-
ship between them and signifying systems is dialectical in that for instance the
economic system internalises, enacts and inculcates (see Section 2 on theory)
signifying systems. Necessarily so, because human beings are reﬂexive, there
is always a dialectical interconnection between what they do and how they
represent, value and identify themselves and what they do. Seeing cultures 
as signifying systems also helps clarify the relationship between culture and 
language: cultures exist as languages, or what I shall rather call discourses 
(and in their enactment as ‘cultural forms’ and inculcation as identities, as 
genres and styles – see Section 2). But cultures are not only discourses, they
are also systems and forms of consciousness, and they may be ideologies –
again, neither excludes discourses, neither is discrete, but they are analytically
different. Let us say that a particular form of social life is a particular network-
ing of social practices (the ‘systems’ referred to in Williams’s terminology
above) including particular articulations among culture, language (discourse)
and other elements of social practices; and let us say that social change is a
change in the networking of social practices and the articulation of elements.
This will have to sufﬁce as a theoretical basis for approaching the question
about social history and change. In broad terms, an increasing salience of 
438
Political discourse


culture and discourse in (an increasingly reﬂexive) social life is a feature 
of modernity, and perhaps especially of changes in social life over recent
decades. The ‘cultural turn’ and the ‘language turn’ are ﬁrst of all ‘turns’ in
social life itself, and only secondarily turns in philosophy and social theory.
Let me quickly review some more recent aspects and indications of this
change. First, the ‘culture industries’, including broadcasting, have become
increasingly important domains of social practice, and their networking with
other domains of social practice (the economy, politics, family life etc.) has
become an increasingly signiﬁcant feature of social life. Culture industries
such as television are (as the term suggests) entities on an economic level as
well as others, but they are specialised for ‘signifying systems’ in Williams’s 
terminology – and the representations, values and identities constructed in
and projected and circulated through them are uncontroversially of increasing
social signiﬁcance. Other domains of social practice (e.g., politics, family 
life, community life) work more and more through the mediation of the 
culture industries, and cultural representations and values (and therefore 
the discourses which circulate through television and other media) play an
increasingly salient role in the way in which politics, family life and so on,
work. Second, culture and discourse are increasingly signiﬁcant in economic
production and consumption. It is a truism that commodities are now con-
sumed for their cultural or ‘sign’ value rather than just their ‘use’ value, and are
accordingly produced as embodiments of cultural values and discourses, 
targeted with ever greater precision at culturally differentiated ‘niche markets’
(deﬁned in terms of generation, gender, lifestyle etc.). Another truism is 
that economies are increasingly ‘informational’ or ‘knowledge-based’ and
‘knowledge-driven’, which amounts to discourse-driven – driven for instance
by shifting managerial discourses that come to be enacted as managerial 
systems in business and industry. By the same token, the knowledge, skills,
aptitudes and attitudes of employees, their values and their identities, and
therefore their (‘lifelong’) education and training, become a major concern for
business.
There are other respects in which identities come to be an increasingly
salient concern. Economic transformations have radically changed the social
relations of work. The system of social classes deﬁned primarily by social rela-
tions within economic production has lost its potency as the principle shaper
of social identities and differences. The attachment of political parties and
governments to particular social class interests has virtually disappeared.
Governments are instead in increasingly close ‘partnerships’ with business,
and see a large part of their role as creating the ﬁnancial, infrastructural and
‘human resources’ conditions for success in the highly competitive ‘global
‘Political correctness’: the politics of culture and language
439


economy’. Education becomes a primary concern, but also forms of ‘cultural
governance’, the formation and transformation of identities and values.
Meanwhile, left politics, unable to respond to these social transformations and
the ideological assault of the New Right and neo-liberalism with an effective
counter-hegemonic strategy (Hall 1994), has become fragmented. They are
no longer centred upon the political parties and social classes but oriented to
‘single issues’ and to a politics of recognition, identity and difference as much
as to a politics of redistributive social justice.
This brief sketch has brought us to the point of entry of the controversy
over ‘political correctness’, because as I indicated above this controversy 
is located within the shift to ‘cultural’ politics, the politics of recognition, 
identity and difference. The point of arriving at this politics by the rather 
circuitous route I have taken above, however, is that ‘PC’ needs, I believe, to be
framed rather more broadly than it has generally been within the social trans-
formations of recent decades. Cultural interventions directed at changing 
representations, values and identities, and (given the particular focus of this
article) doing so in part through changing language (discourse), are actually
pervasive in contemporary social life. They are pervasive in economic prac-
tices, through the inculcation of employees into new ways of working and new
identities corresponding to them, partly through attempts to get them to not
only use but also ‘own’ new discourses (some of the buzz-words are: ‘teams’,
‘networks’, ‘partnerships’, ‘ﬂexibility’). They are pervasive in politics and in
the mediation of politics through the press and broadcasting – as, for instance,
Hall (1994) points out, the hegemonic projects of Reagan and Thatcher were
orchestrated at different levels, and were partly projects for changing culture
and discourse.
From this perspective, one striking feature of the ‘PC’ controversy is its 
narrow focus on one relatively small part of this pervasive process of cultural
and discursive intervention. For one thing, as Hall (1994) points out, the left
cultural politics which was labelled ‘PC’ by the right really took off during 
the Reagan–Thatcher era, which was characterised by substantial cultural and
discursive interventions on the part of government. These were linked to 
the development and diffusion of a neo-liberal political agenda and political
discourse especially on the part of New Right ‘think tanks’ (such as the Adam
Smith Institute in the UK), which were closely linked to the Reagan and
Thatcher governments. The ‘terrorism’ of feminists and anti-racists in, for
instance, their attempts to gain institutional acceptance for guidelines for 
anti-racist and anti-sexist language use (see Section 3 of this article) seem small
beer in comparison with the systematic diffusion and imposition of neo-liberal
discourse through international organisations such as the World Bank and 
440
Political discourse


the OECD, and through the very media which were loudest in condemning
‘PC’.
Of course there are signiﬁcant differences in forms of cultural and dis-
cursive intervention, which can make it difﬁcult to see the generality of the 
process. A primary target of critiques of ‘PC’ has been attempts by feminists,
anti-racists and others to persuade organisations such as workplaces or uni-
versities to adopt guidelines which ask people to think about how they act and
speak, to avoid certain behaviour and language (e.g., sexist language), and to
adopt alternatives. There are also considerable variations in what one might
call the illocutionary stance of such activists (asking, urging, demanding), 
but what is going in such cases is an overtattempt to challenge and change indi-
vidual behaviour and language. By contrast, the neo-liberal project to change
identities, values and representations (e.g., to inculcate ‘ﬂexibility’ and 
‘individual responsibility’, or extend market identities such as ‘customer’ or
‘consumer’ to public services such as education) has mainly relied upon the
covertpower of systems (international agencies, national governments, media,
business or public service organisations).
Let us come back to the question of the apparent performative contradic-
tion in critiques of ‘PC’. Critics of ‘PC’ assemble together a diverse range of
actions and interventions on the part of diverse groups of people (teachers,
academics, feminist activists, etc.) within the category of ‘PC’, and sometimes
refer to them collectively as if they constituted some sort of homogeneous
social movement. It is easy enough to show that they do not; moreover, few of
those identiﬁed as ‘PCers’ accept themselves to be such. ‘Political correctness’
and being ‘politically correct’ are, in the main, identiﬁcations imposed upon
people by their political opponents. But this in itself is also a form of cultural
politics, an intervention to change representations, values and identities as a
way of achieving social change (Cameron 1995). And it has relied primarily on
the complicity of sections of the media. The isolation of ‘PC’ from the more
general process of cultural and discursive intervention has proved to be a
remarkably effective way of disorienting sections of the left (see Section 3). 
At the same time, it has perhaps helped to divert attention from the more 
general, more pervasive, more profound and effective processes of cultural
and discursive intervention referred to above. It is worth considering why 
critics of ‘PC’ readily say that it is ‘PC’ to suggest that adult females should 
be referred to as ‘women’ and not ‘girls’, but do not see it as ‘PC’ when ‘bank
accounts’ are relabelled as ‘ﬁnancial products’. This relabelling is certainly
prescriptive for bank employees, and imposed on customers, and in that 
sense has to do with what is ‘correct’. But I imagine it is not generally seen 
as ‘political’. The critique of ‘PC’ assumes a liberal separation between the
‘Political correctness’: the politics of culture and language
441


‘political’ and the ‘economic’, whereas from the perspective of political eco-
nomy the ‘economic’ is ‘political’ (Sayer 1995) – the generalisation of markets
and the commodity form to ﬁnance, to public services, and indeed to most of
contemporary social life which such relabelling is a part of is an eminently
‘political’ change.
2 Theory: language, social practices and social change
Let me turn to the theoretical question, which I have already begun to address
in Section 1. How are we to understand the relationships among culture, lan-
guage and other elements of social life and social practices (including institu-
tions and organisations, urban or industrial infrastructure, social relations)?
How are we to understand the relationship between change in culture and 
language, and social change?
I suggested above that a particular form of social life is a particular net-
working of social practices including particular articulations among culture,
language and other elements of social practices; and that social change is 
a change in the networking of social practices and the articulation of ele-
ments. A social practice (e.g., commodity advertising, secondary education)
is an articulation of analytically different elements which are not, however, dis-
crete but dialectically interconnected such that each internalises the others
(Harvey 1996, Chouliaraki and Fairclough 1999, Fairclough 2000a). Let us
say that the analytically different elements are:
• activities;
• subjects (endowed with representations, knowledge, beliefs, values, 
purposes, attitudes);
• social relations;
• instruments;
• objects;
• time and place;
• discourse.
Social practices are inherently reﬂexive – people interact, and at the same time
they represent to themselves and each other what they do (sometimes drawing
upon representations of what they do which come from other practices,
including governmental and ‘expert’ practices). What they do is then shaped
and reshaped by their representations of what they do. We can understand the
dialectical internalisation of discourse within other elements in these terms:
activities for instance are enactments of discourses (e.g., the way a teacher
442
Political discourse


teaches is an enactment of particular representations, particular discourses, of
teaching – maybe even developed ‘theories’ of teaching).
This perspective is the basis of theories of social constructionism – theories
of social life as socially (discursively) constructed as an effect of discourses.
Such ‘discourse theory’ has helped shape the forms of cultural politics that
have been labelled as ‘PC’. Processes of cultural and discursive intervention,
including what is referred to as ‘PC’, can be seen in these terms as attempts to
change discourses on the assumption that changing discourses will, or may,
lead to changes in other elements of social practices through processes of
dialectical internalisation. For instance, if people can be persuaded to talk of
‘partner’ rather than ‘the person I’m living with’ or ‘lover’ (or even ‘mistress’),
or if people being ‘sacked’ is partly displaced in public discourse by organisa-
tions ‘downsizing’, there will (or may) be consequential changes in how 
non-marital relationships and economic restructuring are perceived, and 
how people act and react towards them. Changes of discourse are not merely
relabellings but shifts to different spheres of values. In the case of ‘partner’,
this involves a shift for some people to the values of business relationships,
which has made the term uncomfortable even for many who use it; in the case
of ‘downsizing’ there is a shift to the values of a particular form of economics.
Part of the controversy over ‘PC’ is attributable to often implicit differences
between those who assume some form of ‘discourse theory’, which implies
that representations are always positioned, value-laden and chosen against
alternative representations. This compares with those who assume a transpar-
ent and direct relationship between what is said/written and ‘the language’,
without the mediating level of discourse (Cameron 1995).
However, one has to be cautious about how one understands social (dis-
cursive) constructionism. First, the dialectical internalisation also works ‘the
other way round’, which amounts to saying that discourses do not come out 
of nowhere. Second, the internalisation of discourses in other elements of
social practices (including their physical–material elements, e.g., the plant
and machinery of an industry) is a conditioned and contingent process. To see
why this is so, we need to look more closely at the dialectics of discourse.
Let me distinguish among three principle ways in which discourse ﬁgures
in social practices. It ﬁgures ﬁrstly as discourses (note the distinction between
‘discourse’ as an abstract noun and as a count noun – the latter is just one
aspect of the former). Discourses are positioned representations (including
reﬂexive self-representations of social practices) – positioned in the sense that
different positions in the social relations of a social practice tend to give rise to
different representations. Secondly, it ﬁgures as genres – ways of acting and
interacting in their discourse (more broadly: semiotic) aspect. For instance,
‘Political correctness’: the politics of culture and language
443


interviewing, lecturing and conversing are genres. Thirdly, it ﬁgures as styles–
ways of being, identities, in their discourse (semiotic) aspect. For instance,
there are various ways of being a political leader or a manager, which are partly
bodily and partly discursive.
With these distinctions in mind, let us turn to the dialectics of discourse.
Discourses include not only representations of how things are, they can also
be representations of how things could be, or ‘imaginaries’. They can repres-
ent or imagine interconnected webs of activities, instruments, objects, sub-
jects in social relations, times and places, values etc. As imaginaries, they 
may come to be enacted as actual webs of activities, subjects, times and places, 
values etc. – they can become actual ways of acting and interacting. Such
enactments include genres – the dialectical enactment of discourses is partly a
movement within the discursive/semiotic moment/element of social practices,
and partly a movement between this moment/element and others. They may
also come to be inculcated as new ways of being, new identities – including
new styles (but also new bodily behaviours).
‘May’ is crucially important: what I am suggesting is a moderate form of
‘social constructivism’ (Sayer 2000) which recognises that discourses may
construct and reconstruct social practices, social structures and social life, but
which also recognises that there are no guarantees of such constructive effects
– the sedimentation of institutions and the habituses of people may make them
resistant. The general point here is that a dialectical view of social practices
should also include a recognition of the formation of (relative) permanences,
which may limit the dialectical ﬂow between elements (Harvey 1996). These
relative permanences are of two main types. First, the relative permanence of
institutions, organisations, networks of practices, structures. The point is a
rather obvious one: structures and institutions develop internal rigidities that
can make them resistant to any form of change and resistant, in particular, to
cultural and discursive change. Second, the relative permanence of habituses.
The habitus of a person (Bourdieu and Wacquant 1992) is a set of dispositions,
stances, knowhows and so forth (discursive and non-discursive), which develops
over time and can also be resistant to change. The conclusion, which I elab-
orate in political terms in Section 3, is that the socially constructive effects of 
discourses are contingent upon the resistances of structures and habituses.
3 Political strategy and tactics: the politics of culture and
language
Let me turn now to the third question, about political strategy and tactics. For
those who are politically committed to substantive social and political change
444
Political discourse


(whether on the right or on the left), what place can a politics centred around
culture and language have in a political strategy which is to have some chance
of success?
Let me approach this issue via another question: why is it that the critique
of ‘PC’ has been so successful? Why is it that it has divided the left, and 
confused and disoriented some sections of it? Why is it that labelling one’s
opponents as ‘PC’ has proved to be such a durable tactic, still widely resorted
to (e.g., by the current and previous leaders of the British Conservative Party,
Iain Duncan-Smith and William Hague) presumably because it is seen as still
effective? Was it perhaps because the critiques of ‘PC’ have a real target to
shoot at, that there is something really problematic about the forms of cultural
politics which were the primary target?
That is the view of Hall (1994), whose critique I broadly subscribe to,
although I think he is wrong to himself refer to the cultural politics he is 
critiquing as ‘PC’. Hall locates the ‘PC’ controversy in Britain within the after-
math of the Thatcher government’s abolition of the Greater London Council
(GLC), whose leader was Ken Livingstone, now Mayor of London. Hall sees
the GLC as having been an incipient left counter-hegemonic project to the
hegemonic project of Thatcherism, successfully bringing together the cultural
politics of the new social movements (anti-racism, feminism etc.) with more
traditional left politics based on the trade unions and the labour movement.
The political and especially media offensive against the ‘loony left’ GLC was,
as Hall points out, a critique of ‘PC’ avant la lettre. With the demise of the
GLC, the constituents of the alliance around it became fragmented, and some
engaged in what Hall sees as a voluntarist form of ‘vanguardist’ cultural poli-
tics centring upon ‘PC’ – it lost any sense of the need for a strategic, counter-
hegemonic, dimension. Hall is careful to distinguish between the validity of 
a cultural politics focused upon a critique of language in the construction of
social identities and differences, and the vanguardist way in which this politics
was pursued – its attempt to police language and behaviour, an ultra-left 
politics of ‘demands’. Having said that, the danger of people on the left, such
as Hall, using the label ‘PC’ (see also Eagleton 2000: 89) is that it fails to recog-
nize that the differentiation he is seeking to make within left politics’ tactics
and strategies are fudged over in the critique of ‘PC’ – his own more cautious
cultural and discursive interventions are just as likely to be critiqued as ‘PC’.
Critics of ‘PC’ had a plausible target because some (but only some) of the
forms of cultural and discursive intervention labelled as ‘PC’ smacked of the
arrogance, self-righteousness and puritanism of an ultra-left politics, and have
caused widespread resentment even among people basically committed to
anti-racism, anti-sexism etc. I recall, for instance, a discussion with a respected
‘Political correctness’: the politics of culture and language
445


political activist some years ago after a political meeting in which the debate
was interrupted by what he saw as self-righteous, holier-than-thou, hectoring,
which fetishised a rather minor matter of wording (someone referred to the
chair as ‘Mr Chairman’) that was irrelevant to the point at issue, and was dam-
aging to the meeting as a political event. My impression is that such reactions
were common. It is true, as critics of the critique of ‘PC’ have often pointed
out, that some of the favourite chestnuts were apocryphal (e.g., ‘coffee without
milk’ instead of ‘black coffee’), but nevertheless the resonance which these 
critiques have had indicates that they did connect with people’s experiences.
The critiques are certainly reactionary, they certainly depend upon a spurious
construct called ‘PC’, they isolate one form of cultural and discoursal inter-
vention from other forms, but like most successful ideologies they contain a
partial truth.
What follows from all this is that if the politics of culture and language are to
work as part of a political strategy with some prospect of success, they have 
to be integrated within a politics of structures and habituses – a hegemonic
politics, in Hall’s terms, which brings together interventions at various levels
of the social. For example, not focusing on sexist or racist language use in an
organisation through non-sexist/non-racist guidelines in isolation from other
potentially discriminatory aspects of the social relations of the organisation,
such as salary differentials or procedures for promotion. The right has under-
stood this better than the left, though some on the left (still branded within the
catch-all ideological category of ‘PC’) have understood it too. Neo-liberal and
New Right politics have targeted structures and institutions, educational 
systems (and thereby the formation of habituses), as well as cultural representa-
tions, values and identities. That in itself is no guarantee of success, and there
are manifestly resistances both to enactment and inculcation of neo-liberal 
discourses. Moreover, relatively successful enactment does not guarantee 
relatively successful inculcation: there is a stage short of inculcation at which
people may acquiesce to new discourses without accepting them – they may
mouth them rhetorically, for strategic and instrumental purposes, as happens,
for instance, with market discourse in public services such as education.
4 Conclusion
The editorial in the British daily newspaper the Daily Mail on 11 April 2000
was headlined ‘Deplorable bid to stiﬂe debate’, and attacked the ‘liberal 
fascism’ of the Liberal Democrats for their complaint to the Commission for
Racial Equality about the language of both Labour and Conservatives in 
public statements about people seeking political asylum in Britain. A focus of
446
Political discourse


debate was asylum seekers being described as ‘bogus’. The Sun editorial on
the same day, under the heading ‘Bogus issue’, said: ‘What a sad commentary
on this PC-obsessed country that, instead of confronting the problem head
on, we are talking about the “right language” to use!’ It also says: ‘There IS a
ﬂood of illegal immigrants . . . The majority ARE bogus’ and ‘The issue has
nothing to do with race.’
The controversy over political asylum in Britain during the past couple of
years is an example of the apparent continuing effectiveness of the strategy 
of wheeling out charges of ‘PC’ against political opponents. But how might
those who are committed to more socially just policies towards refugees as
well as ‘economic migrants’ respond to this strategy, both tactically in particu-
lar instances like this, and strategically in aiming in the long run to make the 
strategy ineffective? And how might discourse analysts and sociolinguists
contribute? These are big issues which I can only touch upon here.
Strategically, critics of globalisation, neo-liberalism and more speciﬁc
aspects of them such as policies on migration lack, as Hall (1994) points out,
a hegemonic strategy. There is a widespread understanding that the emerging
socio-economic order is deeply problematic, that, for instance, large business
corporations have too much power and elected governments have too little
power, that the advocacy of ‘liberalisation’ in the free movement of money and
goods stands in stark contrast to the harsh restrictions on the movement of
people. Yet, so far, there is no coherent alternative vision of a social order
which can attract the support and conviction that might lead to a hegemonic
strategy. Whether and when such a strategy will emerge we cannot know. But
one of its preconditions is better theory and analysis.
There is clearly a need for a better theoretical understanding of the ‘PC’
controversy on, broadly, the left. Discourse analysts and sociolinguists can
contribute through researching and theorising the ‘PC’ controversy, and seek-
ing ways to bring their perspectives into the political debates. What is missing
on the left is a general understanding of the signiﬁcance and nature of cultural
and linguistic interventions in the transformations of contemporary social life.
We need a balanced view of the importance of language in social change and
politics, which avoids a linguistic vanguardism as well as dismissing questions
about language as trivial, and an incorporation of a politics of language within
political strategies and tactics.
What does this imply tactically for responding to the critique of ‘PC’ in con-
texts such as the controversy over political asylum? First, that this particular
issue be contextualised within contemporary patterns of migration, analysis of
the causes of migration, including analysis of how pressures towards migration
are produced through the damaging effects of the contemporary neo-liberal
‘Political correctness’: the politics of culture and language
447


‘global’ restructuring on the economic, political and social fabric of the poorer
countries and regions of the world. Second, that the role of governments, 
politics and the media in legitimising the restructuring, in (as Bourdieu
(1998a) puts it) clearing away obstacles to the restructuring be placed upon
the political agenda, and be related to speciﬁc issues such as political asylum
and immigration policy. Third, that the importance of language, of discourse,
in both the restructuring and its legitimation with respect to particular issues
like this one, become a matter for political debate. And fourth, that the strategic
use of the critique of ‘PC’ in reducing and mystifying the linguistic and dis-
coursal aspects of restructuring and legitimation, and as an instrument of
political struggle, also become a matter for political debate within this wider
frame. Of course, none of this is easy. But ‘PC’ needs to be addressed seriously
by the left, because the critique of ‘PC’ remains an effective and damaging
strategy.
Acknowledgements
I am grateful to Phil Graham (University of Queensland) and Sally Johnson
(Lancaster University) for helpful comments on a draft of this article.
448
Political discourse


S e c t i o n  F
Globalisation and ‘transition’


This page intentionally left blank


Introduction
T
he three papers in this section were written and published between 2005
and 2009 and deal with various aspects of globalisation, ‘Europeanisa-
tion’ and the ‘transition’ in the formerly socialist countries of Central and
Eastern Europe from single-party state socialism towards the ‘market eco-
nomy’ and western-style democracy. The three papers are primarily linked by
a shared concern with what has become the internationally dominant strategy
for shaping and ‘steering’ globalisation and especially the global economy,
‘globalism’, which was the focus of my book Language and Globalization
(2006). Globalism is as it were the global wing of neo-liberal capitalism, its
central strategic goal being to extend the dominance of this form of capitalism
internationally.
Paper 18 (‘Language and globalisation’) is a presentation of my CDA
approach to globalisation and globalism. I argue that ‘globalisation’ is both a
discourse, or rather a set of discourses associated with diverse strategies, and
transformations in material reality, and that the discoursal or semiotic facet of
globalisation and its material facet are dialectically interconnected. Discourse
is an irreducible part of globalisation, though globalisation cannot be reduced
to ‘just discourse’, and critical analysis of globalisation needs to address these
dialectical relations. I discuss different strategies for steering globalisation 
in particular directions and the discourses associated with them, including the
dominant strategy of ‘globalism’; how processes of globalisation impact at dif-
ferent ‘scales’ (local, national, international) and especially the national scale;
the implication of the mass media in processes of and struggles over globalisa-
tion, and people’s ‘lay’ experience of and responses to globalisation. I also
include a discussion of the ‘war on terror’ on the grounds that it is part of a 
militaristic and imperialistic turn in ‘globalist’ strategy.


Paper 19 (‘Global capitalism, terrorism and war: a discourse-analytical
perspective’) is built around an analysis of the American National Security
Strategy (2002), which has played a major part in deﬁning the shift in
American strategy especially since 2001 in a more militaristic direction. My
concern in the analysis is with the ‘texturing’ (textual production) of a dis-
course in this document (among others), which can be seen as the discoursal
dimension or ‘moment’ of the development of a new American strategy. The
general research concern is with a transdisciplinary approach to changes in
international relations, and this paper is exploring a speciﬁcally discoursal 
or semiotic ‘point of entry’ into transdisciplinary analysis of strategies for
change. I focus on the question of the causal powers of discourse – the condi-
tions under which particular ways of construing reality in a document of this
sort may have constructive, transformative effects upon reality. I suggest that
these conditions include both having a measure of practical adequacy (con-
struing reality as it actually is to a sufﬁcient degree) and having the capacity to
win people’s conviction. I distinguish two sorts of constructive effects, mater-
ial and mental (effects on attitudes and beliefs), and suggest that ideology 
combines the two; and I further distinguish consent and legitimacy as mental
effects on the grounds that while the former may be achieved by persuasive means
of any sort (i.e., just rhetorically), the latter requires argumentation which is
dialectically sound. I also discuss displacement, in the sense of a rhetorically
motivated gap between construals of the strategy for public consumption and
other construals where the intentions and objectives of power are more trans-
parent, and limits on degrees of displacement in public discourse.
Paper 20 (‘Discourse and “transition” in Central and Eastern Europe’) deals
with the role of discourse in ‘transition’ from centralised state socialism to
market capitalism and Western forms of democratic government in Central
and Eastern Europe (CEE). I focus on attempts speciﬁcally in Romania to
construct a ‘knowledge-based economy’ (KBE) and ‘information society’
(IS). The importance of discourse in processes of ‘transition’ is quite widely
recognised in social research but it has so far produced only a limited under-
standing of how discourse actually ﬁgures in these processes, partly because
the theories of discourse which are drawn upon do not constitute an adequate
basis for full and nuanced accounts of how discourse interacts with other non-
discursive facets of ‘transition’, partly because abstract statements about dis-
course have not generally been translated into detailed analysis texts or talk. I
view KBE and IS as strategies for achieving and stabilising a new ‘ﬁx’ between
a regime of capital accumulation and a regime of political regulation (in the
terms of the ‘regulation approach’) in the aftermath of the demise of the ‘ﬁx’
commonly referred to as ‘Fordism’ (Jessop 2004). These strategies are being
452
Globalisation and ‘transition’


pursued in ‘the West’ including the western area of the EU, and recontext-
ualised in CEE as part of the processes of ‘transition’. These strategies have a
partially material and partially discursive character – they include discourses
which represent and ‘imagine’, simplify and condense, complex economic,
political, social and cultural realities. To analyse them we need to use a frame-
work such as the one Jessop proposes, a ‘cultural political economy’ which
incorporates CDA and allows analysis of the relationships between discourse
and materiality in processes of change, including the potentially ‘constructive’
or transformative effects of discourse on non-discursive realities. I discuss 
the recontextualisation of these strategies and discourses in Romania with
particular reference to a government policy text, the National Strategy for the
promotion of the New Economy and the implementation of the Information
Society (2002).
Introduction
453


18. Language and globalisation
L
et me begin from two very general and abstract formulations of the highly
complex sets of changes which have been recently referred to as ‘global-
isation’: ‘a process (or set of processes) which embodies a transformation in 
the spatial organisation of social relations and transactions . . . generating
transcontinental or interregional ﬂows and networks of activity, interaction,
and the exercise of power’ (Held et al. 1999); ‘complex connectivity . . . the
rapidly developing and ever-densening network of interconnections and
interdependencies that characterise modern social life’ (Tomlinson 1999: 
2). These ‘ﬂows’, ‘networks’ and ‘interconnections’ are generally seen 
as very diverse in character, and including ﬂows of goods and money and
international ﬁnancial and trading networks in the economic ﬁeld; inter-
governmental networks and interdependencies and interactions and inter-
connections between international agencies such as the United Nations 
(UN), the International Monetary Fund (IMF), and the World Trade
Organisation (WTO) and government agencies at national and regional 
levels; the mobility of people as migrants, tourists, or members of commercial
or governmental organisations; ﬂows of images and representations and 
interactions through contemporary media and forms of technology; and 
so forth.
We can make three initial observations about discourse in processes of
globalisation in this sense. First, that the networks, connectivities and inter-
actions crucially include, and one might say depend upon, particular forms
(or ‘genres’) of communication which are specialised for transnational and
interregional interaction, such as the genres of global news networks; and that
the ‘ﬂows’ include ﬂows of representations, narratives and discourses, such as
neo-liberal economic discourse. In that sense, it is partly discourse that is


globalising and globalised. Second, that it is important to make a distinction
between actual processes and tendencies of globalisation, and representations
or discourses of globalisation. We cannot get away from the fact that globalisa-
tion is both a set of changes which are actually happening in the world (though
what the set includes is highly controversial), and a word – ‘globalisation’ –
which has quite recently become prominent in the ways in which such
changes are represented. But this is a simpliﬁcation, because the word 
‘globalisation’ is used in various senses within more complex discourses,
which are partly characterised by distinctive vocabularies in which ‘globalisa-
tion’ is related in particular ways to other ‘keywords’ such as ‘modernisation’,
‘democracy’, ‘markets’, ‘free trade’, ‘ﬂexibility’, ‘liberalisation’, ‘security’,
‘terrorism’, ‘cosmopolitanism’ and so forth; and these discourses are more
than vocabularies – they have certain lexico-grammatical features (e.g., does
‘globalisation’ ﬁgure as a causal agent in material processes, as in ‘globalisation
opens up new markets’?), certain narratives, certain forms of argumentation,
and so forth.1 Third, having made this distinction, it is equally important to
consider what the relationship is between actual processes of globalisation
and representations of globalisation. In broad terms, we can say that repres-
entations and discourses of globalisation do not merely construe processes
and tendencies of globalisation which are happening independently (though
they do so construe them, for instance in political rhetoric), they also con-
tribute to creating and shaping actual processes of globalisation, though in
complex and contingent ways.
A vast amount has been said and written about globalisation, and this in
itself makes it a difﬁcult and confusing issue to write about. It is made more
confusing if we do not distinguish what has been said by whom, and differ-
entiate the main ‘voices’ within all this talk and writing. I shall distinguish 
ﬁve: academic research and analysis; government agencies in a broad sense –
national governments, political leaders, agencies which are a part of national
governments, agencies of international governance such as the UN or the
WTO, and so forth; non-governmental agencies, again in a very inclusive
sense including for instance business corporations, charities such as Oxfam,
campaigning or monitoring organisations such as Greenpeace or CorpWatch;
the media (television, radio, press etc.); and people as citizens or members of
various sorts of community – people acting out their ‘ordinary’ lives. These
voices are not fully discrete: there are ﬂows between them – for instance, 
academic analysis directly or indirectly contributes to the language of govern-
mental and non-governmental agencies, and academic analysis itself draws
from management literature. And, of course, differentiating just ﬁve major
sources inevitably simpliﬁes the plethora of actual voices.
Language and globalisation
455


The six sections of the paper partly correspond to these diverse ‘voices’. In
Section 1, I summarise views on discourse as a facet of globalisation in the aca-
demic literature, and then summarise my own approach, which is based upon
a version of ‘critical discourse analysis’ (CDA) which is envisaged as a compon-
ent of a ‘cultural’ political economy. In Section 2, I discuss different strategies
of globalisation (and regionalisation) emanating from governmental and 
non-governmental agencies, and the different discourses which constitute ele-
ments of these strategies. In Section 3, I discuss how processes of globalisa-
tion impact upon speciﬁc spatial ‘entities’ (nation states, cities, regions etc.) 
in terms of the idea of ‘re-scaling’, i.e., changing relations in processes, rela-
tionships, practices and so forth between local, national, and international
(including ‘global’) scales. I focus here upon the national scale in its relation to
the global scale and the scale of international regions (in particular, the process
of ‘European integration’). In Section 4, I deal with the media and mediation.
In Section 5, I discuss people’s ordinary experience of globalisation, and its
implications for and effects upon their lives.
Section 6 deals with war and terrorism. A discussion of this issue may seem
surprising in a paper on the theme of language and globalisation, so let me
brieﬂy explain it, and in so doing clarify the particular stance I am taking on
globalisation and its discourse facet. I shall focus in Section 2 on what Steger
(2005) has called ‘globalism’ (see also Saul 2005), which is the strategy and
discourse (and ‘story’) of globalisation which has become most inﬂuential, has
had most effect on actual processes of change. The key feature of ‘globalism’ as
a discourse is that it construes (and aims to construct, or more contentiously
hijack) the actual processes of globalisation in a neo-liberal way – as centrally
the liberalisation and global integration of markets. Latterly the ‘war on terror’
has been construed as a necessary element in defending and advancing ‘glob-
alisation’ in this reductive sense (and, the claim is, human progress). I focus on
‘globalism’ not because it exhausts globalisation – it does not, globalisation 
is a much bigger phenomenon – nor because ‘globalism’ is the only current
discourse of globalisation (it is not) but because it is the discourse which has
become hegemonic.
1 Views on discourse as a facet of globalisation
There are various attempts to classify the vast and diverse academic literature
on globalisation, including the well-known differentiation between ‘hyper-
globalist’, ‘sceptical’, and ‘transformationalist’ positions in Held et al. (1999)
(see also Hay and Marsh 2000, Cameron and Palan 2004). But I want to 
suggest a classiﬁcation more suited to the purpose of this paper, based upon
456
Globalisation and ‘transition’


different views of discourse as a facet of globalisation. Four main positions 
can be distinguished: objectivism, rhetoricism, ideologism and social con-
structivism. Objectivism treats globalisation as simply objective fact, which
discourse may either illuminate or obscure, represent or misrepresent (the
position basically adopted for instance in Held et al. 1999). Rhetoricism
focuses on how various discourses of globalisation are used for instance by
politicians to persuade publics to accept certain (sometimes unpalatable) poli-
cies (see, for example, Hay and Rosamond (2002)). Ideologism focuses upon
how particular discourses of globalisation systematically contribute to the
legitimation of a particular global order which incorporates asymmetrical rela-
tions of power such as those between and within countries (e.g., Steger 2005).
Social constructivism2 recognises the socially constructed character of social
life in general and forms of globalisation in particular, and sees discourse as
potentially having signiﬁcant causal effects in processes of social construction
(e.g., Cameron and Palan 2004). Let me stress that these are recognisable 
general positions, which particular authors often use in combination – for
instance, although Steger’s emphasis is on ideology, he also discusses the
socially constructive force of discourses.
From this classiﬁcation of positions we can identify ﬁve general claims
about discourse as a facet of globalisation:
1. Discourse can represent globalisation, giving people information about it
and contributing to their understanding of it.
2. Discourse can misrepresent and mystify globalisation, giving a confusing
and misleading impression of it.
3. Discourse can be used rhetorically to project a particular view of globalisa-
tion which can justify or legitimise the actions, policies or strategies of 
particular (usually powerful) social agencies and agents.
4. Discourse can contribute to the constitution, dissemination and reproduc-
tion of ideologies, which can also be seen as forms of mystiﬁcation, but have
a crucial systemic function in sustaining a particular form of globalisation
and the (unequal and unjust) power relations which are built into it.
5. Discourse can generate imaginary representations of how the world will be
or should be within strategies for change which, if they achieve hegemony,
can be operationalised to transform these imaginaries into realities, i.e.,
particular actual forms of globalisation.
The ﬁfth claim is the strongest one, and it is the claim I have committed myself
to above. But this does not mean that we should reject the others – on the 
contrary, there is truth in all of them. What is generally lacking in the existing
Language and globalisation
457


literature, however, is a systematic approach to theorising and analysing 
discourse as a facet of globalisation which can show these various effects of
discourse and the relationship between them, and help explain them.
My approach to discourse is a particular version of CDA (Chouliaraki and
Fairclough 1999, Fairclough 2000a, 2000b, Fairclough 2003, Fairclough,
Jessop and Sayer 2004, Fairclough 2005a, 2005b), but I think it is fruitful 
in researching discourse as a facet of globalisation to work with a ‘cultural’
political economy ( Jessop and Sum 2001, Jessop 2004) which incorporates
the former. Political economy differs from classical economics in asserting that
economic systems and economic changes are politically conditioned and
embedded (Polanyi 1944). Cultural political economy asserts that economic
and political ‘objects’ in the widest sense (including economic systems, eco-
nomic organisations, the division of labour, the state, forms of management
and governance) are socially constructed, are co-constructions of subjects 
and objects (and hence also culturally conditioned and embedded), and are in
part effects of discourse. What I have called actual processes and tendencies 
of globalisation are highly complex, diverse, uneven, multidimensional (eco-
nomic, political, social, cultural, ecological and so forth) and incapable of being
fully controlled by any human intervention. Nevertheless, as in any actual 
scenario, strategies are developed to regulate, direct and control elements of
these real processes, which may if successful inﬂect and partly redirect their
overall trajectory, and such strategies centrally include discourses which rep-
resent and narrate past and present processes and imagine possible futures,
possible economic (social, political, cultural) orders. Even if, as in the case 
of globalism, the primary objectives of the strategy are economic, the non-
economic conditioning and embedding of economic systems, objects and
processes which I have alluded to means that a strategy is only likely to suc-
ceed if it aims for general social and cultural change.
In situations of disorientation and crisis such as that associated with the
difﬁculties of post-war Fordist economic systems and the Keynsian welfare
state (Jessop 2002) which preceded the emergence of globalism, one ﬁnds a
proliferation of discourses imagining alternative forms of organisation for
economy, state and society. One central question for cultural political eco-
nomy is the mechanisms and processes which connect variation, selection and
retention, i.e., how certain of the discourses which are circulating are selected,
and how they come to be retained (or institutionalised) and thereby come to
be capable of having constitutive effects on real economic, political and social
processes. This is a question one can ask about the discourse of globalism –
how did it come to be selected from a range of alternatives and retained (institu-
tionalised)? How did it come to shape actual processes and tendencies of
458
Globalisation and ‘transition’


globalisation or, in other words, come to be operationalised and implemented?
Operationalisation points to the dialectical character of relations within dis-
course and between discourse and other elements or moments of the social. 
A discourse is operationalised through being enacted in ways of acting and
interacting which themselves have a partially discursive character in that they
include genres (ways of interacting communicatively), for instance in ways 
of working, managing, governing, or conducting politics; through being
inculcated in ways of being, social and personal identities, which also have a
partly discursive character in that they include styles (ways of being in their
speciﬁcally communicative or discursive aspect, as opposed to their bodily 
or somatic aspects), for instance the identities of workers, entrepreneurs,
managers, politicians, teachers; and through being materialised physically in
technologies, infrastructures, architectures and so forth. From a discourse-
analytical perspective a successfully operationalised strategy constitutes a 
new order of discourse (Fairclough 1992a), i.e., a new structured (though
ﬂexibly structured) conﬁguration of discourses, genres and styles. Globalism,
neo-liberal globalisation, is in part an order of discourse in this sense. It is
important to add, however, that the hegemony of such a strategy, discourse,
and operationalised social order can never be complete – because actual 
processes always exceed even successfully constructed construals of them;
because there are always alternative and even counter strategies and dis-
courses, and because any successfully reconstituted reality is a contradictory
and crisis-prone reality ( Jessop 2004).
2 Discourses of globalisation
‘Globalism’ is a discourse of globalisation which represents it in reductive
neo-liberal economic terms within a strategy to inﬂect actual processes of
globalisation in that direction. Steger (2005) identiﬁes six core claims of ‘glob-
alism’ (as well as providing arguments against all of them):
1. Globalisation is about the liberalisation and global integration of markets.
2. Globalisation is inevitable and irreversible.
3. Nobody is in charge of globalisation.
4. Globalisation beneﬁts everyone.
5. Globalisation furthers the spread of democracy in the world.
6. Globalisation requires a war on terror.
The ﬁrst claim is the most crucial one, and most central to the question of
how this particular discourse came to be selected and retained from the range
Language and globalisation
459


of alternatives, especially in what it assumes as a general and therefore globally
applicable truth, that the most effective form of capitalist economy is one
based upon ‘liberalised’ markets. The plausibility and resonance of this
assumption rest upon what have been pretty successfully established as facts
about the post second-world-war socio-economic order, and especially the
‘fact’ that markets are self-regulating and interference by states (as this history
is claimed to have shown) are economically counter-productive and damag-
ing. There is, of course, the contrary ‘fact’ that unregulated markets have been
shown to produce chaotic and disastrous effects (Polanyi 1944), but in the
aftermath of the economic troubles of the 1970s powerful agents and agencies
were unreceptive to it. For in addition to a perceived objective plausibility in
real experience, market liberalisation gained the support of the most powerful
states (the USA and Britain were forerunners) and inﬂuential politicians,
international agencies which these states effectively control (the World Bank,
IMF, WTO, OECD etc.), private corporations, and many other agents and
agencies. Steger describes globalism as a ‘story’ (or narrative), a discourse,
and an ideology. The term ‘ideology’ is not inappropriate: globalism can be
seen as having created a space for unconstrained and highly proﬁtable action
on the part of the corporations of the most powerful countries on earth, espe-
cially the USA, on the basis of a claim that markets work benignly without
external regulation which the crises of the late 1990s (in East Asia, Latin
America, and Russia) have shown to be false. Yet the strategy and discourse
have proved relatively resilient and capable of accommodating certain conces-
sions to regulation without major change. It has also gained inﬂuence within
the European Union despite continuing commitment to some form (if a 
‘modernised’ and arguably weakened one) of the European Social Model.
Epistemologically, discourses are abstract entities which established on 
the basis of repetition and recurrence over time and in diverse social sites, 
but ontologically they appear in the concrete form of particular texts. One
contribution that CDA can make to (cultural) political economic analysis is
methods for analysing texts which illuminate their contribution to strategies,
discourses, and their operationalisation and implementation, as well as their
recontextualisation in different places (e.g., countries, regions) and different
ﬁelds of social life, and their adaptation to changing events and circumstances.
CDA in itself cannot, however, tell us which texts are signiﬁcant within the
constitutive effects of discourse on social life – that requires institutional and
historical forms of analysis.
I shall illustrate the contribution of textual analysis in the case of a speech
(Eizenstat 1999) whose signiﬁcance arises from the standing of the speaker
(US undersecretary of State, Stuart Eizenstat) and the context of crisis for 
460
Globalisation and ‘transition’


globalism within which it was delivered and which it addresses (it was 
delivered in the wake of the Asian economic collapse in the late 1990s), con-
stituting a response by the US government to crises which threatened the
strategy they supported. In essence, Eizenstat acknowledges the threat while
arguing that ‘globalisation’ must not be abandoned, that the crisis was largely
due to ﬂaws in the countries affected, and that international help must be given
to remedying them, and thus restoring conﬁdence in the capacity of the system
to deliver on its promises. The speech is clearly globalist, and it illustrates
some of the central globalist claims identiﬁed by Steger: that ‘globalisation’
beneﬁts everyone (‘By any measure, globalisation is a net beneﬁt to the United
States and the world. In an increasingly globalised and interdependent eco-
nomy, the quest for prosperity is the opposite of a zero sum game’), that it is
inevitable and irreversible (‘Globalisation is an inevitable element of our lives.
We cannot stop it anymore than we can stop the waves from crashing on the
shore’), and that it strengthens democracy. Yet there is evidence in appar-
ent incoherencies within the speech that its attempt, to justify continuing
adherence to a globalist strategy in the face of stark evidence of the failures of
globalism and ‘fears’ of a consequential ‘backlash against globalisation’, puts
the discourse of globalism under strain. For example, the quotation above to
illustrate the claimed inevitability and irreversibility of ‘globalisation’ comes
from the following paragraph in the ofﬁcial transcript:
Globalization is an inevitable element of our lives. We cannot stop it 
anymore than we can stop the waves from crashing on the shore. The 
arguments in support of trade liberalization and open markets are strong
ones – they have been made by many of you and we must not be afraid to
engage those with whom we respectfully disagree.
This appears to be an argument, with a claim in the ﬁrst sentence which seems
to be supported by two grounds in the second and third sentences. But it is
incoherent because the two grounds are in contradiction – if globalisation is
analogous to a natural phenomenon in its inevitability, how can it be open to
argument, as the second ground implies? To put the problem in different
terms, we have three sentences which are combined in the transcript within a
paragraph, which implies coherent relations of meaning between them which
are difﬁcult to see. The difﬁculty lies in the meaning of ‘globalisation’, a word
which is much used in the text but in a way which confuses the ‘forces’ of glob-
alisation which the US strategy for ‘trade liberalisation and open markets’ is
designed to ‘harness’, and the (globalist) strategy itself. Here as elsewhere 
in the speech, an implicit equivalence is constructed between ‘globalisation’
Language and globalisation
461


and ‘trade liberalisation and open markets’. In the following paragraph, 
the implicit equivalence is between ‘globalisation’ and ‘dramatic economic
liberalisation’:
In short, the ﬁnancial crisis has exacerbated fears in developing countries
and could fuel a backlash against globalization. Indeed, the optimistic
notion only 2 years ago that the world was adopting dramatic economic 
liberalization as a model for economic and political development is under
challenge.
We might counter Eizenstat’s argument with the claim that the feared ‘back-
lash’ is surely against globalist strategy, not against globalisation as a set of real
processes. And for the following extract, with the claim that the ‘undeniable
risks’ surely come from globalist strategy and policies, not from the real pro-
cesses of globalisation, and that it is by no means ‘fruitless’ to attempt to stop
the former.
The world must neither resort to protectionist measures in a fruitless
attempt to stop globalization nor should we ignore its undeniable risks.
In short, Eisenstat’s apologia for globalism in the face of evidence and wide-
spread recognition of its manifest failures is built upon obscuring the differ-
ence between globalisation as a set of real processes and tendencies, and one
favoured strategy among a number of conceivable and potentially viable 
alternatives for regulating, controlling and directing a globalising world.
If Eizenstat’s speech illustrates the capacity of the strategy and discourse 
of ‘globalism’ to accommodate failures and crises without fundamental
change, though not without incoherence and contradiction, there is no short-
age of alternative and competing strategies and discourses which in some 
cases, especially since the crises of the late 1990s, constitute a challenge to 
the hegemony of ‘globalism’. The Malaysian government withdrew from the 
neo-liberal ‘global economy’ after the Asian crisis and has pursued its own
counter-strategy with some considerable success (bin Mohamad 2002).
Other Asian governments also have their own strategies for and discourses of
globalisation. In the European Union, especially countries with a strong tradi-
tion of social democracy (such as Sweden) seek to combine international 
competitiveness with strong social policies. And some international agencies
have pushed for alternatives to globalism (e.g., ECLAC 2002). There are 
then many non-governmental organisations which produced alternative 
and competing strategies, including those which reﬂect the ‘limits to growth’
462
Globalisation and ‘transition’


perspective such as the Green Party in the UK (Green Party UK 2005).
Globalism is still the most inﬂuential strategy, but it has had to some extent to
come to terms with others, though US policy especially since 11 September
2001 has favoured aggressive unilateralism over accommodation, shifting
from what Steger (2005) calls ‘soft power’ (reliance on persuasion and 
inducements) to ‘hard power’ (using economic and military force to compel
compliance) in pursuit of a version of globalism which is more nakedly 
self-interested.
3 Re-scaling
I shall now shift my focus from strategies and discourses of globalisation to 
the question of how processes of globalisation impact upon speciﬁc spatial
‘entities’ (nation states, cities, regions etc.), how they become globalised. I
shall draw upon Jessop’s view (2002) of globalisation as the constitution of
new scales of social action, interaction and exchange (not only the global scale,
but also for instance the ‘macro-regional’ scale of the European Union or the
North American Free Trade Area, and the scale of ‘cross-border regions’),
and of new relations between different scales. The spatial entity I focus on here is
the nation state, taking Romania, one of the ‘post-communist’ states of Eastern
Europe, as an example. The globalisation of a country like Romania can be
viewed as a matter of its ‘re-scaling’, its incorporation into new relations of
scale.
The strategy of globalism constitutes from this perspective a strategy to
constitute a global scale of action, interaction and exchange. As I argued
above, the objective is a global scale which is narrowly constrained and one
might say reduced in terms of the forms of action, interaction and exchange it
entails to, in Eizenstat’s words, ‘trade liberalisation and open markets’,
though the political and cultural embedding of economies which I discussed
earlier mean that the success of the strategy is conditional upon a more general
transformation of social relations, institutions, values, attitudes and identities.
Success also requires the dissemination of the strategy and discourse within
innumerable spatial entities including nation states like Romania, and their
operationalisation and implementation. There are also simultaneously strat-
egies and discourses to constitute macro-regional scales such as the European
scale. When we begin to examine these strategies in detail, it becomes clear
that although it may be possible to identify overall strategies oriented to both
the global and the macro-regional scales, these are ‘nodal’ strategies around
which a multiplicity of more focused strategies are clustered. So in the case of
the European Union, a nodal strategy was deﬁned by the Lisbon Council of
Language and globalisation
463


2000 (to make the EU ‘the most competitive and dynamic knowledge-based
economy in the world, capable of sustainable economic growth with more and
better jobs and greater social cohesion’), but there are many more focused
strategies for constituting a European scale (or ‘space’ or ‘area’) of higher 
education, lifelong learning, competitiveness, social inclusion, and so forth.
These strategies and discourses, as well as many others, are ‘recontextu-
alised’ (Chouliaraki and Fairclough 1999) in spatial entities at various scales,
including nation states like Romania. Recontextualisation is not a simple mat-
ter of the spread of strategies and discourses to new contexts. Chouliaraki and
Fairclough (1999) argue for seeing recontextualisation as a dialectical process
of external ‘colonisation’ by and internal ‘appropriation’ of recontextualised
elements, which are appropriated within an internal ﬁeld (or rather complex
set of ﬁelds) of strategic diversity, contestation and struggle. Romania is said to
be a country in ‘transition’ from a centrally planned economy and one-party
state to a market economy and western parliamentary democracy, and it is
even after ﬁfteen years of ‘transition’ a highly complex not to say chaotic 
and disorganised mixture of old and new. The actual impact on particular
nation states of recontextualised strategies and discourses is likely to be vari-
able, unpredictable, and potentially quite different from what strategists may 
have envisaged. Is for instance ‘trade liberalisation and open markets’ an 
accurate way of describing Romania ﬁfteen years after what was effectively a
globalist strategy for transition (what came to be known as the ‘Washington
Consensus’) was deﬁned for it as for other post-communist countries? Partly,
yes – but Romania is also characterised by a still signiﬁcant if rapidly dimin-
ishing state economic sector, a substantial ‘black economy’, and the existence
of clientelist relations between the state, political parties, public administra-
tion and private business which make the word ‘open’ highly problematic and
produce massive corruption and the exorbitant self-enrichment of an elite.
Let me try to make these general observations about re-scaling more con-
crete by referring to a particular example, the EU’s strategy to constitute a
European Area of Higher Education (i.e., a European scale in higher educa-
tion) which would incorporate candidates for EU accession like Romania as
well as other countries on borders of the EU as well as EU members, and the
recontextualisation of the EU strategy and discourse in Romania. EU strategy
is based around the ‘Bologna process’ which grew out of the Bologna Declara-
tion (2001). Its aim is to achieve ‘greater compatibility and comparability of
the systems of higher education’ in the region in both undergraduate and
graduate degrees, in order to ‘promote citizens’ mobility and employability’
and ‘the international competitiveness of the European system of higher educa-
tion’. The latter objective indicates that the process of higher educational
464
Globalisation and ‘transition’


reform is actually global, not just European – the Bologna process is a
European response to global processes of change, which involve the emer-
gence of a competitive international market in higher education (as part of the
moves towards a General Agreement on Trade in Services within the WTO),
in the context of the perceived increasing economic importance of higher 
education in the ‘knowledge-based economy’ which the EU is committed to,
and fears about the EU’s lack of competitiveness with the USA and East Asia.
The speciﬁc targets include standardisation of degree structures in terms 
of the duration of undergraduate and graduate degrees and the number of
credits attaching to each unit, the development of comparable criteria and
methodologies for quality assurance, a ‘Diploma Supplement’ which would
make qualiﬁcations more easily readable and comparable, and promoting 
student and staff mobility within European countries.
The discourse associated with the Bologna strategy is internally complex,
and we can better refer to it as a nodal discourse which is constituted as a
conﬁguration of discourses, including for instance the discourses of ‘compet-
itiveness’ and ‘quality’. Moreover, the Bologna process is an incremental one
in which the strategy and discourse have been elaborated over time, at regular
biannual meetings of Ministers of Education. For Romania, the selection of
this discourse was a selection that made itself, given government policy to
achieve accession to the EU, and given the relations of power entailed (for suc-
cessful accession, involvement is required in the construction of European
scales in various domains). One part of measures to secure retention of the dis-
course, as well as its operationalisation and implementation, has been legisla-
tion – a new Law on the Organization of University Studies was passed in
2004, requiring universities to implement the speciﬁc targets detailed above.
The justiﬁcation for the new law provided by the government in Parliament
was that reorganisation would ‘eliminate excessive specialization’, contribute
to the ‘development of professions which are short of specialized and eco-
nomically and culturally necessary personnel’, contribute to ‘the development
of new qualiﬁcations related to current needs and . . . the labour market’, and
be in line with ‘the dynamics of the labour market at national, European and
international level’. So the Government’s interest was more or less entirely
economic, and there were no references to other legitimations which have
been prominent in the Bologna documentation such as student mobility or
European culture and identity. The new system was put into operation from
autumn 2005.
But a promised law on ‘quality assurance’ has not yet emerged, and it is
quality assurance I want to focus on to illustrate the complexities and uncer-
tainties of recontextualisation and re-scaling in Romania. There is a general
Language and globalisation
465


public cynicism about government discourse and legislation which is con-
stantly expressed in public discourse, including the mass media, in terms of a
gap between words and realities. In this case as in others, it is with operation-
alisation and implementation that the problems begin. To put a complex issue
in a simple way, there is considerable scepticism about whether Romanian
universities have, or can come to have in the near future, the institutional 
characteristics which are prerequisites for the Bologna reforms to be actually
implemented. Quality assurance is a particularly good illustration of the 
problems.
The European Association for Quality Assurance in Higher Education
(ENQA) has developed ‘European standards for internal and external quality
assurance, and for external quality assurance agencies’ which were approved
at the Bergen meeting of Ministers of Education in 2005. The methodology
for quality assurance is centred upon ‘self-examination’ and ‘self-evaluation’ –
the principle that ‘providers of higher education have the primary respons-
ibility for the quality of their provision and its assurance’ (ENQA 2005). They
should establish an inclusive ‘culture of quality’ (including students, aca-
demic staff, administrative staff and other ‘stakeholders’) which recognises 
the importance of quality and seeks its continuous enhancement. The role of
external quality assurance is to ensure that this process of internal quality
assurance is adequate. In internal quality assurance, ‘institutions should have
formal mechanisms for the approval, periodic review and monitoring of their
programmes and awards’; ‘students should be assessed using published cri-
teria, regulations and procedures which are applied consistently’; ‘institutions
should have ways of satisfying themselves that staff involved with the teaching
of students are qualiﬁed and competent to do so’; that ‘the resources available
for the support of student learning are adequate and appropriate’ and that they
‘collect, analyse and use relevant information for the effective management of
their programmes of study and other activities’.
The operationalisation of this discourse of quality assurance entails its
enactment through the constitution and institutionalisation of new proced-
ures (‘mechanisms’) which amount to a new set of interconnected genres (on
genre ‘chains’ or ‘networks’, see Fairclough 2003), such as genres for staff self-
evaluation and student evaluation of courses. It also entails, as the idea of a
‘culture of quality’ suggests, its inculcation in new ways of being, new institu-
tional identities which substantively include new styles. The idea of a ‘culture’
of quality and an ongoing concern to improve quality through self-monitoring
and self-assessment implies changes in ‘the way people perceive themselves 
in relation to their work, to one another and to themselves’, changes in 
‘professional, collegial and personal identity’ (Shore and Wright 2000). Thus
466
Globalisation and ‘transition’


systems of quality assurance entail profound changes in institutions, their
social relationships and practices and the identities of their members, which
could fruitfully be researched with CDA as changes in their orders of dis-
course. They entail social relationships which are open and relatively egalitarian,
practices which are transparent and subject to effective institutional regula-
tion, and people who are professionally committed to the institution and 
well disposed to continuous learning. Consider, for example, staff appraisal.
The staff appraisal procedure I am familiar with in one British university is
transparently deﬁned as a network of genres: a written self-evaluative report by
the appraisee, which is the basis for an interview between appraiser and
appraisee so designed as to achieve consensus on an account and evaluation of
the appraiser’s work in the preceding period, a plan for the next period, and
means for fulﬁlling this plan. The appraisal interview is the basis for a report
written by the appraiser and agreed by the appraisee which is conﬁdential 
to both of them and the Head of Department. For such a procedure to work
successfully, the sort of prerequisites I have indicated need to be in place.
The general situation in Romanian universities (there are differences, and
exceptions) is that institutional regulation of practices is poor and opaque;
social relations are highly hierarchical and predominantly clientelist and the
distribution of goods is controlled in often arbitrary and personalised ways by
a professorial elite; and people in some cases cynically seek to maximise their
own interests, and in most cases are demoralised and alienated by abysmal
salaries and conditions and what they perceive as an under-resourced and
unjust system. There is already a national council set up for external quality
assurance, and internal quality assurance systems are in a more or less
advanced stage of preparation in individual universities. Public universities
are still subject to a substantial measure of ministerial control, so a quality
assurance system and new procedures will emerge. The optimistic view is that
systems and procedures will contribute to the profound transformations I
have indicated; the pessimistic and perhaps more realistic view is that existing
social relations and interests are so entrenched that lip-service will be paid 
to forms of quality assurance with little substance, and certainly nothing
resembling a ‘culture of quality’. If the latter happens, there will be new genres
and styles – on paper, but probably not in practice.3
Quality assurance is just one example of a new technology and discourse of
governance which is based upon a principle of ‘self-management’, ‘monitor-
ing’ and ‘assessment’ combined with external ‘audit’, ‘rituals of veriﬁcation’.
‘Where audit is applied to public institutions – medical, legal, educational –
the state’s overt concern may be less to impose day-to-day direction than to
ensure that internal controls, in the form of monitoring techniques, are in
Language and globalisation
467


place’ (Strathern 2000). The technology/discourse is closely associated with
the idea of the ‘accountability’ of public institutions. These developments in
governance fall under the general rubric of ‘new public management’, which is
consistent with neo-liberal principles of converting public services into com-
petitive markets (Rose 1999). On the face of it, institutions are ‘empowered’ to
make their own way in the market free of bureaucratic control, but their auto-
nomy is largely illusory, because they are subject to ‘audits’ which monitor
how effective their mechanisms and procedures are for ‘assuring’ standards of
‘quality’ which are imposed upon them. The ‘open method of coordination’
adopted by the EU can be seen as essentially the same technology and dis-
course of governance. The Bologna strategy thus overlaps with a strategy and
discourse to constitute a European scale of governance, and the problems I
have indicated for Romania in operationalising the former are compounded as
the latter is applied to a variety of institutions.
Let me just add that university reform in Romania as in other countries
gives people working in universities a sense of being caught between the devil
and the deep blue sea. While few people would wish to defend to existing 
system, few people are attracted by the subordination of universities to eco-
nomic demands and interests or the university system turning into just
another competitive international market.
4 Media and mediation
Cultural political economy asserts that political economies are subject to 
cultural conditions, and are culturally embedded. In contemporary societies,
mass media are the predominant social ﬁeld in the creation of these cultural
conditions – in the constitution of the public knowledge and information,
beliefs, values and attitudes which are necessary for establishing and sustain-
ing economic, social and political systems and orders. Changes in the inter-
national political economy of communication have been an important factor
for the relative success of globalist strategy and discourse. The emergence of a
global communications industry, dominated by powerful transnational cor-
porations such as Rupert Murdoch’s News Corporation, is itself a signiﬁcant
part of the emergence of a neo-liberal ‘global economy’. The role of these cor-
porations in global political economy is twofold: ﬁrst, they have provided the
infrastructure (hardware and software) that has enabled changes in the pattern
of production; second, they are ‘the major purveyors of news, information,
entertainment and knowledge about the world in general’ (Wilkin 2001: 126).
They are the main source of views and ideas, of a sense of what is right and
what is possible, and the main providers of credibility and legitimacy for the
468
Globalisation and ‘transition’


powers that be. They contribute to the dissemination of globalist discourse,
claims and assumptions, and of the values, attitudes and identities which are
conditions for the successful implementation of globalism, on the basis of an
intimate relationship between these corporations and other sectors of busi-
ness, the public relations industry, governments in the most powerful states,
and other agencies. This is not to say that the media as a whole are a mere echo
chamber for globalism. Inﬂuential independent newspapers and broadcast-
ing still exist in many countries, and they have in many cases played a crucial
role in challenging aspects of globalism as well as orchestrating opposition to
war (especially in the case of Iraq). But the independent role of the media as a
‘fourth estate’ fulﬁlling a public service role, providing accurate and dispas-
sionate information, and, where necessary, exposure and criticism of social
ills, is being progressively undermined as the transnational corporations
become dominant in the media ﬁeld internationally.
With respect to news, one can see the partial emergence of a global news
agenda whose coverage depends upon a common resource of news agency
reports and ﬁlm, addressed to an increasingly global audience, and producing
globalised representations and meanings around particular events. This is
particularly clear in the case of news items which top the global agenda, such
as natural disasters like the tsunami of December 2004, terrorist attacks like
‘9/11’, wars (most recently the Iraq war), the death of prominent individuals
(such as the Pope), or major international political events such as meetings of
G8 or the WTO. Meetings of such organisations have become occasions for
protest demonstrations by people who are opposed to the way that globalism
is actually working with respect to such matters as international debt, terms of
trade between rich and poor states, and so forth, and I want to take the cover-
age of such representations as an example. Such demonstrations have come to
be increasingly seen and treated as primarily problems of law and order, and
predominant media representations in countries across the world represent
them with a focus upon anticipated or actual violence rather than on the major
political issues which are at stake, according to what we can call an established
narrative schema or template which is applied to new events as they occur. An
example of the focus on anticipated violence in the media build-up to such
events is a report in the British Daily Telegraph on 12 June 2005 about the 
G8 meeting in Edinburgh in July. The headline was ‘Police prepare to make
thousands of arrests at G8’, and the article began as follows:
The Army is preparing barracks and military bases in Scotland for use 
as holding camps if, as police expect, thousands of protesters are arrested
during the G8 summit of world leaders next month.
Language and globalisation
469


The decision to earmark sites where protesters may be held follows 
warnings from European police forces and intelligence ofﬁcials that foreign
anarchists have already entered Britain and are plotting to disrupt the 
meeting, to be held at Gleneagles, the luxury hotel and resort in Perthshire,
Scotland.
Senior detectives have told The Sunday Telegraph that more than 50 dedi-
cated troublemakers with criminal records have slipped into the country,
before the imposition of stringent security measures at airports, ferry 
terminals and on the Eurostar train service in the immediate run-up to the
summit.
World leaders including Tony Blair and presidents Putin, Bush and Chirac
will attend the three-day meeting and police are straining to protect them
and keep protesters at bay. There are fears that anarchists from across
Europe will mingle with anti-capitalism campaigners in and around
Edinburgh, which is expected to be the focal point of demonstrations
against the international ﬁnancial system.
Their numbers are likely to be swollen by campaigners for African debt
relief, who have been urged to descend on the Scottish capital by Bob
Geldof.
The political objectives of the planned demonstration are alluded to (‘demon-
strations against the international ﬁnancial system’, ‘campaigners for African
debt relief’) but parenthetically and in the most general terms. The focus of the
story is on preparations for ‘disruption’ (the term attributed to the police)
against the background of evidence that ‘dedicated troublemakers’ (with,
moreover, ‘criminal records’) and ‘anarchists’ will be joining the demonstra-
tion and are ‘plotting’ (anarchists are, of course, wont to ‘plot’) to disrupt
them.
Reports of the actual events of and around the G8 meeting were again 
dominated by violence. What is striking is that very similar reports 
appeared across the world, from Europe and America to China. On 6 July, 
CNN, the transnational news channel with the biggest international circula-
tion, used the headline ‘G8 protesters clash with police’ (notice the implicit
agency and responsibility attributed to the protestors in this formulation, 
in comparison with ‘G8 protestors and police clash’). The story began as 
follows:
EDINBURGH, Scotland – Protesters clashed with police, smashing car
windows and throwing rocks, just hours before the world’s eight richest
nations were set to open their annual meeting in Gleneagles, Scotland.
470
Globalisation and ‘transition’


More than 100 activists, many wearing bandanas and hoods, emerged from
a makeshift camp in Stirling early Wednesday morning, The Associated
Press reported, one day after clashes sent 100 protesters to court.
A spokesman for Central Scotland Police conﬁrmed to AP that ofﬁcers had
come under attack. Protesters could be seen smashing a police van.
There had been two arrests but no reported injuries, a police spokes-
woman told Reuters.
The report did go on to why people were demonstrating, but the focus was on
the violence. Needless to say, if the increasingly global character of protest can
be countered by an increasingly global message that protestors are violent
anarchists or criminals, globalist strategy stands to beneﬁt. Other accounts of
such events outside the mainstream media (see, for instance, www.indymedia.
co.uk) have accused the latter of focusing upon what were in relative terms
minor aspects of the demonstrations, of reporting violence rather than the
substantive content of the demonstrations, and of ignoring the ways in which
heavy-handed policing was provoking clashes.
5 Globals and locals
Globalised media agendas dominated by a globalised communications indus-
try assume considerable importance, given what Tomlinson (1999) calls the
‘deterritorialisation’ of local lives whereby ‘globalisation lifts cultural life out
of its hitherto close connection with physical locality’. People’s experience is
increasingly a combination of unmediated experience through direct contact
with others in their communities, and mediated experience especially through
television. Their mediated experience gives them contact with ways of life,
information, practices and values (and in discourse analytical terms with dis-
courses, genres and styles) which transcend their unmediated experience.
Positively, it vastly increases their access to potential resources, but in so far 
as agendas, perspectives and values (and discourses, genres and styles) are
controlled and limited in the ways I have suggested, it exposes them to the
strategies and meanings favoured by the powerful.
Yet the relationship between mediated and unmediated experience is a
complex one, and the comments I made in the section on re-scaling about the
complexities, uncertainties and unpredictability of recontextualisation apply
also here. There can be tensions between them which affect media reception,
so that the interpretation of media messages, images and representations 
may be highly diverse. And while people may add elements of their mediated
Language and globalisation
471


experience to their resources for living their own lives, these may be hybridised
with local resources in diverse and unpredictable ways (Tomlinson 1999).
This includes ‘interdiscursive hybridity’ (Fairclough 1992a), the emergence
of new hybrid discourses, genres and styles out of the dynamic relationships
and tensions between mediated and unmediated experience. A trap which
some academic analysis of globalisation falls into is treating globalisation only
in terms of the actions and strategies of agents and ‘players’ who are dominant
on global, macro-regional or national scales, and assuming the local impacts of
global processes and tendencies, rather than recognising the need for locality-
based analysis to establish these (Burawoy et al. 2000).
One issue is the strategies of survival which people develop to deal with the
effects of globalisation, such as unemployment. In the following extract (from
MacDonald 1994) we have three unemployed people in the North East of
England talking on the theme of ‘ﬁddly jobs’ – working (illegally) while claim-
ing social security beneﬁts.
Phil: There’s enough around. All you have to do is to go into any pub or
club, that’s where the work is. The person you mentioned he probably just
sits around watching the telly. To get a job round here you’ve got to go
around and ask people.
Danny: Most of it is who you know. You’ve got no chance of getting a job in the
Job Centre. . . . You go out to the pub. People who go to the pub go to work.
Stephen: he [the ‘hirer and ﬁrer’] just shows his face in ‘The Rose Tree’ or
‘The Gate’ and people jump and ask him for work. When I was working
there I’ve seen him just drive off in his van around the pubs and he’ll 
come back with another 20 men to work, an hour later. No-one asks any
questions.
It’s a matter of us being cheaper. It’s deﬁnitely easier than having a lot of 
lads taken on permanently. It would cost them more to put them on the
books or pay them off. It’s just the ﬂexibility. You’re just there for when the
jobs come up, and he (the ‘hirer and ﬁrer’) will come and get you when
you’re needed. You need to be on the dole to be able to do that. Otherwise
you’d be sitting there for half the year with no work and no money at all.
Jordan (1996) argues that the ‘socially excluded’ develop their own often
effective social capital and social networks to survive – this is evident in this
extract, as also is the way such emergent practices are discoursally constructed
and sustained through contemporary proverbs – ‘People who go to the pub 
go to work’. Jordan also argues that survival strategies are a perfectly rational
response to the conditions people ﬁnd themselves in, based upon a perception
472
Globalisation and ‘transition’


of how the new form of capitalism works which is widely recognised but out-
side ofﬁcial public discourse. We can read Stephen here as giving a formula-
tion of such a rationale: black labour is part of the ‘ﬂexibility’ of the new
capitalism, but it is so undependable that only people on social security (‘the
dole’) can do it. Notice the word ‘ﬂexibility’ – Stephen is giving voice to neo-
liberal economic discourse, but ironically incorporating it into his rationale
for black labour as an alternative to the ofﬁcially approved course of moving
from welfare into poorly paid work.
But the issue goes beyond strategies of survival. ‘Global ethnographers’
(Burawoy et al., Burawoy and Verdery 1999, 2000) have shown a sort of 
‘globalization from below’ in which people in particular localities develop
their own global networks as resources for building and promoting strategies
on local issues, drawing upon their mediated experience. Gille (2000) for
example has investigated a controversy over the building of a hazardous waste
incinerator in a rural area of Hungary which divided the local communities
and brought them into alliances with national and international agencies and
organisations. Those in favour of the incinerator sought to ally themselves
with the global incinerator industry and to justify the project in terms of EU
policy on the disposal of hazardous waste, as well as appealing to anti-Romani
sentiment by representing the incinerator as a way to ‘keep the Gypsies out’ of
the area. Those opposed to the incinerator sought allies in the Western Green
movement, representing the incinerator as part of an EU policy to shift the dis-
posal of western hazardous waste to the East. What such examples illustrate is
local people actively constructing global links and in so doing developing their
own discursive resources, appropriating on both sides discourses, narratives
and forms of argumentation from the West. This provides an important cor-
rective to the idea of ﬂows of strategies and discourses from West to East which
people are passively subjected to.
6 War and terrorism
The US shift from ‘soft’ to ‘hard’ power I alluded to above is associated with
the rise to power of ‘neo-conservatism’, particularly when G.W. Bush became
President. Neo-conservatism has a continuing commitment to neo-liberalism
and globalism, but combined with a willingness to use the USA’s economic
and military power, unilaterally if necessary, to preserve US global hegemony,
which is seen as conditional upon the successful defence and extension of the
globalist strategy. The clearest expression of this combination of strategic
change and continuity is the US National Security Strategy of 2002 (Chomsky
2003b). I shall discuss an essay (2002, published in Stelzer 2004) on this
Language and globalisation
473


Strategy by Condoleezza Rice, National Security Advisor and then Secretary
of State in G.W. Bush’s administration.
Rice interprets the New York attacks as an ‘existential threat’ to US ‘secur-
ity’ not from other powerful states but from ‘terrorists’ and ‘weak or failed
states’, a new threat which demands a new strategy. America will ‘use its posi-
tion of unparalleled strength and inﬂuence to create a balance of power that
favors freedom’, and this will include ‘military power’. 
We will break up terror networks, hold to account nations that harbour 
terrorists, and confront aggressive tyrants holding or seeking nuclear,
chemical, and biological weapons that might be passed to terrorist allies.
These are all different faces of the same evil. . . . the United States must be
prepared to take action, when necessary, before threats have fully material-
ized. Pre-emption is not a new concept. There has never been a moral or
legal requirement that a country wait to be attacked before it can address
existential threats.
To support this strategy, the US ‘will build and maintain . . . military forces
that are beyond challenge . . . and seek to dissuade any potential adversary
from pursuing a military build-up in the hope of surpassing, or equalling, the
power of the United States’. Such a development is more remote than in the
past, however, because ‘the world’s great centers of power are united by com-
mon interests, common dangers and . . . common values’ and ‘share a broad
commitment to democracy, the rule of law, a market-based economy, and open
trade’. The US ‘will ﬁght poverty, disease and oppression because it is the
right thing to do – and the smart thing to do. We have seen how poor states can
become weak or even failed states, vulnerable to hijacking by terrorist net-
works’. But ‘development assistance . . . will only be available to countries
that work to govern justly, invest in the health and education of their people,
and encourage economic liberty . . . values must be a vital part of our rela-
tionship with other countries.’ ‘We reject the condescending view . . . that
Muslims somehow do not share the desire to be free. The celebrations we saw
on the streets of Kabul . . . proved otherwise.’ ‘We do not seek to impose
democracy on others, we seek only to help create conditions in which people
can claim a freer future for themselves.’ Finally, ‘we have the ability to forge a
twenty-ﬁrst century that lives up to our hopes . . . only if we (exercise) our
inﬂuence in the service of our ideals, and not just ourselves’.
The change in military circumstances which Rice refers to can be seen as
the emerging predominance of ‘irregular warfare’, which is fundamentally
about ‘weak forces learning how to ﬁght strong’, and is a comprehensible
474
Globalisation and ‘transition’


response to prolonged domination by the West over the rest (Saul 2005). In
reducing this to ‘terrorism’ and ‘tyrants’, and adopting an aggressive military
strategy, the US government is arguably failing to address basic issues of
(in)justice which underlie the proliferation of irregular warfare, and its own
responsibility for injustices. ‘Terrorism’ is, of course, a much contested cat-
egory – for neo-conservatives it conﬂates different forms of violence such as 
11 September itself, the Palestinian intifada, the Chechyen war, and the 
resistance to American and British occupation of Iraq, without apparently
including the ‘state terrorism’ practised by US governments themselves 
in Indo-China or by the Israeli government in Palestine (Honderich 2003)
The now routine portrayal of the opposition as ‘evil’ indicates an important
characteristic of neo-conservatism – its links with Christian fundamentalism.
The National Strategy includes what Rice misleadingly calls a strategy of ‘pre-
emption’ – to attack nations which are ‘seeking’ (on what evidence, and in whose
view?) nuclear, chemical or biological weapons which ‘might’ be passed to
‘terrorist allies’, and ‘before threats have fully materialized’. This is not ‘pre-
emptive’ war, which might be justiﬁed in international law, but ‘preventive’
war, which is illegal (Chomsky 2003a). There is a problem of how to legitimise
the US claim to permanent hegemony, and the solution is broadly to claim the
US is a force for good which operates on the basis of ‘values’. It seeks a balance
of power which favours ‘freedom’, a value which few would dissociate them-
selves from. But the neo-conservative use of the word systematically blurs the
distinction between ‘free market’ and political ‘freedom’, and treats them as
one and them same thing. The desire for ‘freedom’ is assumed to be universal,
shared by Muslims as well as others. And in the words of British Prime
Minister Tony Blair, ‘values and interests merge’: when it come to ﬁghting
poverty, disease and oppression, what is ‘right’ is also ‘smart’, though aid is
conditional upon conformity with values which include the globalist value 
of ‘encouraging economic liberty’ (Dufﬁeld 2001).
This neo-conservative version of globalist strategy and discourse (which
includes the discourse of the ‘war on terror’ (Jackson 2005)) has been effec-
tively disseminated internationally with the assistance of the global commu-
nications industry. In terms of the ﬁve positions I distinguished earlier on 
discourse as a facet of globalisation, what I have said above suggests that the
discourse of the ‘war on terror’ is primarily ideological, effectively legitimising
a strategy to preserve and extend US global (and globalist) hegemony for large
sections of the global public, including for instance the publics of post-
communist countries such as Romania. It has succeeded in marginalising
counter-discourses, but without silencing them, and indeed they are gaining
Language and globalisation
475


strength even in the USA itself and Britain. The discourse is also effective
rhetorically in persuading many people to accept restrictions on civil liberties.
But it also has constructive effects, including an international restructuring 
of regimes and apparatuses of security, and the convergence of policies on
development with security policies (Dufﬁeld 2001).
7 Conclusion
I have adopted a speciﬁc, and necessarily highly selective, approach to the
very big issue of how language relates to processes of globalisation. Among
many omissions there is the questions of languages, and particularly the ques-
tion of ‘global English’. For instance, the recontextualisation of the discourse
of globalism and other many discourses which are germane to the re-scaling of
Romania also entails the borrowing of a great deal of English vocabulary. To
illustrate, readers will recognise the italicised words in the following extract
from a statement by the Romanian Minister of Communications and Informa-
tion Technology at a National Conference on ‘Outsourcing’ in November
2005, which are either English borrowings or existing Romanian words used
in the senses they have in recontextualised discourse:
Outsourcingul este un domeniu de succes al IT&C – ului romanesc. Com-
petitia pe aceasta piata a devenit una foarte stransa, Romania ﬁind nevoita
sa concureze in satul global nu doar cu tarile europene, ci si cu cele din
Orientul Indepartat sau America Latina. Doar o strategie de marketing si 
de branding bine structurata si gandita pe termen mediu ne va ajuta sa ne
situam pe un loc fruntas in aceasta competitie globala.
My approach is based upon the use of CDA in transdisciplinary research
on social change which has characterised my recent research and is reﬂected
in the References. In particular, I have used a version of cultural political 
economy which incorporates a version of CDA. The main point that emerges
from this approach is that all the highly complex and diverse contemporary
processes of globalisation inherently have a language dimension, because
globalisation and indeed social change in general are processes involving
dialectical relations between diverse social elements or ‘moments’, always
including discourse. This has been partly recognised as I have indicated in the
social scientiﬁc literature of globalisation, though little of this research truly
does justice to the language dimension, and students of language have a great
deal to offer social scientiﬁc research in terms of helping it to achieve a more
satisfactory treatment of discourse.
476
Globalisation and ‘transition’


Notes
1. It also raises an epistemological problem: what I have referred to as ‘actual 
processes and tendencies of globalisation’ are themselves also representations,
so we are faced with evaluating different representations in terms of how 
adequate they are to realities. I shall not address this thorny problem in detail.
I shall assume that it is difﬁcult to solve but not unsolvable – that different 
representations can indeed be evaluated in terms of their relative ‘practical
adequacy’ (Sayer 2000), by reference to social scientiﬁc evidence of various
sorts on the extent to which what they suggest or imply about social reality
actually happens in social reality.
2. I use ‘social constructivism’ here for the widespread recognition within social
science of the socially constructed character of the social world, and not for the
particular philosophy of science which goes under that name, which ‘in its
strong form claims that objects or referents of knowledge are nothing more
than social constructions’ (Sayer 2000). Like Sayer, I would reject this posi-
tion, while recognising the socially constructed character of the social world.
3. I don’t wish to suggest that the institutional obstacles to effective quality assur-
ance systems I have described are exclusively a problem for Romania or other
post-communist countries, they also exist to a greater or lesser degree in at
least some Western European countries.
Language and globalisation
477


19. Global capitalism, terrorism and war: 
a discourse-analytical perspective 
M
y general objective in this paper is to consider some aspects of the rela-
tionship between discourse and other elements in the social process,
and to give a partial presentation of a methodology for addressing this rela-
tionship in transdisciplinary research on social change. My more particular
objective is to consider, with reference to the American National Security
Strategy(2002), some aspects of the relationship between discourse and other
elements of contemporary processes of ‘globalization’, especially with regard
to their military and security dimensions, including the ‘war on terror’ and
associated ‘pre-emptive’, ‘preventive’ or ‘aggressive’ war – take your choice! –
as in Iraq. I want to try to clarify the signiﬁcance within and effects upon 
military/security and other dimensions of real processes of globalisation, of
the NSS document and other broadly similar policy and strategy documents,
speeches and so forth; and the particular contribution that discourse analysis
can make within transdisciplinary research on these processes.
I am conscious of – and maybe a little uncomfortable about – discussing a
document about which a great deal has been said – perhaps even everything
there is to say! – in terms of questions about the signiﬁcance and effects of dis-
course in the social process about which a great deal has also already been
said. I might say in my defence – half-seriously – that there is nothing unusual
in this for academics! I cannot promise astounding new insights about either
the document or discourse. What I am hoping is that by approaching familiar
issues in a particular way I may shed a glimmer of new light on them. 
Let me begin with the second paragraph of President Bush’s Preface to the
NSS in which he summarises the strategy in terms of what Condoleeza Rice in
a speech on the strategy (The President’s National Security Strategy 2002)
calls its ‘three pillars’ (which I have italicised):


Today, the United States enjoys a position of unparalleled military strength
and great economic and political inﬂuence. In keeping with our heritage
and principles, we do not use our strength to press for unilateral advantage.
We seek instead to create a balance of power that favors human freedom:
conditions in which all nations and all societies can choose for themselves
the rewards and challenges of political and economic liberty. In a world that
is safe, people will be able to make their own lives better. We will defend the
peace by ﬁghting terrorists and tyrants. We will preserve the peace by building
good relations among the great powers. We will extend the peace by encourag-
ing free and open societies on every continent.
Here are a number of comments on this extract which bear upon my broader 
objectives.
• The national security strategy is not simply a strategy for a ‘safer’ world 
but also for a ‘better’ world – it is not simply a military, security, political 
and diplomatic strategy, it is also a global economic (or more properly 
political–economic) strategy, in which societies with particular political
and economic properties (‘free and open’) will be ‘encouraged’ throughout
the world.
• The document as a whole is organised around these three ‘pillars’ apart
from the last chapter, which is on ‘transforming America’s national security
institutions’. So there are chapters on ‘defeating global terrorism’ and ‘pre-
venting attacks’ and ‘preventing our enemies from threatening us with
weapons of mass destruction’ (ﬁrst pillar), ‘working with others to defuse
regional conﬂicts’ and ‘cooperative action with other main centres of global
power’ (second pillar), and ‘championing aspirations to human dignity’,
‘igniting a new era of economic growth through free markets and free trade’,
and ‘expanding the circle of development by opening societies and build-
ing the infrastructure of democracy’ (third pillar).
• The three pillars are formulated and textured together in a way which 
integrates them as intended actions with respect to ‘the peace’; there is 
syntactic parallelism between them, and the three means adverbials (‘by
ﬁghting/building/encouraging’ etc.) texture together in a relation of 
equivalence construals of action which emanate from different discourses 
– military, diplomatic and political–economic. This is interdiscursive
hybridity, and the texturing of a hybrid new security discourse (not strictly
new to this document, but new to the strategy which this document gives
authority to).
• ‘The peace’ seems to be used in the sense of pax in pax Romana/
Britannica/Americana – the state of peace maintained by a dominant
Global capitalism, terrorism and war
479


power – and historically an imperial power – and the area in which it obtains
(which can thus be ‘extended’). America is explicitly identiﬁed elsewhere
in the document as the ‘leading’ power – not of course the ‘imperial’ power
– and that is implicit here in the claim to ‘unparalleled strength and
inﬂuence’ and the objective of ‘creating a balance of power that favors
human freedom’ (only the dominant power could do that).
So a new entity has been textured – in the sense of textually produced – at this
point, and elsewhere in the document: a new hybrid security discourse.
What relationships can this discourse have with reality beyond discourse?
– I formulate it in this way to avoid suggesting that discourse stands outside
reality.
We might say that the discourse is an imaginary for reality, a pre-ﬁguring 
of a possible and intended reality, which includes an objective (‘the peace’, 
‘a balance of power which favors human freedom’) and the means to achieve it.
Imaginaries produced in discourse are an integral part of strategies, and if
strategies are successful and become implemented, associated imaginaries 
can be ‘operationalised’, transformed into practice, made real. So one possible
relationship is that the discourse can contribute to constructing and recon-
structing the wider reality. But the implementation of strategies and opera-
tionalisation of imaginaries are subject to certain conditions, including what
we might call practical adequacy – the world must be such that the imagined
reality is possible, the agents imagined as bringing it into being have the power
to do so, and so forth – and conviction – imaginaries and the strategies they are
a part of have to be convincing for the people who need to be convinced. The
two are related – people look for practical adequacy in deciding if something 
is convincing, though they are also likely to consider whether what can be
done should be done, so there can be tension between the two. This means
that there may be motivation for as we might put it ‘displacing’ a preferred
strategy/imaginary deemed practically adequate but unlikely to carry convic-
tion with a different strategy/imaginary deemed more likely to carry convic-
tion. But this displacement cannot be arbitrary: the displacing strategy/
imaginary must have reasonable claims to practical adequacy, and moreover
sufﬁciently mirror the displaced and preferred strategy/imaginary for subse-
quent events and actions to be convincingly construed as operationalisations
of it – at least to a certain point. 
The point of this is that the strategy as construed here has been widely seen
as not quite the strategy that is actually being pursued. Yet before saying more
about that, let us listen to what Noam Chomsky (2003a: 4) says about it: the
NSS is
480
Globalisation and ‘transition’


pretty clear and straightforward [. . .] It stated, in effect, that the United
States plans to dominate the world permanently, through the use of force if
necessary [. . .] And that they are committed to eliminating any potential
challenge to their rule that they might detect [. . .] this was unusually brazen
and it aroused a lot of concern.
His summary relates particularly to the last chapter, which includes the state-
ments that ‘We must build and maintain our defenses beyond challenge [. . .].
Our forces will be strong enough to dissuade potential adversaries from pur-
suing a military build-up in hopes of surpassing, or equaling, the power of 
the United States [. . .]. We will be prepared to act apart when our interests
and unique responsibilities require’. One can see this as ‘in effect’ amounting
to the way Chomsky summarises it. But even so Chomsky’s language is not the
language of the document, and though I wouldn’t disagree with his summary
of what the strategy amounts to, his analysis does not help us with the question
of the discourse of the NSS and its relationship with reality beyond discourse.
The document is not that ‘clear and straightforward’.
So in what ways is the strategy as construed not quite the strategy as pur-
sued? The intended actions in the three pillars are recognisable in the strategy
as pursued – ‘ﬁghting terrorists and tyrants’, ‘building good relations among
the great powers’ (though also upsetting them at times), ‘encouraging free and
open societies on every continent’ – though the formulations are questionable
(only ‘encouraging’? ‘tyrants’? etc.). It’s the formulation of the strategic goal
which is most contentious. Has the strategy as pursued really been – not only
and most obviously in its actual effects, which inevitably differ from inten-
tions, but also in its intentions – aimed at consolidating and extending ‘the
peace’? Has it really been aimed at ‘building a balance of power that favors
human freedom’ for ‘all nations and societies’ rather than ‘pressing for unilat-
eral advantage’? And if the answer is ‘no’, what are we to say about the rela-
tionship between this discourse and reality beyond discourse?
Perhaps, returning to the conditions of practical adequacy and conviction,
that the discourse has contributed to building a sufﬁcient measure of convic-
tion for a strategy with a somewhat different goal, especially in the USA but
also to a degree elsewhere? Though, of course, a great many people both 
in and outside the USA were never convinced. Perhaps therefore that the 
discourse is largely or in part rhetoric, intended to persuade rather than to
truthfully set out intentions? Perhaps, more than this, that the discourse has
contributed to consolidating and developing an ideology, a generalised belief
or assumption that serves to abet American power – the ideology of American
exceptionalism, that America here as always acts on principle, on values, for
Global capitalism, terrorism and war
481


the general good. Maybe so, but let me come back to the point on displace-
ment, and the point that not any displacement will do. Let me put the point
this way: it is not plausible to practically pursue one strategy over any length of
time – and Bush states in his Preface that ‘The war against terrorists of global
reach is a global enterprise of uncertain duration’ – and explain, interpret 
and justify what is done in terms of another totally different strategy. The dis-
course associated with the displacing strategy must provide construals of and
imaginaries for actions and events which are practically adequate as well as
carrying conviction; and this means actions and events being construed in
ways which do correspond in some measure to realities, and actions and
events being shaped by these imaginaries as well as other less publicly stated
ones. So in opting for ‘rhetoric’ and/or ‘ideology’, we are not opting against
social construction.
So we might say that a good measure of what is really intended needs to be
there in the strategy, discourse and imaginaries which construe it. One reason
why Chomsky’s summary is acceptable up to a point is that the document, 
as is characteristic of documents of this sort, is hybrid not only in texturing
diverse elements and discourses together into new discourses, but in com-
bining different discourses, sometimes in different parts of the document, 
that can be in tension with each other or even plain contradictory. And this 
is partly because the document needs to construe the purported intentions
and strategy in a way which make them sufﬁciently consistent with real inten-
tions and strategies. For a case of contradiction, let us look at the ﬁrst para-
graph of Bush’s Preface as well as the second (which is the extract I have been
discussing):
The great struggles of the twentieth century between liberty and totalitar-
ianism ended with a decisive victory for the forces of freedom – and a single
sustainable model for national success: freedom, democracy, and free enter-
prise. In the twenty-ﬁrst century, only nations that share a commitment to
protecting basic human rights and guaranteeing political and economic
freedom will be able to unleash the potential of their people and assure their
future prosperity. People everywhere want to be able to speak freely; choose
who will govern them; worship as they please; educate their children – male
and female; own property; and enjoy the beneﬁts of their labor. These 
values of freedom are right and true for every person, in every society – and
the duty of protecting these values against their enemies is the common call-
ing of freedom-loving people across the globe and across the ages.
The ﬁrst sentence claims that one outcome of the Cold War was ‘a single sus-
tainable model for national success: freedom, democracy, and free enterprise’.
482
Globalisation and ‘transition’


What is this ‘single sustainable model’? It is ‘freedom’ and ‘democracy’,
but also ‘free enterprise’, which is noteworthy in terms of the ‘bother to men-
tion’ principle – I mean ‘freedom’ would have ‘done’; freedom is ‘political and
economic freedom’, and what ‘people want’ includes to ‘own property’ and
‘enjoy the beneﬁts of their labor’. Bush here, and the document generally, con-
strues ‘economic freedom’ in a particular way, not for instance just capitalism,
but what is construed in a coded way as ‘free enterprise’ (coded because
although he doesn’t precisely say what he means, most readers will know what
he means), and more explicitly in the chapter title ‘Igniting a new era of eco-
nomic growth through free markets and free trade’, and within that chapter,
for instance: ‘The concept of “free trade” arose as a moral principle even
before it became a pillar of economics. If you can make something that others
value, you should be able to sell it to them. If others make something that you
value, you should be able to buy it. This is real freedom, the freedom for a 
person – or a nation – to make a living.’ The NSSis not a treatise on neo-liberal
political economy, but it is pretty clear that the ‘single sustainable model’ 
is ‘free market’ capitalism in the neo-liberal conception. This extract also
makes explicit that ‘free trade’ is basic to the understanding of ‘freedom’. The
NSS is not a treatise on neo-liberal political economy, but it recontextualises
the discourse of neo-liberal political economy which is more fully elaborated
elsewhere, and recontextualising means appropriating within a new context,
adapting the discourse to the main purposes at hand, abbreviating and con-
densing it.
What then of the sentence in the second paragraph: ‘We seek instead to 
create a balance of power that favors human freedom: conditions in which all
nations and all societies can choose for themselves the rewards and challenges
of political and economic liberty’? ‘Freedom’ allows ‘nations and societies’ to
‘choose’ – to choose ‘political and economic liberty’! There is one model, one
option – therefore no choice. The sentence is semantically incongruous. Let
us assume that a central element of the intended strategy is to extend ‘free 
market’ capitalism to as many countries as possible, and that this is seen as the
key means to achieving the primary strategic goal, consolidating American
global hegemony in a context where it has been seen as endangered. (I’ll return
to the obvious question: why should we assume this?) This is not fully absent
from the document, nor is it fully present in the document. We might see it as
present in ‘encouraging free and open societies on every continent’, but what
marks it not being fully present is the verb – ‘encourage’. Given the mixture of
threats and inducements which have been widely documented for instance
with respect to IMF ‘structural adjustment’ packages, ‘encourage’ seems to 
be a detail of the displacement of one strategy, discourse and imaginary by
Global capitalism, terrorism and war
483


another, which does not so much eliminate the strategic goals, means, etc. 
of the former as ‘translate’ them. But back to the semantically incongruous
sentence. We might say that the source of its semantic incongruity is that the
authors are here seeking to manage a contradiction– between the real strategic
objective of persuading, cajoling, pushing and of necessary forcing countries
to accept the one model, and the objective as it is construed in the docu-
ment and in indeed in the sentence, ‘a balance of power that favors human 
freedom’.
Let me come back to my assumption about the real strategy as opposed 
to the strategy as construed, and make two points. The ﬁrst is that one cannot
get far in analysing texts without having to make such assumptions, without 
taking some position on what is real and what isn’t. The second is that just
making assumptions makes analysis pretty ad hoc. I began by indicating a view
of discourse analysis as located within transdisciplinary research. In my recent
book on globalisation I worked for instance with a version of ‘cultural polit-
ical economy’ (Jessop 2004) which synthesises three elements: a ‘Regulation
Approach’ to economic analysis, a version of Gramscian state theory for polit-
ical analysis, and ‘critical discourse analysis’ for analysing discourse (and as a
major resource for analysing culture, and ideology). The point here is that
rather than assumptions, we need political economic analysis, and for dis-
course analysis to contribute to social research it needs to be embedded within
transdisciplinary frameworks which theorise and develop methodologies 
for analysing what I see as dialectical relations between discourse and other
elements. Cultural political economy is just one such framework. And 
transdisciplinary synthesis means attending to relations and compatibilities
between discourse-analytical categories and categories in other disciplines
and theories within the synthesis. ‘Contradiction’ is a political economic 
category in the version of political economy I work with, and ‘semantic 
incongruity’ is a category in analysis of language and discourse; ‘strategy’ and
strategic ‘complexity’ or ‘hybridity’ are categories of this version of political
economy, and ‘interdiscursive hybridity’, ‘discourse’ and ‘order of discourse’
are categories in discourse analysis. Analysis of texts from this perspective is a
matter of identifying speciﬁcally discoursal, semiotic and linguistic features of
texts, but in ways which allow for textual analysis to be part of a speciﬁcally
semiotic ‘point of entry’ into the main concern – analysing relations between
discourse and other elements of the social processes in focus. 
More speciﬁcally, I am alluding to particular political economic analyses of
globalisation and its military and security dimensions, including that of Steger
(2005). It is fruitful to see globalisation as having both structural and strategic
dimensions ( Jessop 2002) – there are real global structures and structural 
484
Globalisation and ‘transition’


tendencies, and there are diverse strategies developed by groups of social
agents and agencies for ‘steering’ globalisation and its structural tendencies in
particular directions. Strategies as I have indicated inherently include dis-
courses which construe and narrate reality in distinctive ways and produce
imaginaries for changed realities which may, contingently, be operationalised
– enacted in new ways of acting and interacting, inculcated in new ways of
being or identities, materialised in the physical world. The dialectics of dis-
course, as Harvey (1996) calls it. The political-economic dimension of the
strategy of NSS has the objective of promoting free-market capitalism, and
promoting it across the ‘globe’. This combination of neo-liberalism and glob-
alisation emerged after the collapse of the Soviet Union and other European
socialist countries at the turn of the 1990s, and is what Steger (2005) calls
‘globalism’, ‘globalist’ political-economic strategy. ‘Globalism’ has been the
most inﬂuential international strategy for globalisation, for steering it in a par-
ticular direction, strongly associated with the doctrine of ‘a single sustainable
model’, not capitalism as such but ‘free market’ capitalism. Following Steger, 
I see the NSS as globalist, interpreting globalism as a strategy whose continu-
ity has depended upon adaptation. We can see globalism as a ‘nodal strategy’
around which other strategies and associated discourses cluster, with change
in the cluster over time. Steger diagnoses a shift from ‘soft power’ to ‘hard
power’ in pursuing the strategy of globalism. This is associated with a con-
vergence of globalist political-economic strategy with military and security 
strategy and the strategy for a ‘war on terror’, which emerged especially after
11 September 2001 and is evident in NSS, though this ‘neo-conservatist’ 
militarised globalism was being developed by people who came to hold 
high ofﬁce in the Bush Administration (Cheney, Rumsfeld and Wolfowitz) as
early as the Defense Planning Guidance (1992) and the Project for a New
American Century(1997). One view is that 11 September provided a manifest
justiﬁcation for the gloves to be taken off, but the roots of ofﬁcial acceptance of
the neocon strategy lie in the serious challenges to globalism arising out of
growing evidence of its failures in the late 1990s, most notably the East Asian
crisis of 1997.
In working with this analysis I am of course making a choice, which I would
justify if pressed on grounds of practical adequacy: I think for instance that the
sort of things which this analysis suggest are likely to happen have indeed been
happening.
Let me now return to the document and look more systematically at its
main constituent elements, continuing to identify on the one hand certain
semiotic, discoursal and linguistic features and to raise on the other hand
questions about the relationship between the discourse and reality beyond
Global capitalism, terrorism and war
485


discourse – i.e., treating textual analysis as part of a semiotic ‘point of entry’
into transdisciplinary analysis of relations between discourse and other ele-
ments. I am going to focus on Bush’s Preface but refer as relevant to other parts
of the document.
Both the Preface and the document as a whole have on one obvious level 
a ‘problem–solution’ structure, or more exactly they work from narrative of
the recent past (basically from the Cold War to the present), to analyses of the
present including present problems and dangers, to imaginaries for the future
– strategic intentions, objectives and means of realisation. I’ll take narrative of
the past and analysis of the present together (I’ve already illustrated part of the
narrative of the past), then imaginaries for the future.
The end of the Cold War is ‘an historic opportunity’ to ‘build a world
where great powers compete in peace instead of continually prepare for war’,
and to ‘extend the beneﬁts of freedom across the globe’ bringing ‘the hope of
democracy, development, free markets, and free trade to every corner of the
world’. It is also a time of new dangers. The task of ‘defending our Nation
against its enemies [. . .] has changed dramatically’.
Enemies in the past needed great armies and great industrial capabilities to
endanger America. Now, shadowy networks of individuals can bring great
chaos and suffering to our shores for less than it costs to purchase a single
tank. Terrorists are organized to penetrate open societies and to turn the
power of modern technologies against us.
Moreover, ‘the gravest danger our Nation faces lies at the crossroads of 
radicalism and technology’.
Our enemies have openly declared that they are seeking weapons of 
mass destruction, and evidence indicates that they are doing so with 
determination.
In the chapter entitled ‘Preventing our enemies from threatening us, our allies
and friends with weapons of mass destruction’, the ‘enemies’ are identiﬁed as
‘rogue states’ as well as terrorists: ‘new deadly challenges have emerged from
rogue states and terrorists’.
The nature and motivations of these new adversaries, their determination
to obtain destructive powers hitherto available only to the world’s strongest
states, and the greater likelihood that they will use weapons of mass destruc-
tion against us, make today’s security environment more complex and 
dangerous.
486
Globalisation and ‘transition’


The document goes on: ‘In the 1990s we witnessed the emergence of a small
number of rogue states that, while different in important ways, share a number
of attributes’. They
brutalize their own people and squander their national resources for the
personal gain of the rulers; display no regard for international law, threaten
their neighbors, and callously violate international treaties to which they
are party; are determined to acquire weapons of mass destruction, along
with other advanced military technology, to be used as threats or offensively
to achieve the aggressive designs of these regimes; sponsor terrorism
around the globe; and reject basic human values and hate the United States
and everything for which it stands.
And ﬁnally:
We must be prepared to stop rogue states and their terrorist clients before
they are able to threaten or use weapons of mass destruction against the
United States and our allies and friends.
I shall comment on two issues: signiﬁcant absences, and ‘the enemy’.
Texts are selective actualisations of potentials (potential discourses, 
genres, grammatical constructions, metaphors, vocabularies etc.), and the
selection and texturing of actualisations involve agency. Textual analysis seen
in these terms needs to attend to what is signiﬁcantly not ‘there’ as well as 
what is ‘there’ – to signiﬁcant absences. There is a claim that ‘in the 1990s we 
witnessed the emergence of a small number of rogue states’, but there is no
explanation or analysis of how or why they ‘emerged’, why and how states
became ‘rogue’, the motivations for their ‘roguery’. The document is slightly
more forthcoming on ‘terrorism’:
In many regions, legitimate grievances prevent the emergence of a lasting
peace. Such grievances deserve to be, and must be, addressed within a
political process. But no cause justiﬁes terror.
The implication here is that people may turn to terrorism because of legitimate
grievances, though the claim is they are not justiﬁed in doing so. But that’s all.
However, the chapter which deals most with terrorism begins with a quotation
from Bush in which he says:
Our responsibility to history is already clear: to answer these attacks and rid
the world of evil.
Global capitalism, terrorism and war
487


So we have a national strategy document which provides no analysis or 
explanation of where the enemy has come from, how it has got to be an enemy,
why it is hostile to the USA and its allies. Labelling it as ‘evil’ implies that no
explanation is necessary, or indeed possible. By contrast, the motivation for
the US action against these threats is made fully explicit, for instance in the
chapter on terrorism:
In the war against global terrorism, we will never forget that we are 
ultimately ﬁghting for our democratic values and way of life. Freedom 
and fear are at war, and there will be no quick or easy end to this conﬂict. In
leading the campaign against terrorism, we are forging new, productive
international relationships and redeﬁning existing ones in ways that meet
the challenges of the twenty-ﬁrst century.
And the motives of the USA are repeatedly – sometimes implicitly – repres-
ented as unselﬁsh and benign – for instance ‘rogue states’ ‘reject basic human
values and hate the United States and everything for which it stands’ implies
through conjunction that the USA stands for ‘basic human values’. This
extract also illustrates the value dualisms which proliferate in this discourse –
freedom and fear, good and evil, civilisation and barbarism.
The lack of historical depth and of analysis and explanation is a signiﬁcant
absence. We can say it is an absence because there is plenty of analysis of how
and why terrorism has developed, why certain states and many people ‘hate
the United States and everything for which it stands’, how past actions on the
part of the USA have contributed, and the administration is surely familiar
with this. It is in the public sphere, and one might, in fact, say – anticipating
something I come to shortly – that failure to enter into dialogue with it is a ﬂaw
in the document viewed from the perspective of dialectical argumentation. It
is a signiﬁcant absence because no security strategy can afford to ignore it – for
a strategy to be a sound basis for action, it needs to be based upon the serious
analysis of the problems or the ‘threat’. One can see a rhetorical motivation for
this absence: the strategy needs to win conviction, and diagnosing a threat
which the USA has failed to avert or diminish though arguably having the
power to do so, and indeed contributed to creating, might undermine that.
‘Dramatic change’ and unexplained ‘emergence’ are likely to be more con-
vincing. But, again, rhetoric does not preclude socially constructive effects of
discourse. We might say that operationising an imaginary which construes the
enemy in an ahistorical and irrational way, enacting the imaginary militarily
and in other forms of force, has predictably led to perverse effects: the threat is
increased rather than diminished, and in a certain sense acting as if the enemy
488
Globalisation and ‘transition’


were in reality the ﬂawed construal of it contributes to constructing it as some-
thing more closely resembling that construal. Thus acting on the basis of 
what is arguably the exaggerated threat from international terrorism in this
document and elsewhere has – also arguably – contributed to producing a 
real threat which is closer to the construal. The point is essentially that if you
operate on the basis of a discourse that excludes historical analysis of causes
and errors, you may well perpetuate the causes and repeat the errors, and
aggravate the problems. Here is Chomsky (2003a: 2) again:
The administration planners [. . .] understand just as well as the intelli-
gence agencies and the intelligence reports they read and the critics that
they read [. . .] that the actions that they are undertaking are likely to
increase the threat to security of Americans and of the world and a great
long-term threat. They don’t want that outcome; it just doesn’t matter 
very much. It’s a question of priorities. And there are other priorities that
are higher, such as the priority of maintaining global hegemony, and main-
taining a hold on domestic political power so that they can carry out an
extremely radical, reactionary, domestic program.
The actions Chomsky refers to are carried out by actors, including the mili-
tary, who are imbued with the public discourse represented by this document,
in which we might say that the gap left by the absence of analysis is ﬁlled by ideo-
logy – the ideology of a struggle between good and evil. It was for instance
some of these actors who were responsible for the torture and dehumanisation
of prisoners in Abu-Ghraib, media images of which would seem to have fed
the hatred and resistance and hence the threat. Pinning down the causative
effects of discourse in such a case is of course notoriously difﬁcult given the
complex character of causality, but it is difﬁcult to believe that the construal of
the enemy as dehumanised and irrational has no effect on how the enemy is
treated.
A few more comments on ‘the enemy’. In some parts of the document 
the enemy is represented as just ‘terrorists’ or ‘terrorism’, for instance in the
chapter on terrorism:
The United States of America is ﬁghting a war against terrorists of global
reach. The enemy is not a single political regime or person or religion 
or ideology. The enemy is terrorism – premeditated, politically motivated
violence perpetrated against innocents.
In other parts, there is a dual enemy – ‘rogue states and terrorists’. This incon-
sistency in the document indicates the difﬁculty of construing a unitary enemy
Global capitalism, terrorism and war
489


for what is construed and pursued as a single war. How are the two antagonists
connected? ‘Rogue states’ are characterised as ‘sponsoring terrorism’, they
have ‘terrorist clients’, and both are represented as ready to ‘threaten or use
weapons of mass destruction against the United States and our allies and
friends’. Iraq has of course compromised claims about development and 
possession of WMD, the threat of them being used particularly against the
USA, and the supposed links between ‘rogue states’ and terrorism.
The construal of the ‘enemy’ has of course attracted a great deal of critical
commentary, and the suggestion that this is a ‘made-up’ enemy to legitimise
military actions whose objectives are not primarily ‘defending the peace’ but
geopolitical and geo-economic – controlling Middle Eastern oil, for example.
But terrorist groups are a real enough target; the difﬁculty is construing the
enemy as ‘terrorists’, or even worse ‘terrorism’, as such, and operationalising
this construal in a way which fails to make crucial discriminations between the
perpetrators of the terrorist attacks in New York, London and Madrid and 
for instance Palestinians who are arguably exercising the right to resistance
recognised in UN Resolution 42 (1987), while excluding what is arguably
state terror on the part of, say, Israel. ‘Rogue states’ on the other hand seems
like a soundbite in the Reagan tradition which has somehow been taken as 
a serious category in a vitally important strategy document. Not all of the
‘attributes’ listed for ‘rogue states’ are applicable to all the states that have been
labelled as ‘rogue’, and many of them are applicable to ‘allies and friends’ and
even – as has been irrelevantly pointed out – the USA itself. It is, of course, not
a category to be taken seriously, though it is serious that it appears to carry so
much conviction. Its operational value lies in its arbitrariness and emptiness –
it can be added to as and when needed. I shall comment further on ‘terrorists’
in discussing legitimacy.
Let me move on to imaginaries for the future – the document as I have said
is organised in terms of the three ‘pillars’ of the strategy. I will begin with the
third ‘pillar’, to ‘extend the peace by encouraging free and open societies on
every continent’, but focus on its connections with the ﬁrst (to ‘defend the
peace by ﬁghting terrorists and tyrants’), and speciﬁcally on the construal of
the relationship between development and security. Bush elaborates the third
‘pillar’ as follows:
We will actively work to bring the hope of democracy, development, free
markets, and free trade to every corner of the world. The events of
September 11, 2001, taught us that weak states, like Afghanistan, can pose
as great a danger to our national interests as strong states. Poverty does 
not make poor people into terrorists and murderers. Yet poverty, weak 
490
Globalisation and ‘transition’


institutions, and corruption can make weak states vulnerable to terrorist
networks and drug cartels within their borders.
It is not only ‘rogue states’ that pose a threat to the USA, it is also ‘weak states’
(and ‘failed states’). Dufﬁeld (2001) argues that there was a convergence from
the mid-1990s between the security strategy and development strategy of the
USA and its allies which can be summed up in the claim: underdevelopment
is dangerous. The point is also formulated in terms of a convergence of values
and interests by Rice (‘The United States will ﬁght poverty, disease and
oppression because it is the right thing to do – and the smart thing to do. We
have seen how poor states can become weak or even failed states, vulnerable to
hijacking by terrorist networks’) and in the Overview chapter of the NSS(‘The
US national security strategy will be based on a distinctly American interna-
tionalism that reﬂects the union of our values and our national interests. The
aim of this strategy is to help make the world not just safer but better’.) So an
additional motivation for the political-economic strategy and the develop-
ment strategy attached to it is that it increases international security. Moreover,
the linkage of development and security has as Dufﬁeld argues led to the use of
development aid as a lever for more direct intervention in steering the policies
of recipient countries. This is expressed here as the conditionality for aid:
The United States will deliver greater development assistance through the
New Millennium Challenge Account to nations that govern justly, invest in
their people, and encourage economic freedom.
And the Preface continues on the theme of the ‘responsibilities’ of nations:
In building a balance of power that favors freedom, the United States is
guided by the conviction that all nations have important responsibilities.
Nations that enjoy freedom must actively ﬁght terror. Nations that depend
on international stability must help prevent the spread of weapons of mass
destruction. Nations that seek international aid must govern themselves
wisely, so that aid is well spent. For freedom to thrive, accountability must
be expected and required.
Bush’s elaboration of the third ‘pillar’ of the strategy textures together political-
economic, development and security strategies and discourses, and effects
their convergence in the national security strategy. This again involves the 
texturing of relations of equivalence through syntactic parallelism in respect 
of the ‘responsibilities’ and ‘accountability’ of nations, and interdiscursive
hybridity. ‘Enjoy freedom’, ‘depend on international stability’ and ‘seek 
Global capitalism, terrorism and war
491


international aid’ are textured as equivalent, as are ‘actively ﬁght terror’, ‘help
prevent the spread of weapons of mass destruction’, ‘govern themselves
wisely’, articulating together expressions associated with diverse discourses:
political-economic, development, and military security. So this is an elabora-
tion of the new hybrid security discourse whose emergence in the text I 
discussed earlier.
These are the words of the President of the power which is construing itself
(not without justiﬁcation) as the main source and guarantor of the ‘goods’
which nations are construed as having or wanting (‘freedom’, ‘stability’, ‘aid’),
who would seem to be taking up the position of authoritative source of these
demands upon nations, which implies a disciplinary aspect to political-
economic and development strategy: the objective not just to include as many
countries as possible in the free market economy and the virtuous circle of
international aid, purportedly for their own beneﬁt and the general good, 
but also to use the carrot of inclusion and the stick of exclusion to enforce 
compliance with the ‘war on terror’ and the economic and political precepts
advocated by the USA as well as other governments and international agencies
(World Bank, IMF, WTO etc.). We might say, going back to Chomsky, that
this is a point where the document is ‘brazen’ – it is a pretty transparent textual
example of the ways in – according to a substantial body of political analysis –
the USA to use its power to enforce compliance through inducements and
threats.
Let me ﬁnally comment on the elaboration of the ﬁrst ‘pillar’ (‘defending
the peace by ﬁghting terrorists and tyrants’) with particular respect to the
question of legitimacy, and relations between discourse and legitimacy. 
What is at issue here is the legitimacy of a new complex state apparatus for
securing not only external security but also internal security, which is partially
construed and imagined in the document especially in the ﬁnal chapter
(‘Transform America’s National Security Institutions to Meet the Challenges
and Opportunities of the Twenty-First Century’). This includes transforming
military structures designed for the Cold War to meet current ‘operational
challenges’, building new ‘bases and stations within and beyond Western
Europe and Northeast Asia’, developing ‘ability to defend the homeland, con-
duct information operations, ensure US access to distant theaters, and protect
critical US infrastructure and assets in outer space’, ‘transforming our intel-
ligence capabilities and building new ones’, ensuring ‘the proper fusion of
information between intelligence and law enforcement’, transforming diplo-
matic institutions, developing ‘a more comprehensive approach to public
information that can help people around the world learn about and under-
stand America’, recognising that ‘our freedom, our cities, our systems of
492
Globalisation and ‘transition’


movement, and modern life [. . .] are vulnerable to terrorism’, that ‘this is a
new condition of life’ which we must ‘adjust to’. The ramiﬁcations in terms of
internal security, surveillance and curtailment of civil liberties have emerged
over the past few years.
Let me go back to what I have called conviction as a condition for success-
ful strategies. There are I suggest two relations between discourse and reality
beyond discourse associated with conviction: the construction of consent,
and the construction of legitimacy. The success of a strategy depends not only
on achieving the consent of those whose consent is needed, which can be done
through rhetorical means, but also legitimising the applications of power 
associated with pursuing the strategy. The concept of legitimacy is complex
and controversial, but I shall need to short-circuit some of that. Weber linked
legitimacy to the willingness to comply with a system of rules or to obey com-
mands. Every ‘system of authority’, he argued, attempts to establish and to
cultivate the belief in its ‘legitimacy’. He deﬁned the state in a way which is
close to the issues here: ‘a human community that (successfully) claims the
monopoly of the legitimate use of physical force within a given territory’ (Weber
1946: 78). Weber’s deﬁnition has been criticised for conﬂating belief and
legitimacy. Beetham for instance argues (1991) that ‘A given power relation-
ship is not legitimate because people believe in its legitimacy, but because it
can be justiﬁed in terms of their beliefs’. Power can then be said to be legitimate
to the extent that: (a) it conforms to established rules, (b) the rules can be
justiﬁed by reference to shared beliefs, and (c) there is evidence of consent 
by the subordinate to the particular power relation. A breach of rules leads 
to illegitimacy; a discrepancy between rules and beliefs or the absence of
shared beliefs leads to a legitimacy deﬁcit, and a withdrawal of consent leads 
to delegitimation. ‘Rules’ here needs to include a range from legal norms to
principles based upon accepted values. Habermas (1976) has pointed to the
weakening of cultural systems as sources of legitimacy and a corresponding
increase in the signiﬁcance of ongoing processes of legitimation which cope
with threats of delegitimation and if necessary engage in relegitimation. The
increasing salience of this dynamic view of legitimation rather than a more
static view of legitimacy means that analysis of discourse and of texts emerges
as an important resource for research on legitimacy and legitimation – there is
a clear case for a semiotic point of entry.
Weber identiﬁed three types of legitimate authority: traditional, charis-
matic, and rational–legal authority, and argued that modern states increas-
ingly seek rational–legal authority, which rests ‘on a belief in the “legality” of
patterns of normative rules and the right of those elevated to authority under
such rules to issue commands’. He also identiﬁes a value–rational legitimacy,
Global capitalism, terrorism and war
493


which holds ‘by virtue of a rational belief in its absolute value’ (Weber 1947:
130). Rational–legal is most relevant in this case, though value–rational
authority is also relevant. Notice that both include the word ‘rational’. I sug-
gested that consent can be achieved rhetorically, though it can also be achieved
dialectically – I am contrasting persuading by any available means, and per-
suading through the power of argument. Rational–legal and value–rational
legitimation on the other hand indicate dialectical means of persuasion. I 
want to illustrate both forms of legitimation, or attempts at legitimation, in this
document.
Note ﬁrst the sense in which a document of this sort does call for textual
work of legitimation. What is imagined and intended is the application of 
state power on a massive scale in the pursuit of security, including externally in
wars of what the document calls a ‘pre-emptive’ nature but others have called
‘preventive’ at best and ‘aggressive’ at worst. The unprecedented scale of use
of the state’s monopoly over the means of violence in what is in a conventional
sense a time of peace needs to be legitimated. But so also do unprecedented
internal security measures which are indicated here but not detailed, and
which have led to a vast increase in surveillance and a curtailment of civil
rights, and have as Dillon (2007) puts it produced a terror over security in 
creating security against terror.
Legitimating such a massive application of state power and violence entails
establishing that they are proportionate to the scale of the threat, which entails
establishing that the threat itself is unprecedented. There is both rational–
legal legitimation here involving claims about danger, and value–rational 
legitimation involving claims about an attack on ‘our values’. Moreover, there
is a more positive form of value–rational legitimation involving claims that the
security strategy is driven by values, above all ‘freedom’. Finally, there is also
rational–legal legitimation with the emphasis on ‘legal’ – the military action
envisaged is argued to be ‘pre-emptive’ and hence defensible in international
law. Let me give a few examples, pointing to ways in which they are dialect-
ically ﬂawed – though such ﬂaws have not prevented them from convincing
many people and contributing to the legitimation of the strategy.
First, rational–legal legitimation on the basis of claims about danger, using
Bush’s Preface as an illustration. It contains a sequence of two legitimating
arguments of this sort, of which I shall discuss the ﬁrst:
Now, shadowy networks of individuals can bring great chaos and suffering
to our shores for less than it costs to purchase a single tank. Terrorists 
are organized to penetrate open societies and to turn the power of modern
technologies against us. To defeat this threat we must make use of every tool
494
Globalisation and ‘transition’


in our arsenal–military power, better homeland defenses, law enforcement,
intelligence, and vigorous efforts to cut off terrorist ﬁnancing. The war
against terrorists of global reach is a global enterprise of uncertain duration.
Our enemies have openly declared that they are seeking weapons of mass
destruction, and evidence indicates that they are doing so with determina-
tion. The United States will not allow these efforts to succeed. We will build
defenses against ballistic missiles and other means of delivery. We will co-
operate with other nations to deny, contain, and curtail our enemies’ efforts
to acquire dangerous technologies. And, as a matter of common sense and
self-defense, America will act against such emerging threats before they are
fully formed.
The conclusion of the ﬁrst argument is – to simplify – that we must make 
war against terrorists of uncertain duration on a global scale. The ﬁrst two 
sentences are explicit premises, and there is an implicit premise that making
war will defeat the threat. We might criticise the argument with respect to the
second explicit threat by questioning whether the threat is not exaggerated,
whether it is indeed great enough to justify the total character of the proposed
response. But more importantly the argument is dialectically ﬂawed with
respect to the implicit premise, and in terms of dialogicality: it is highly con-
tentious that war will defeat or even diminish the threat (assuming it is as
depicted); it is arguable that it will increase it, and the argument is dialogically
(and therefore dialectically) ﬂawed in failing to address these arguments which
are widely enunciated in the public sphere (van Eemeren and Houtlosser
2002, Ieocu 2006). We can say that it comes back to the absence of analysis 
and explanation – the lack of an analysis of terrorism precludes rational 
exploration of means to diminish the threats it poses. Terrorism is taken as a
given phenomenon, an ‘emergence’ – there is no room for instance for the
argument that the existence of small groups who would happily use WMD
against America is not in itself a serious threat, that without large-scale support
they would be powerless, and that there are non-military options available for
curtailing that support which are more likely to be effective in dealing with the
threat than military options.
Value–rational legitimation is not as prominent in this document as it 
has been in speeches by Bush but also for instance by Tony Blair, who has con-
tributed particularly to developing moral legitimation of war. But here is one
example:
In the war against global terrorism, we will never forget that we are 
ultimately ﬁghting for our democratic values and way of life. Freedom and
fear are at war, and there will be no quick or easy end to this conﬂict.
Global capitalism, terrorism and war
495


The argument, condensed and partly implicit, is that a prolonged and difﬁcult
war against global terrorism is necessary because we are ﬁghting for our values
and way of life, which global terrorism is by implication aiming to destroy, 
and for freedom and against fear (which, by implication, global terrorism
amounts to). It does not necessarily or obviously follow from the fact that there
are groups and individuals whose aim is to destroy liberal democracy and 
consumer society that they are actually in danger, and again the argument is
dialectically ﬂawed in not addressing other publicly available arguments
which bear upon questions of value in relation to terrorism – for instance that
the great majority of those who support terrorist organisations are not driven
by objectives of this sort, that the sort of fundamentalism alluded to could be
more effectively isolated by means other than all-out war, and so forth.
Finally, let me come to the legal legitimation of intended military action as
‘pre-emptive’. There is an elaborate and extended legitimising argument in
the chapter on ‘rogue states’ and their link to terrorism – one point of analytical
interest is which claims are argued for and which claims are not, for instance as
I said earlier that the claim that ‘the only path to peace and security is the path of
action’ is not argued for, it is simply asserted. The elaboration of the argument in
this case would seem to indicate that this is a focus of concerns about legitimacy.
It has taken almost a decade for us to comprehend the true nature of this
new threat. Given the goals of rogue states and terrorists, the United States
can no longer solely rely on a reactive posture as we have in the past. The
inability to deter a potential attacker, the immediacy of today’s threats, and
the magnitude of potential harm that could be caused by our adversaries’
choice of weapons, do not permit that option. We cannot let our enemies
strike ﬁrst.
• In the Cold War, especially following the Cuban missile crisis, we faced a
generally status quo, risk-averse adversary. Deterrence was an effective
defense. But deterrence based only upon the threat of retaliation is less
likely to work against leaders of rogue states more willing to take risks,
gambling with the lives of their people, and the wealth of their nations.
• In the Cold War, weapons of mass destruction were considered weapons
of last resort whose use risked the destruction of those who used them.
Today, our enemies see weapons of mass destruction as weapons of
choice. For rogue states these weapons are tools of intimidation and 
military aggression against their neighbors. These weapons may also
allow these states to attempt to blackmail the United States and our 
allies to prevent us from deterring or repelling the aggressive behavior of
rogue states. Such states also see these weapons as their best means of
overcoming the conventional superiority of the United States.
496
Globalisation and ‘transition’


• Traditional concepts of deterrence will not work against a terrorist
enemy whose avowed tactics are wanton destruction and the targeting of
innocents; whose so-called soldiers seek martyrdom in death and whose
most potent protection is statelessness. The overlap between states that
sponsor terror and those that pursue WMD compels us to action.
For centuries, international law recognized that nations need not suffer an
attack before they can lawfully take action to defend themselves against
forces that present an imminent danger of attack. Legal scholars and inter-
national jurists often conditioned the legitimacy of preemption on the 
existence of an imminent threat – most often a visible mobilization of armies,
navies, and air forces preparing to attack. We must adapt the concept of
imminent threat to the capabilities and objectives of today’s adversaries.
Rogue states and terrorists do not seek to attack us using conventional
means. They know such attacks would fail. Instead, they rely on acts of terror
and, potentially, the use of weapons of mass destruction – weapons that 
can be easily concealed, delivered covertly, and used without warning. The
targets of these attacks are our military forces and our civilian population, in
direct violation of one of the principal norms of the law of warfare. As was
demonstrated by the losses on September 11, 2001, mass civilian casualties
is the speciﬁc objective of terrorists and these losses would be exponentially
more severe if terrorists acquired and used weapons of mass destruction.
The United States has long maintained the option of preemptive actions to
counter a sufﬁcient threat to our national security. The greater the threat,
the greater is the risk of inaction – and the more compelling the case for tak-
ing anticipatory action to defend ourselves, even if uncertainty remains as to
the time and place of the enemy’s attack. To forestall or prevent such hostile
acts by our adversaries, the United States will, if necessary, act preemp-
tively. The United States will not use force in all cases to preempt emerging
threats, nor should nations use preemption as a pretext for aggression. Yet
in an age where the enemies of civilization openly and actively seek the
world’s most destructive technologies, the United States cannot remain
idle while dangers gather. [. . .] The purpose of our actions will always be to
eliminate a speciﬁc threat to the United States or our allies and friends. The
reasons for our actions will be clear, the force measured, and the cause just.
‘Pre-emptive’ action is generally regarded as legitimate self-defence in inter-
national law. But ‘pre-emption’ is conventionally regarded as legitimate only
where there is an ‘imminent threat’, usually clear evidence of preparation and
mobilisation for an immediate attack. Part of the argument here is that this
concept of ‘imminent threat’ is out of date and must be ‘adapted’ to ‘the cap-
abilities and objectives of today’s adversaries’. The point with respect to
‘capabilities’ is not new: since the beginning of the nuclear age, the possibility
Global capitalism, terrorism and war
497


has existed of surprise attack with devastating effect. But it is argued that
whereas ‘deterrence was an effective defense’ during the Cold War, it no longer
is, and the reason is not the nature of the weapons but the nature of the enemy
– ‘rogue states and terrorists’, ‘the enemies of civilization’. We can concede
that there are terrorist groups which do threaten the USA and/or its allies and
friends against which deterrence is not an effective defence. But the legitimis-
ing argument has a fallacious character which lies in further claims within its
premises about the nature of the enemy and the nature of the threat. I have
already covered problems in the construal of the ‘enemy’, and I’ll just add a few
additional points.
First, there is an assumption that ‘rogue states [. . .] seek to attack’ the
USA, and a claim that they ‘rely on acts of terror’. I am not aware of evidence
that any of the ‘rogue states’ has ‘sought to attack’ the USA, or been respons-
ible for ‘acts of terror’. There are claims of support by particular so-called
‘rogue states’ for terrorist organisations and even complicity in acts of terror.
Even if these are true, a generic claim that ‘rogue states’ as such seek to attack
the USA and are associated with ‘acts of terror’ would seem to be totally
ungrounded. The same applies to other generic claims about ‘rogue states’ in
this extract (e.g., ‘For rogue states, [weapons of mass destruction] are tools of
intimidation and aggression against their neighbors’).
Second, a threat is implied of use by terrorist groups of WMD (‘rogue states
and terrorists [. . .] rely on acts of terror and, potentially, the use of weapons 
of mass destruction’). There no doubt are terrorists who might use WMD if
they had access to them and the capability to use them, so we can’t dismiss this
as a possibility. But what is at stake here is imminentthreat, and no evidence or
argument is provided of that. Notice an obfuscation of the boundary between
actual and possible, realisand irrealis claims,which is clearer if we extend the
quotation a little:
Rogue states and terrorists do not seek to attack us using conventional
means. [. . .] they rely on acts of terror and, potentially, the use of weapons
of mass destruction – weapons that can be easily concealed, delivered
covertly, and used without warning. The targets of these attacks are our 
military forces and our civilian population [. . .]
There is a movement from a realis claim (they rely on acts of terror) to an 
irrealis claim (they ‘potentially’ rely on the use of WMD) to realis presupposi-
tions (these attacks happen, these attacks have targets) which works I think
rhetorically to make the threat of terrorist attacks with WMD seem more real
than it actually is.
498
Globalisation and ‘transition’


The third point is that an answer to the crucial question of how terrorist
organisations get access to WMD is only obliquely hinted at:
Traditional concepts of deterrence will not work against a terrorist enemy
whose avowed tactics are wanton destruction and the targeting of inno-
cents; whose so-called soldiers seek martyrdom in death and whose most
potent protection is statelessness. The overlap between states that sponsor
terror and those that pursue WMD compels us to action.
The last sentence might be regarded as a highly compressed argument for 
the claim ‘we must act (i.e., use force “preemptively”)’ with implicit premises
including the claims that ‘states that sponsor terror might develop WMD’ and
‘if they develop WMD, they might make them available to terrorist groups’),
but this makes it seem more transparent than it actually is.
Fourth, despite the claim at the end that ‘the purpose of our actions will
always be to eliminate a speciﬁc threat’, the ‘threat’ is formulated in ways
which suggest that it is not in any sense either ‘speciﬁc’ or ‘immanent’:
taking anticipatory action to defend ourselves, even if uncertainty remains
as to the time and place of the enemy’s attack. To forestall or prevent such
hostile acts by our adversaries, the United States will, if necessary, act 
preemptively. The United States will not use force in all cases to preempt
emerging threats [. . .].
If there is uncertainty as to time or place, or the threats are ‘emerging’, they
would not seem to be ‘immanent’ or ‘speciﬁc’. Notice that the verb ‘prevent’ is
used – indeed this looks more like ‘preventive’ warfare – which is not legiti-
mate according to international law – than ‘pre-emptive’ warfare. Arguably
this was anyway besides the point in Iraq since there proved to be nothing to
prevent let alone ‘pre-empt’.
Conclusion
I have been concerned with the texturing of a discourse in this document as
part of the development of a strategy, involving the recontextualisation of other
texts in some of which the discourse is already textured in similar if not the
same ways, and in the light of the extensive and intensive recontextualisation
of this document in turn in many other texts of various types. I have selectively
analysed the document in such a way as to try to suggest a semiotic ‘point of
entry’ into transdisciplinary analysis of relationships between discourse and
Global capitalism, terrorism and war
499


other elements of the social process. What I have done is indicate, point to,
ways of relating features of the discourse to reality beyond discourse, referring
to lines of political-economic, political and sociological analysis which could
be brought into a synthesis with discourse analysis, without attempting to
effect such syntheses, which would be beyond the scope of the paper. Let me
ﬁrst pull together some main aspects and categories of the version of critical
discourse analysis I have been working with, but necessarily only illustrated 
in part, and then sum up the relations I have suggested between discursive 
features and realities beyond discourse.
One characteristic of textual analysis within this version of CDA is that it is
both interdiscursiveanalysis and linguistic analysis in a broad sense (including
for instance analysis of argumentation) – in a multimodal text it might have
been both linguistic and visual semiotic analysis. Interdiscursive analysis is
analysis of hybridity in terms of the categories of discourses(ways of represent-
ing), genres (ways of interacting), and styles (ways of being, identities in their
discoursal aspect), though in this analysis I have only discussed hybridity of
discourses. Interdiscursive analysis mediates between linguistic analysis and
social analysis in this version of CDA – thus hybridisation of discourses of 
the sort we have here is the discoursal or semiotic dimension shifts in bound-
aries between social ﬁelds, in this case convergence between the political-
economic, development, diplomatic, and military and security ﬁelds; and
hybridisation of discourses is realised in the linguistic features of the texts.
Another important category I did not use is order of discourse, which is a term
I use for the semiotic dimension of stabilised networks of social practices, or
institutions or social ﬁelds. One might for instance talk of the semiotic dimen-
sion of the new or at least radically reshaped ﬁeld (if that’s what it is) of security
as a new order of discourse, interpreting this to mean a particular conﬁgura-
tion or articulation not only of different discourses as we have seen, but also 
of different genres and different styles – which in plain terms is just to say that 
a new order of security entails new ways of acting and interacting, and new
identities, both of which have a partly semiotic character. A category I brieﬂy
used was recontextualisation, the movement of a discourse from one context
(one network of practices, one institution, one ﬁeld and so forth) to another, a
movement which Chouliaraki and I (Chouliaraki and Fairclough 1999) sug-
gested is a dialectical relationship between colonisation and appropriation. 
A document of this sort recontextualises discourses from different ﬁelds, but
then articulates them together according to its own logic and genre. Finally, I
have used the category of operationalisation, which has a crucial place in dis-
cussing relations between discourse and reality beyond discourse, because it
subsumes the enactment of discourses in ways of acting and interacting, their
500
Globalisation and ‘transition’


inculcationin ways of being or identities, and their materialisationin changes
in the physical world.
Let me turn to the relations I have suggested between discursive features
and realities beyond discourse. I have discussed the relationship between the
discourse of this document and actually existing realities as the construal of
these realities, a process which condenses these realities, selectively includes
and excludes aspects of them. I have also discussed the relationship between
the discourse and actions strategically oriented to producing changed realit-
ies, and these changed realities themselves. I have argued that the construal 
of actually existing realities and of actions to change it must have some mea-
sure of practical adequacy, sufﬁciently construing things as they actually are
and imaging actions which will actually be taken – or constituting a sort of
blueprint which is a practically adequate guide to action and which shapes
action – for the strategy to be successful, as this one has been to a degree, even
if it has also seemed to be failing and unravelling. Thus terrorist organisations
which have inﬂicted and seek to inﬂict damage on the USA and its allies have
really existed, and much of the USA’s application of force has indeed been
directed at terrorist organisations. I have suggested that construals may under
certain conditions, which include practical adequacy and achieving convic-
tion, be operationalised, and so come to have constructive effects on reality
beyond discourse. I suggested for instance that the construal of the enemy as
an irrational and evil ‘emergent’ phenomenon which must be eliminated has
had constructive effects on the nature of the military and other action which
has been taken against the enemy.
This account has been complicated by what I called ‘displacement’ – a
rhetorically motivated gap between a construal of the strategy for public 
consumption and a different construal where the intentions and objectives of
power are more transparent. I argued the gap cannot be too big – that the public
construal also needs a good measure of practical adequacy. Nevertheless, the
gap bears upon relations between discourse and reality beyond discourse – in
construals which are partly adequate and partly inadequate to reality (e.g.,
‘encouraging free and open societies’), and in contradictions which may 
be textually managed (e.g., the freedom to choose, the requirement to choose
freedom).
In addition to practical adequacy, I have discussed issues of conviction,
and the relationship between discourse and beliefs and attitudes. The con-
structive effects of discourse include the construction of consent and the 
construction of legitimacy, both fragile constructs which need to be constructed
anew. I suggested that whereas consent can be achieved by rhetorical means,
legitimation requires dialectic. The distinction between the two is not a 
Global capitalism, terrorism and war
501


simple one. Rhetoric is persuasion by any available means, dialectic is persua-
sion through the power of argument. But both are persuasion, and there is a
tension between the two, and a tendency which is apparent in this document
for the requirements of dialectic to be overridden by rhetoric. My stance on
legitimation here has been normative, taking the position that legitimation
ought to be dialectically sound, and arguing that it is, in fact, dialectically
ﬂawed in legitimising arguments in the document. This normative insistence
on the means by which the discursive construction of legitimacy ought to 
be pursued seems to me to be justiﬁed in terms of the standards we should
demand of public discourse even if they are rarely satisﬁed.
In broad terms I have discussed two sorts of constructive effect, mental and
material effects, which are, of course, not unconnected. One might say that
discourse can have constructive effects on beliefs and attitudes, and so on how
people act in and towards the material world, and so on the material world
itself. I have also referred to ideologies: ideologies might be interpreted in a 
way that partially brings the mental and material together, as beliefs and values
which are naturalised as dispositions to act in and on the material world in cer-
tain ways, and as ways of being in the world (‘subject positions’ adopted as
Althusser put it).
Finally, the question of causality. I would say that I have been concerned
with the causal powers of discourse, the power of discourse to contribute to
change in reality beyond discourse, but on a particular view of the nature of
causality. Causality is not the same as regularity. The causal powers of dis-
course do not necessarily have causal effects in particular instances, because
events are standardly subject to diverse causal powers which can block or
override each other in contingent ways. This is what has been described as the
‘non-Humean’ view of causation which separates causality and regularity
which has been advanced within ‘critical realism’ (Sayer 2000), which is a 
philosophy of social science which can be seen as consistent with the version
of CDA I use (Fairclough, Jessop and Sayer 2004).
502
Globalisation and ‘transition’


20. Discourse and ‘transition’ in Central
and Eastern Europe
T
his chapter is an initial contribution to an area of research I am currently
embarking on: the role of discourse in processes of ‘transition’ (i.e., from
socialism to capitalism and Western forms of democratic government) in
Central and Eastern Europe (henceforth CEE). My particular focus here is on
attempts in CEE, and speciﬁcally Romania, to construct a ‘knowledge-based
economy’ (KBE) and ‘information society’ (IS). I begin with a brief sketch 
of the version of Critical Discourse Analysis (henceforth CDA), which I am
currently working with. I then discuss discourse as an element in processes of
‘transition’, and the construction of ‘objects of research’ from research topics
such as ‘transition’, KBE, and IS. The ﬁnal part of the chapter looks in par-
ticular at the recontextualisation of discourses of the KBE and IS, especially
the later, in Romania. I shall analyse a speciﬁc Romanian government policy
text, the ‘National Strategy for the promotion of the New Economy and the
implementation of the Information Society’ (2002).
1 Critical discourse analysis
I have chosen some of the main features of the version of CDA I now work 
with (Chouliaraki and Fairclough 1999, Fairclough 2003, 2000a, 2000b,
Fairclough, Jessop and Sayer 2004), listing them for the sake of brevity:
1. Discourse is an element of all social processes, events and practices,
though they are not simply discourse (Fairclough 1992a).
2. The relationship between abstract social structures and concrete social
events is mediated by social practices, relatively stabilised forms of social
activity (Chouliaraki and Fairclough 1999).


3. Each of these levels has a linguistic/semiotic element: languages (social
structures), orders of discourse (social practices), texts broadly under-
stood (social events) (Fairclough, Jessop and Sayer 2004).
4. Social practices and events are constituted as articulations of dialectically
related elements including discourse. These are different (and they 
cannot, for instance, all be reduced to discourse, as some versions of dis-
course theory claim) but not discrete: discourse internalises and is inter-
nalised in other elements (Harvey 1996, Fairclough 2003). For instance,
in researching any social organisation, one is faced with its partly discur-
sive character, including its constitution as an operationalisation (putting
into practice, ‘translating’ into its non-discursive as well as discursive
facets) of particular discourses. But this does not mean that the organisa-
tion is nothing but discourse, or that it can be researched exclusively
through discourse analysis – which would be highly reductive.
5. Discourse ﬁgures in three main ways in social practices: discourses (ways
of representing, e.g., political discourses), genres (ways of [inter] acting,
e.g., lecturing, interviewing), styles (ways of being – identities, e.g., styles
of management) (Fairclough 2000a, 2000b).
6. Social practices are articulated into networks that constitute social ﬁelds,
institutions and organisations. Orders of discourse are more exactly the
linguistic/semiotic facet of such networks (Chouliaraki and Fairclough
1999).
7. An order of discourse is a social structuring of linguistic/semiotic differ-
ence, which is constituted as a relatively stable articulation of discourses,
genres and styles (Fairclough 2003). For instance, the political order of
discourse, associated with the political ﬁeld as an articulation of social
practices, is constituted in a particular time and place as an articulation of
(conservative, liberal, social-democratic etc.) discourses; of genres such
as political debate, speech and interview; and of styles, including differ-
ent styles of political leadership.
8. Social change includes change in social structures, social practices and
social events.
9. Change in social practices affects how elements are articulated together 
in practices; how practices are articulated together in networks; and 
how discourses, genres and styles are articulated together in orders of
discourse (Chouliaraki and Fairclough 1999). Thus the relatively recent
development of ‘mediatised politics’ is a re-articulation of the relation-
ship between the ﬁelds of politics and media; their reconstitution as a net-
work, which includes a transformation of the political order of discourse;
its genres (e.g., the forms of political interview), discourses (e.g., the
504
Globalisation and ‘transition’


translation of political discourses into popularised, more ‘conversa-
tional’, forms), and styles (political leaders adopt to a degree the ‘show
business’ styles of entertainers).
10. Social change in countries, organisations etc. is often initiated with new
discourses. This operates through a dissemination across structural and
scalar boundaries which ‘recontextualises’ new discourses. These may
be enacted as new ways of (inter)acting including genres, inculcated as
new ways of being including styles, as well as materialised in, for example,
new ways of structuring space. Thus liberal and neo-liberal discourses
have been recontextualised in ‘transitional’ countries in CEE, and to
varying degrees enacted in new ways of (inter)acting (e.g., in government,
including government addressing and interacting with citizens as con-
sumers), inculcated in new ways of being (e.g., people adopting the
lifestyles and identities of consumers), and materialised in such new 
constructions of space as the ‘shopping mall’.
11. ‘May’ is important: there are discursive as well as non-discursive condi-
tions of possibility for discourses having constitutive effects on other 
elements of the social – the fact that discourses ‘construe’ the world in
particular ways does not necessarily mean that they (re)construct it in
those ways (Fairclough, Jessop and Sayer 2004). Social ﬁelds, institu-
tions, and organisations are ‘intransitive’ realities that have properties
that make them more or less amenable or resistant to particular directions
of change.
12. CDA claims that analysis of social processes and change is productively
carried down into detailed textual analysis. More detailed (including 
linguistic) analysis of texts is connected to broader social analysis by way
of interdiscursive analysis of shifting articulations of genres, discourses,
styles in texts (Fairclough 2003).
13. As a form of critical social science, CDA analyses social life in its discur-
sive aspects from a normative perspective, i.e., on the basis of a commitment
to a set of values of social justice, social equality, democracy – though
there are differences in how such values are understood and interpreted.
2 Discourse as an element of processes of ‘transition’
The importance of language and discourse in processes of ‘transition’ in CEE
and elsewhere is quite widely recognised in social research (for instance, 
in Miroiu (1999), and in the conception of inﬂuential neo-liberal models of
transition as ‘discourses’ in, e.g., Bourdieu and Wacquant (2001)). But social
research has so far produced only a limited understanding of how discourse
Discourse and ‘transition’ in Central and Eastern Europe
505


ﬁgures in processes of ‘transition’. This is partly a theoretical problem: the
theories of discourse which tend to be drawn upon are relatively underdeveloped
and do not constitute an adequate basis for providing full and nuanced
accounts of how discourse interacts with other non-discursive facets of pro-
cesses of ‘transition’. It is also a problem of data and analytical method:
acknowledgement of the importance of discourse in general and abstract 
statements about discourse in ‘transition’ or more generally in social change
have not generally been translated into detailed analysis texts or talk, so there
is little concrete knowledge of how they ﬁgure in the unfolding of events or
change and continuity of practices in speciﬁc types of situation, organisation,
locality etc.
Having said that, forms of textual analysis have already been used in
Romanian research on ‘transition’, e.g., on media (e.g., Miroiu 1999, Beciu
2000, Coman 2003a, 2003b), but CDA’s particular mix of interdiscursive 
and linguistic analysis is, I think, a more powerful analytical resource for
addressing these issues than those I have seen used (Preoteasa (2002) is one
case of CDA being used). I see CDA as a resource for producing richer under-
standing and analysis of the relationship between discourse and other non-
discursive facets of social processes and social change, and of the effects of
discourse on wider processes of social change, through a ‘transdisciplinary’
dialogue with other theories and disciplines. Transdisciplinary research is a
form of interdisciplinary research that sees ‘Internal’ development of a theory
or discipline (of their theoretical categories and concepts and methods of
research) as emerging out of dialogue with others (Fairclough 2003).
3 Theorising ‘transition’
I shall approach the IS and KBE as topics of research by way of recent devel-
opments in political economy (Sayer 1995, Pickles and Smith 1998, Stark 
and Bruszt 1998, Ray and Sayer 1999, Jessop 2002, 2004). In particular, I 
follow Jessop (2004) in viewing them as strategies for achieving and stabilising
a new ‘ﬁx’ between a regime of capital accumulation and a regime of political
regulation in the aftermath of the demise of the ‘ﬁx’ commonly referred to as
‘Fordism’. This formulation derives from ‘regulation theory’, which has a
political-economic rather than a narrowly and purely economic perspective
on economic change, arguing that an economic order (‘regime of capital accu-
mulation’) is dependent upon a political order (a ‘mode of regulation’) that can
produce and sustain the preconditions for its durable operation. The more
general claim is that there are non-economic (including, as we shall see, social
and cultural as well as political) preconditions for the establishment and
506
Globalisation and ‘transition’


reproduction of economies. The dominant international political-economic
order since the demise of Fordism has been widely identiﬁed as ‘post-Fordist’,
which is indicative of the uncertainty of what follows, or should follow,
Fordism.
The signiﬁcance of the KBE (this is Jessop’s focus, though the same could
be said for the IS, and for the frequent conjunction of the two which is charac-
teristic of the material I shall look at) is that it seems to be emerging as a 
strategy for change that can effectively be operationalised in real change. They
are strategies but, like any strategy, also discourses, particular ways of repres-
enting, or rather imagining (because they are certainly as much predictive as
descriptive) a new political-economic order. And they are discourses of a 
particular kind, what we might call ‘nodal’ discourses, in the sense that they
are discourses which subsume and articulate in a particular way a great many
other discourses: technical discourses (e.g., discourses of ICT – information
and communications technology), the discourse of ‘intellectual property’,
discourses of governance and government (e.g., ‘e-government’), discourses
of ‘social exclusion’ and ‘social inclusion’, and so forth. As discourses, they
constitute selective representations, ‘simpliﬁcations’ ( Jessop 2002), ‘con-
densations’ (Harvey 1996) of highly complex economic, political, social and
cultural realities, which include certain aspects of these realities and exclude 
others, highlight certain aspects and background others. Not any discourse
would work as a strategic nodal discourse for imagining and potentially oper-
ationalising, actualising, a new political-economic ﬁx. A discourse can only
work in so far as it achieves a high level of adequacy with respect to the realities
it selectively represents, simpliﬁes, condenses – in so far as it is capable (as
these seem capable) of being used to represent/imagine realities at different
levels of abstraction, in different areas of social life (economy, government,
education, health, regional and social disparities etc.), on different scales
(international, macro-regional [e.g., EU], national, local). It is only if it is a
plausible imaginary that it will attract investments of time and money to pre-
pare for the imaginary future it projects, material factors which are crucial to
making imaginaries into realities (Cameron and Palan 2004).
In this sense, the KBE andthe IS have a partially discursive and partially
material character. They are discourses, but not just discourses; they are dis-
courses that are materially grounded and materially promoted. The theoret-
ical framework we need to conceptualise this needs to be not just a political
economy (rather than a narrow economics) but also what Jessop calls a ‘cultural
political economy’, a political economy which, among other things, incorpor-
ates a theory of discourse and of the dialectics of discourse, of how discursive
construals of the world can come to construct and reconstruct the world, 
Discourse and ‘transition’ in Central and Eastern Europe
507


without losing sight of the material reality of the world, or the conditions
which the material reality of the world sets (as I have brieﬂy indicated) on the
discursive (re)construction of the world.
This strategic perspective provides a basis for formulating objects of
research for this aspect of ‘transition’ as a topic of research, and the ‘cultural’
orientation of the approach to political economy means that objects of research
can be formulated to include or highlight questions of semiosis. Objects 
of research might include the emergence and constitution, hegemony, dis-
semination and recontextualisation and operationalisation of the strategies 
of the ‘KBE’ and the ‘IS.’ These objects of research might be formulated
speciﬁcally as objects for CDA research projects in the following ways:
• The emergence of the discourses of the ‘KBE’ and the ‘IS’ as nodal discourses
in association with the emergence of strategies, their constitution through
the articulation of relationships between other discourses, including dis-
courses ‘available’ within existing or prior nodal discourses.1
• Relations of contestation between discourses within the framework of 
relations of contestation between strategies, and the emerging hegemony 
of these nodal discourses.2
• The dissemination of the discourses of ‘KBE’ and the ‘IS’ across structures
(e.g., between economic markets, governments, public and social services
such as education and health) and scales (between ‘global’ or international,
macro-regional (e.g., EU or NAFTA), national, and local scales of social
life), their recontextualisation in new social ﬁelds, institutions, organisa-
tions, countries, localities.
• The shift of these nodal discourses from ‘construals’ to ‘constructions’
(Sayer 2000), from being just representations and imaginaries to having
transformative effects on social reality, being operationalised – enacted as
new ways of (inter)acting, inculcated in new ways of being (identities),
materialised in new instruments and techniques of production or ways of
organising space.
These different research objects call for different methods in data selection,
collection and analysis. Researching the emergence and constitution of these
discourses requires a genealogical approach which locates these discourses
within the ﬁeld of prior discourses and entails collection of historical series of
texts and selection of key texts within these series, analysis of the constitution
of these discourses through articulation of elements within the ﬁeld of prior
discourses, and speciﬁcation of the relations of articulation between the
diverse discourses which are drawn together within these nodal discourses.
508
Globalisation and ‘transition’


Researching the emergent hegemony of these discourses entails locating these
discourses in their relations of contestation with other potentially nodal 
discourses, which involves, for instance, focusing on dialogical relations
between and within texts in key institutions such as the OECD (Godin 2004).
Researching dissemination and recontextualisation entails comparing texts in
different social ﬁelds and at different social scales (e.g., in different societies 
or localities), and analysing, for instance, how, when these discourses are
recontextualised, they are articulated with discourses that already exist within
these new contexts. Researching operationalisation calls for ethnographical
methods in the collection of data, in that it is only by accessing insider per-
spectives in particular localities, companies, and so on, that one can assess
how discourses are materialised, enacted and inculcated. I shall be discussing
only aspects of (the dissemination and) recontextualisation of these nodal 
discourses.
The predominant form of critique associated with CDA and critical social
research more generally has been ideology critique. But we can distinguish
three forms of critique that are relevant to CDA: ideological, rhetorical and
strategic critique. Whereas ideological critique focuses on the effects of
semiosis on social relations of power, and rhetorical critique on persuasion
(including ‘manipulation’) in individual texts or talk, what we might call
‘strategic critique’ focuses on how semiosis ﬁgures within the strategies pur-
sued by groups of social agents to change societies in particular directions.
The research objects I have distinguished (emergence, hegemony, recon-
textualisation and operationalisation) can be seen as objects associated with
strategic critique. One might see strategic critique as assuming a certain 
primacy in periods of major social change and restructuring, such as the one
we are going through now. This is not to suggest at all that ideological and
rhetoric critique cease to be relevant; it is more a matter of their relative
salience within the critical analysis.
The Pickles and Smith (1998) collection on the political economy of 
‘transition’ adopts a regulation approach in combination with theories of govern-
ance and elements of cultural theory. One concern is with ‘re-scaling’, which
alludes to the category of ‘scales’, different levels of social process, organisa-
tion, structure and strategy: ‘global’, international, and macro-regional (e.g.,
the EU and candidate countries), national, micro-regional and local. One
aspect of transition is ‘re-scaling’, the emergence of new scales, and the 
reorganisation of relations between scales ( Jessop 2002). The issue of ‘global-
isation’ is signiﬁcant here, as is what has been referred to as ‘glocalisation’
(Robertson 1992), a re-scaling which sets up new relations between the 
local and the global in ways that can to some degree bypass the national.
Discourse and ‘transition’ in Central and Eastern Europe
509


Ethnographic and other studies of crisis and change in speciﬁc localities
(Burawoy and Verdery 1999, Burawoy 2000, Anastasoaie et al. 2003) have
shown how ‘global’ resources are marshalled by local strategists in struggles
over, for instance, environmental issues, or attempts to reposition econom-
ically depressed cities within global urban networks (Pickles 1998, Gille
2000). These ‘global’ resources include discourses – for instance, the dis-
courses of internationally organised environmental groups.
On the basis of this literature, one can say the following about ‘transition’:
1. There is not one form of capitalism but many forms. The market is only
one regulatory mechanism within contemporary forms of capitalism,
which combines in various ways with others, hierarchies (states), and net-
works (Sayer 1995, Pickles and Smith 1998, Stark and Bruszt 1998,
Jessop 2002).
2. The particular trajectories of ‘transition’ vary in different countries but
also within different countries, depending on legacies, including how the
process of extrication from communism took place. The forms of capital-
ism that develop are consequently also variable (Pickles and Smith 1998,
Przeworski 1992, Daianu 2000).
3. Transition entails a mixture of old and new, rather than a simple replace-
ment of the old by the new (Stark and Bruszt 1998, Verdery 2000).
4. Research on transition in a particular country should be sensitive to (a)
variation both between and within social ﬁelds – economy, government,
politics, media etc. – and (b) hybridity (including mixtures of old and new)
in particular ﬁelds, institutions, practices etc.
5. Transition has semiotic as well as non-semiotic elements. Consequently,
variation and hybridity will be in part semiotic variation and hybridity 
(see, for instance, Miroiu (1999) on variation and hybridity in post-1989
Romanian political discourses) – in the way social life is represented, nar-
rated, imagined (therefore in discourses), in semiotic aspects of forms of
action and interaction (therefore in genres), in semiotic aspects of the 
identities of social actors (therefore in styles).
4 Recontextualisation of the ‘knowledge-based economy’ and
‘information society’ in Romanian policy texts
The dissemination and recontextualisation of the strategies and discourses 
of the KBE and IS in CEE is closely connected to the process of EU enlarge-
ment. The Lisbon Council of the EU in 2000 adopted these strategies as part
of the ‘e-Europe’ initiative. The EU’s ‘strategic goal’ is to ‘become the most
510
Globalisation and ‘transition’


competitive and dynamic knowledge-based economy in the world, capable of
sustainable economic growth with more and better jobs and greater social
cohesion.’ The ‘e-Europe 2002 Action Plan’ was agreed at Feira in 2000, 
and the candidate countries for EU membership in CEE were associated with
the EU’s strategic goal in adopting the ‘e-Europe+ Action Plan’ in 2001, one
reason for which was said to be avoiding a ‘digital divide’ within the EU.
According to the Romanian government’s ‘National Strategy for the promo-
tion of the New Economy and the implementation of the Information Society’
(2002), it was made clear at a conference of ministers of the candidate coun-
tries and representatives of the EU in Warsaw (May 2000) that ‘the e-Europe
initiative will become a basic element of the process of integration’.
The ‘e-Europe+ Action Plan’ agreed by the candidate countries was
explicitly modelled upon the EU’s ‘e-Europe 2002 Action Plan’, and much of
the Romanian government’s ‘National Strategy’ document is modelled upon
them. The document is partly an ‘action plan’, but it is also partly a strategy
document comparable to an extent with the Lisbon Summit Declaration. The
nodal discourse in the Lisbon Declaration is the ‘KBE’, whereas the nodal 
discourse in the Romanian document is the ‘IS’ (the discourse of ‘the new
economy’ could be seen as a secondary nodal discourse). There seems to be
no clear and stable relation between the two nodal discourses within the
‘eEurope’ and ‘eEurope+’ projects overall; they are articulated together in dif-
ferent ways in different policy documents. In the Romanian position paper on
the KBE for the World Bank’s ‘Knowledge Economy Forum for EU Accession
Countries’, held in Paris at precisely the same time as the publication of the
Romanian ‘National Strategy’ document (February 2002), the nodal dis-
course is ‘the KBE’, even though it refers to virtually the same set of strategies
and policies. In the Lisbon Declaration, the ‘IS’ is one element of one of 
three ‘strategies’ for achieving the ‘strategic goal’ of becoming ‘the most com-
petitive and dynamic knowledge-based economy in the world’ (see section 5
of the Lisbon Declaration, Text 1, in the Appendix). Although the ‘KBE’ is
not an entity or imaginary or strategic goal in the Romanian ‘National
Strategy’, the ‘new economy’ is deﬁned partly in recognisably ‘KBE’ terms 
as the ‘intensiﬁcation of incorporation of knowledge in new products and 
services’ (‘intensiﬁcarea înglob rii cunoa terii în noile produse i servicii’).
As these comments imply, what is signiﬁcant with respect to recontextual-
isation is both the presence or absence of particular discourses in particular
texts, and the relations in which diverse discourses are articulated, ‘textured’,
together. One can identify differences between texts in this regard, by ana-
lysing the relationship between discourses and features of genre, in the sense
that genres can be seen as ‘framing’ devices for organising relationships
Discourse and ‘transition’ in Central and Eastern Europe
511


between discourses (Chouliaraki and Fairclough 1999). Relevant features of
genre include the rhetorical structure and argumentative structure of the text
(Fairclough 2003). I shall focus my analytical comments upon these issues.
One can see how this selection of focuses for analysis depends upon the par-
ticular object of research (recontextualisation), though there are many other
analytical issues (such as the presentation of processes and of agency) that are
germane to recontextualisation.
In the opening section of the Lisbon Declaration (‘A strategic goal for the
next decade,’ paragraphs 1–7, Text 1, Appendix), predominant features of the
rhetorical structure are arguments from problems to solutions and from ends
to means. The two paragraphs of the ﬁrst sub-section (‘The new challenge’) are
both arguments from problem to solution, from what ‘is’ happening to what
‘must’ be done in response (from the ‘challenge’, the changes that are happen-
ing, to the necessary responses, what the Union ‘must’ do, ‘needs’ to do, what
is ‘urgent’ for it to do, what these changes ‘require’). The second section (‘The
Union’s strengths and weaknesses’) is also a version of a problem-to-solution
argument, arguing for the proposed solution as a response to ‘weaknesses’
which is timely in the light of ‘strengths’. Both paragraphs 5 and 6 in the third
section (‘The way forward’) are arguments from ends (‘strategic goals’) to
means (‘strategy’), and paragraph 7 is an argument from ends (‘strategy’) to
means of governance for achieving them.
This rhetorical structure constitutes a frame within which diverse dis-
courses are articulated together in a particular way, within which relations are
textured (textually constituted) between these discourses. I am particularly
concerned here with the placing of expressions that are associated with differ-
ent discourses in relations of ‘equivalence’3 through listing and other forms 
of paratactic connection (Fairclough 2003). One can see this as a process of
(re)classifying, texturing relations between expressions as co-members of a
class (even if, as is generally the case, the class itself is not named – what van
Leeuwen (1996) calls ‘association’). In paragraph 5, for instance, the formula-
tion of the ‘strategic goal’ sets up a relation of equivalence between ‘sustainable
economic growth’, ‘more and better jobs’, and ‘greater social cohesion’ (more
precisely: there is a comitative structure which sets up a relation of equivalence
between the ﬁrst and the other two phrases, and a coordinate structure 
which sets up a relation of equivalence between these two), all as attributes 
of the ‘KBE’. Each of these equivalent phrases represents a substantive EU
policy area associated with an elaborated discourse (the discourses of growth,
(un)employment, social and regional cohesion), and the relations of equiva-
lence among them are linguistic realisations of interdiscursive hybridity (the
‘mixing’ of discourses).
512
Globalisation and ‘transition’


The formulation of the ‘overall strategy’, which is the means to achieving
the ‘strategic goal’, again sets up relations of equivalence, among the three
listed elements of the strategy (‘preparing . . .’, ‘modernising . . .’, ‘sustaining
. . .’), and within them between ‘better policies for the information society and
R&D’ (and within this, between ‘IS’ and ‘R&D’), ‘stepping up the process 
of structural reform for competitiveness and innovation’ (and within this,
between ‘competitiveness’ and ‘innovation’) and ‘completing the internal
market’; among ‘modernizing the European social model’, ‘investing in 
people’, and ‘combating social exclusion’; and so forth. Again, diverse policy
areas and associated discourses (e.g., the ‘IS’, ‘competitiveness’, ‘social 
exclusion’) are articulated together in particular relations within the nodal 
discourse of the ‘KBE’.
A signiﬁcant overall feature of the articulation of discourses in the docu-
ment is that, in the formulation of problems, the strategic goal, and the strat-
egies for achieving it, discourses which represent the economy (‘sustainable
economic growth’ in the strategic goal) are articulated with discourses which
represent social problems and policies (‘more and better jobs’ and ‘social
cohesion’ in the strategic goal).
One notable difference between the Lisbon Declaration and the Romanian
‘National Strategy’ document is that there is no section in the latter with a com-
parable rhetorical structure, articulating arguments from problems to solutions
with arguments from ends to means. In more general terms, the Romanian docu-
ment is not based upon arguments from the speciﬁc problems facing Romania
to strategic goals for dealing with them (and strategies for achieving these). This
is on the face of it a surprising absence in a national strategy document, though,
as I argue later, not actually at all surprising given Romania’s international
position. This does not mean that problems are not identiﬁed in the document,
or that goals and strategies and policies are not speciﬁed. They are, but what
is signiﬁcant is the relations that are textured between them. For instance, the
relationship between strategic goals and problems is largely reversed: rather
than goals and strategies being legitimised in their adequacy and timeliness in
responding to a diagnosis of the problems facing the country, the problems are
construed as weaknesses and difﬁculties with respect to achieving the strat-
egic goal, taken as given, of the ‘IS’. This is indicated by the wider rhetorical
structure of the document: the strategic goal is formulated (as I show below) in
Chapters 1 and 2, on the basis of claims about the general beneﬁts (not speciﬁc
beneﬁts to Romania) of the ‘IS’ and Romania’s international commitments
(especially to ‘eEurope+’), and speciﬁc Romanian problems (of poverty, 
emigration of skilled labour etc.) are identiﬁed only in Chapter 3 within an
assessment of the country’s current position in respect of the ‘IS’.
Discourse and ‘transition’ in Central and Eastern Europe
513


Arguments for the ‘IS’ as the strategic goal are largely implicit. The Lisbon
Declaration is ‘based upon’ arguments from problems to solutions in the
material sense that the document begins from these arguments. The Romanian
document, by contrast, begins with a general chapter about the ‘IS’ and the
‘new economy’, which does not directly refer to Romania at all and only indir-
ectly alludes to Romania in the ﬁnal few paragraphs. In rhetorical structure,
the chapter is an extended description of the ‘IS’, followed by prescriptions
about what must be done to construct such a society. The ﬁrst, descriptive,
section construes the ‘IS’ as actually existing rather than as a strategic goal,
representing it in an idealised (and to some degree utopian) way, which con-
strues in universal terms what are commonly claimed to be its potential effects
and beneﬁts as if they were actual effects and beneﬁts. Here, for instance, is a
translation of the second paragraph:
The information society represents a new stage of human civilisation, a
new and qualitatively superior way of life, which implies the intensive use of
information in all spheres of human activity and existence, with major economic
and social consequences. The information society allows widespread access
to information for its members, a new way of working and learning, greater
possibilities for economic globalisation, and increasing social cohesion.
It is only in the ninth of its thirteen paragraphs that a strategic perspective
on ‘constructing the new model of society’ (‘Construirea noului model de
societate . . .’) appears. The following paragraphs specify the role of govern-
ment, business, the academic community, and civil society in this process. 
By this stage, one can assume that Romania in particular is being alluded to
without being explicitly named – this is implicit in the claim that ‘national
development priorities for the medium-long term’ and ‘objectives of adhesion
to Euro-Atlantic structures’ (often formulated in this way in Romanian policy
contexts) need to be taken into account. The ‘IS’ as a strategic goal is covertly
established on the basis of idealised claims about the ‘IS’ as a universal reality.
The second chapter is a review of tendencies and policies internationally
and within the EU, including a summary of the ‘e-Europe’ and ‘e-Europe+’
initiatives. Romania is a participant in ‘e-Europe+’. The ‘IS’ as a ‘development
objective’ is claimed to be ‘an essential condition for participation in the single
European market’. It is implied, without being explicitly stated, that this
applies to Romania, and that the ‘information society’ is therefore its ‘develop-
ment objective’ (strategic goal). The third chapter is a STEEP (social, techno-
logical, economic and political factors) analysis of the current situation with
respect to the ‘IS’ internationally and in Romania, which includes a review of
problems and possibilities and policies in Romania – it is here, as I said earlier,
that speciﬁcally Romanian problems are introduced.
514
Globalisation and ‘transition’


Thus the ‘IS’ is implicitly established as Romania’s strategic goal on essen-
tially extraneous grounds: the universal beneﬁts it brings as an existing reality,
and the commitment to this strategic goal as a part of commitment to the 
‘e-Europe+’ initiative.
It is only in Chapter 4 (‘Strategic Directions and Options’) that ‘strategic
choices’ for Romania are explicitly addressed. I shall comment on the rhetorical
and argumentative structure of the ﬁrst section (entitled ‘Global objectives’,
see Texts 2 and 3 in the Appendix) and how it frames the articulation of dis-
courses. The rhetorical structure of the section is characterised by arguments
from general factual claims about economic changes and their societal conse-
quences in the ‘IS’, to possibilities, policies and strategies (for, by implication,
particular countries). Although these arguments are formulated in general
terms without speciﬁc reference to Romania (Romania is referred to explicitly
only in the last sentence), they can be taken as referring implicitly to Romania
– the list of four policies includes what appear to be speciﬁcally Romanian
policies (especially the fourth, which is very similar to policies advocated
explicitly for economic applications of ICT in Romania in the next section 
of the chapter). The ﬁrst sentence makes a general factual claim about the 
consequences of large-scale use of ICTs (‘profound implications for socio-
economic life, fundamental transformations in the way of producing goods
and services and in human behavior’). The second sentence is a conditional
formulation of the possibilities opened up: greater use of information tech-
nologies ‘can ensure the socio-economic progress characteristic of informa-
tion societies’, as long as ‘objectives and orientations of a strategic nature are
adopted through policies appropriate to the actual societies in which we live’.
Four policies are then listed (‘consolidation of democracy and the rule of
law’, ‘development of a market economy and progressive movement towards
the new economy’, ‘improving the quality of life’, and, through policies to
achieve this, ‘integration into Euro-Atlantic structures and the Global
Information Society’, ‘consolidation and development of a national economic
framework which ensures the production of goods and services which are
competitive on internal and external markets’). The ﬁrst three elements of this
list are structured as arguments from end to means. In the following two para-
graphs, there are two sentences making general factual claims about the ‘IS’,
which frame a more speciﬁc claim (sentence 3) about the development of
knowledge as ‘a critical, determining, factor in economic growth and stand-
ards of living’, which by implication makes it possible (sentence 4) for the 
‘digital divide’ to become, with ‘appropriate strategies’, the ‘digital oppor-
tunity’. The pattern of argument from factual economic claim to strategic pos-
sibilities is repeated in the following two paragraphs. The ﬁnal sentence is a
Discourse and ‘transition’ in Central and Eastern Europe
515


recommendation, ‘given the example of the countries referred to above and
presented in the appendix’ (Ireland, Israel, Finland) that Romania ‘should
make a fundamental choice to develop a branch of the economy which pro-
duces the goods and services demanded by the information society, based 
on ICT’.
The rhetorical structure of the ﬁrst section of the Lisbon Declaration set up
a relationship among diagnosed problems, a strategic goal for solving them,
and strategies for achieving it (with means for achieving these strategic ends).
Here, by contrast, the strategic goal is taken for granted rather than established
on the basis of diagnosis of problems (there is no such diagnosis), and the
focus is on possibilities arising from general claims about economic and social
change and the strategies for realising them. Thus, at the one point in the docu-
ment where ‘strategic options’ speciﬁcally for Romania are addressed, there 
is no attempt to establish strategic goals adapted to Romania’s particular 
problems, and the only strategic choice recommended, in the last sentence
(the only one that explicitly refers to Romania), relates speciﬁcally and 
narrowly to economic applications of ICT. The rest of the chapter is taken up
with an elaboration of this.
I noted above that, in the Lisbon Declaration, discourses that represent the
economy are articulated with discourses that represent social problems and
policies. In the Romanian document, there is something resembling this arti-
culation in the list of four policies, but it is signiﬁcantly different. First, this
articulation is only within strategies to achieve the assumed strategic goal of
the ‘IS’, whereas in the Lisbon Declaration the articulation of economic and
social discourses is present in the formulation of problems, strategic goal, and
strategies for achieving it. Second, and connectedly, it is only social policies
that are represented, not social problems. Third, the social policies repres-
ented relate to political issues and ‘the quality of life’, but not, for instance, to
standards of living (or the key problem of poverty), employment (or the prob-
lem of unemployment), or the major divisions between urban and rural areas
and populations.4 That is, major social problems which one might see as
demanding social policies (including those focused upon in the Lisbon Declara-
tion, (un)employment, social and regional cohesion) are not represented.
I shall make a few comments on the articulation of discourses within the
listed policies. In the ﬁrst, a relation of equivalence is textured between
‘democracy’ and ‘(the institutions of ) the state of right’,5 which one can see as
signiﬁcant in the recontextualisation of the discourse of ‘e-government’ (as a
constituent discourse of both the nodal discourses): the aim of establishing
the ‘state of right’ was one of the key ways in which Romanian society after
1989 differentiated and distanced itself from the Ceausescu era. However, the
516
Globalisation and ‘transition’


equivalence relations within the formulation of the means for achieving the
policy (between ‘the participation of citizens in public life’, ‘the facilitation of
non-discriminatory access to public information’, ‘improvement of the quality
of public services’, modernisation of public administration’) constitute an
articulation of discourses that one might ﬁnd in the ‘e-government’ policies of
EU members. In the third, the policy of ‘improving the quality of life’ is repres-
ented as a means to ‘integration into Euro-Atlantic structures and the Global
Information Society’. This is again signiﬁcant with respect to recontextualisa-
tion. ‘Integration into Euro-Atlantic structures’, subsuming integration into
the EU, is often formulated as a Romanian policy objective which has been
interpreted as merging in a confused way EU membership and NATO mem-
bership (Repere 2004). Policies for improving the quality of life are a means to
this end in that they are among the conditions Romania must meet (in the
acquis communitaires and the ‘e-Europe’ initiative) for joining the EU.
If we look at the arguments and explanations given in the document as 
a whole for Romania’s adoption of the ‘IS’ as a strategic goal, it may clarify
what problems it is covertly construed as a solution to. ICT is ‘considered an
important engine for boosting the national economy and promoting national
interests’. Romania has adhered to the objectives of the ‘e-Europe’ pro-
gramme, ‘considering them a beneﬁcial framework for the urgent process of
integration in the EU’. If Romania is not rapidly integrated into ‘Euro-Atlantic
structures’ (the strategy of the ‘IS’ is represented as a precondition for this),
‘the economic gap between our country and developed countries will grow’.
What is noteworthy is that factors to do with the economy, ‘national interests’,
and EU integration are included, but – in contrast with the Lisbon Declaration
– social factors (unemployment, poverty, social exclusion, social and regional
cohesion) are not.
These are the cases of Romania being speciﬁcally and explicitly referred to.
There is a much larger number of others, in which arguments for the ‘IS’ are
given in general terms, without reference to particular countries, which can be
seen as implicitly applying to Romania. Apart from the ﬁrst chapter, these are
mainly economic arguments (e.g., ‘developing countries can obtain certain
economic advantages from rapidly capitalising on the opportunities offered 
by ICT and especially electronic commerce’). In the ﬁrst chapter, there are a
number of general claims about the ‘IS’ which might be taken as implicit argu-
ments in favour of adopting it as a strategic goal, and these do include solutions
to social problems (see the paragraph quoted earlier). But these arguments do
not, of course, address Romania’s particular and in some ways quite speciﬁc
social problems (e.g., approximately forty per cent of the workforce is still
employed in agriculture).
Discourse and ‘transition’ in Central and Eastern Europe
517


In Chouliaraki and Fairclough (1999), we argued that recontextualisation
is a colonisation–appropriation dialectic. There is both a process of an ‘exter-
nal’ discourse colonising the recontextualising practices (country, ﬁeld,
organisation etc.), and a process of the ‘external’ discourse being appropri-
ated within the recontextualising practices. In principle, one can claim that
there is no colonisation without appropriation – recontextualisation is always
an active process on the part of ‘internal’ social agents of inserting an ‘external’
element into a new context, working it into a new set of relations with its exist-
ing elements, and in so doing transforming it. This is often manifested in the
interdiscursive hybridity of texts, the mixing of ‘external’ with ‘internal’ dis-
cursive elements. Moreover, in strategic terms one could argue that strategic
relations between ‘external’ and ‘internal’ social agents will always be inﬂected
by strategic relations between ‘internal’ social agents.
However, it is necessary to add two provisos to this theoretical account.
First, the degree to which recontextualisation becomes an active process of
appropriation entailing potentially substantive transformation of recontextu-
alised elements (which includes the possibilities of them being strategically
used by some ‘internal’ agents in their struggles with others, being contained
or marginalised or contested etc.) depends upon the state of the relations
between ‘external’ and ‘internal’ agents and of relations between ‘internal’
agents. Recontextualising contexts may manifest degrees of passivity. Second,
however active the process of appropriation, one cannot assume that it will 
be equally active in all practices within the recontextualising context (e.g., a
nation state such as Romania).
In general terms, the room for autonomous agency and initiative in con-
temporary Romania with respect to the main lines of economic and social 
policy and activity is rather limited. Romania is strongly committed to integra-
tion into the European Union and ‘Euro-Atlantic structures’ and to maintaining
good relations with and the support and assistance of the EU, the US, EU
states, international agencies (UNO, World Bank, IMF, and so forth), and
these come with conditions attached which leave Romania with little room for
manoeuvre. I have shown in the analysis of the ‘National Strategy’ document
that, rather than being explicitly legitimised as solutions to Romania’s par-
ticular problems, strategic goals are implicitly legitimised through idealised
claims about the ‘IS’ construed as a universal reality, and by reference to
Romania’s international commitments. Any state is faced with the problem of
legitimising its goals, strategies, and policies, and these can perhaps be seen as
the legitimising strategies adopted by the Romanian government (though
such a conclusion would require more extensive analysis of policy documents
and other government material). Given its international position, one might
518
Globalisation and ‘transition’


argue that Romania does not have the option of formulating goals, strategies
and policies on the basis of an analysis of its speciﬁc problems and needs.
Though Boia (1999), in distinguishing ‘defensive’ and ‘offensive’ Romanian
responses to integration with ‘the West’ over the course of modern Romanian
history, suggests that it is a characteristic of the ‘offensive’ (integrationist)
responses to proceed with scant regard for the consequences in the already
profound social divisions and inequalities in the country.
5 Conclusion
Miroiu (1999) describes the ‘mental cramp’ she experienced in discussing
Romanian problems with Western academics, and her realisation that Romanian
realities could not be grasped in their conceptual frameworks. I think this is in
part an issue of methodology. Bourdieu’s approach to constructing the ‘object
of research’ implies a progressive articulation or rapprochement of topics of
research with theories and methods in the course of deﬁning and reﬁning the
‘object of research’, rather than immediately approaching the topic of research
armed with ready-made theories and methods. What is implied is that theories
and methods appropriate to the object of research and particular to this object
of research should be progressively constructed out of existing resources 
of theory and method, which can quite legitimately include theories and 
methods hitherto used only ‘elsewhere’, be that in different parts of the world,
different areas of research, or different disciplines.
We also need to draw distinctions, with respect to theory, among different
types of theory. Metatheories (such as ‘critical realism’ as a philosophy of 
science) and general theories (such as the theory of discourse I have sketched
here, or regulation theory) generally travel better than ‘local theories’ (e.g.,
theories focused upon particular social ﬁelds in particular sorts of society,
such as theories of education, media, or social welfare in social democratic
societies). This is not to say that research in particular sorts of society may not
lead to speciﬁc critiques of metatheories or general theories. There are, for
instance, apparently general theories whose covert particularity is revealed by
working with them in new contexts – recently inﬂuential economic theories
are a case in point. And even with general theories, one needs to carefully dis-
tinguish what is general about them from particularities that attach to them
because of the speciﬁc research topics they have been used to address and the
speciﬁc localities of such research. This is certainly true for CDA: the categor-
ies of ‘order and discourse’, ‘discourses’, ‘genres’, ‘styles’, ‘interdiscursivity’ 
are among those which belong to the general theory, whereas categories 
such as ‘marketisation’ or ‘conversationalisation’ which have ﬁgured quite
Discourse and ‘transition’ in Central and Eastern Europe
519


prominently in CDA research do not, nor does the use of systemic functional
grammar for linguistic analysis of texts. If ‘conversationalisation’ proved to be
a useless category for discourse analytical research in Romania, it would not
be a problem for the theory; if ‘interdiscursivity’ did, it would.
CDA’s transdisciplinary way of working makes it difﬁcult sometimes to
separate general from particular. For instance, I would say that ‘recontextual-
isation’, a category which originated in Bernstein’s sociology of pedagogy
(Bernstein 1990; Chouliaraki and Fairclough 1999) has become a general cat-
egory of CDA because it has been fully reinterpreted in discourse-analytical
terms and built into the relational structure of the categories of the theory,
whereas ‘conversationalisation’ has not. Moreover the transdisciplinary way
of working and the associated methodology I have pointed to entails that, in
the course of progressively arriving at one’s ‘object of research’, one is also
seeking to ﬁnd a coherent synthesis between CDA as a general theory and
other theories which bear upon one’s topic – let us say theories of media and
mediation, theories of politics, theories of identity, theories of learning – so
that caution is always needed about non-reﬂexively ‘importing’ inappropriate
or misleading particularities.
Finally, let me note the limited nature of what I have done in this chapter,
and point to directions in which this research needs to be developed. Firstly, I
have looked at recontextualisation only with respect to policy texts. One
would also need material from within particular institutions (e.g., educa-
tional), businesses, localities, political parties etc. to arrive at a fuller assess-
ment. Such an extension of the data might also provide evidence of a more
active appropriation of these discourses, hybrid relations between these and
other discourses, and strategic differences in their recontextualisation, than 
I have been able to show in this chapter.
Secondly, a commonplace in commentaries on transition is that they are, in
the much-used expression of the nineteenth-century Romanian literary critic
Maiorescu, ‘form without content’ – as modernisation and westernisation in
Romania have always been, many would add. The language of modernisation
is readily ‘imitated’ from the West, but without much change in social realities.
Such claims make it particularly important to go beyond public policy 
documents in looking at recontextualisation, and especially to research the
operationalisation of discourses such as the ‘IS’ and the ‘knowledge economy’, 
not only by looking, for instance, at how imaginaries for ‘e-government’ are
being operationalised in, for instance, the setting up of a government web 
portal (http:www.guvernare.ro) but also through ethnographic research in
localities, companies etc. which can give insights into the relationship among
discourses, rhetoric and reality.
520
Globalisation and ‘transition’


APPENDIX
Text 1: Extract from the Lisbon Declaration: 
(‘A strategic goal for the next decade’)
The new challenge
1. The European Union is confronted with a quantum shift resulting from
globalisation and the challenges of a new knowledge-driven economy. These
changes are affecting every aspect of people’s lives and require a radical trans-
formation of the European economy. The Union must shape these changes in
a manner consistent with its values and concepts of society and also with a
view to the forthcoming enlargement.
2. The rapid and accelerating pace of change means it is urgent for the Union
to act now to harness the full beneﬁts of the opportunities presented. Hence
the need for the Union to set a clear strategic goal and agree a challenging pro-
gramme for building knowledge infrastructures, enhancing innovation and
economic reform, and modernising social welfare and education systems.
The Union’s strengths and weaknesses
3. The Union is experiencing its best macro-economic outlook for a genera-
tion. As a result of stability-oriented monetary policy supported by sound
ﬁscal policies in a context of wage moderation, inﬂation and interest rates are
low, public sector deﬁcits have been reduced remarkably and the EU’s balance
of payments is healthy. The euro has been successfully introduced and is
delivering the expected beneﬁts for the European economy. The internal 
market is largely complete and is yielding tangible beneﬁts for consumers and
businesses alike. The forthcoming enlargement will create new opportunities
for growth and employment. The Union possesses a generally well-educated
workforce as well as social protection systems able to provide, beyond their
intrinsic value, the stable framework required for managing the structural
changes involved in moving towards a knowledge-based society. Growth and
job creation have resumed.
4. These strengths should not distract our attention from a number of weak-
nesses. More than 15 million Europeans are still out of work. The employ-
ment rate is too low and is characterised by insufﬁcient participation in the
labour market by women and older workers. Long-term structural unemploy-
ment and marked regional unemployment imbalances remain endemic in
Discourse and ‘transition’ in Central and Eastern Europe
521


parts of the Union. The services sector is underdeveloped, particularly in the
areas of telecommunications and the Internet. There is a widening skills 
gap, especially in information technology where increasing numbers of jobs
remain unﬁlled. With the current improved economic situation, the time 
is right to undertake both economic and social reforms as part of a positive
strategy which combines competitiveness and social cohesion.
The way forward
5. The Union has today set itself a new strategic goal for the next decade: 
to become the most competitive and dynamic knowledge-based economy in the
world, capable of sustainable economic growth with more and better jobs 
and greater social cohesion. Achieving this goal requires an overall strategy
aimed at:
• preparing the transition to a knowledge-based economy and society by 
better policies for the information society and R&D, as well as by stepping
up the process of structural reform for competitiveness and innovation and
by completing the internal market;
• modernising the European social model, investing in people and combat-
ing social exclusion;
• sustaining the healthy economic outlook and favourable growth prospects
by applying an appropriate macro-economic policy mix.
6. This strategy is designed to enable the Union to regain the conditions for
full employment, and to strengthen regional cohesion in the European Union.
The European Council needs to set a goal for full employment in Europe in 
an emerging new society which is more adapted to the personal choices of
women and men. If the measures set out below are implemented against a
sound macro-economic background, an average economic growth rate of
around 3% should be a realistic prospect for the coming years.
7. Implementing this strategy will be achieved by improving the existing pro-
cesses, introducing a new open method of coordination at all levels, coupled
with a stronger guiding and coordinating role for the European Council to
ensure more coherent strategic direction and effective monitoring of progress.
A meeting of the European Council to be held every Spring will deﬁne the 
relevant mandates and ensure that they are followed up.
522
Globalisation and ‘transition’


Text 2: Chapter 4, section 1, of the Romanian ‘Strategia
Na0ionalt Pentru Promovarea Noii Economii 9i 
Implementarea Societa0ii Informa0ionale’
4.1 Obiective globale
Utilizarea largf a tehnologiilor informa8ionale 7i de comunica8ii (TIC) con-
duce la implica8ii profunde în via8a social-economicf, la transformfri funda-
mentale în modul de a realiza produsele 7i serviciile 7i în comportamentul
uman. Valoriﬁcarea superioarf a acestor tehnologii poate asigura progresul
economic-social ce caracterizeazfsocietatea informa8ionalf, cu condi8ia înde-
plinirii unor obiective 7i orientfri de naturf strategicf prin politici adecvate
stfrii societf8ii în care trfim:
1. Consolidarea democra0iei 9i a institu0iilor statului de drept prin partic-
iparea cetf8enilor la via8a politicf 7i facilitarea accesului nediscriminatoriu
la informa8ia publicf, îmbunftf8irea calitf8ii serviciilor publice 7i modern-
izarea administra8iei publice (e-government, e-administration).
2. Dezvoltarea economiei de pia0t9i trecerea progresivtla noua economie,
cre7terea competitivitf8ii agen8ilor economici 7i crearea de noi locuri de
muncf în sectoare de înaltf tehnologie prin dezvoltarea comer8ului elec-
tronic, tele-lucrului, a unor noi metode de management al afacerilor, de
management ﬁnanciar 7i al resurselor umane, integrarea capabilitf8ilor
TIC în noi produse 7i servicii, dezvoltarea sectorului TIC.
3. Cre9terea calitt0ii vie0ii prin utilizarea noilor tehnologii în domenii pre-
cum: protec8ia socialf, asisten8a medicalf, educa8ie, protec8ia mediului 7i
monitorizarea dezastrelor, siguran8a transporturilor etc. 7i, pe aceastfcale,
integrarea în structurile euro-atlantice 7i în Societatea Informa8ionalf
Globalf.
4. Consolidarea 9i dezvoltarea unei ramuri a economiei na0ionale care st
asigure realizarea de produse 9i servicii competitive pe pia0a internt 9i
externt, cerute de evolu8ia lumii contemporane. O ramurf a economiei
bazatfpe produse 7i servicii care valoriﬁcfTIC pe pia8a internf7i, mai ales,
la export, ar permite ocuparea resursei umane în activitf8i caracterizate de
eﬁcien8f maximf, comparativ cu alte ramuri, prin faptul cf produsele 7i
serviciile speciﬁce SI con8in o cotf ridicatf a valorii adfugate, asociatf cu
consumuri minime de resurse materiale 7i de energie. O asemenea op8iune
corespunde previziunilor privind evolu8ia societf8ii umane în secolul 21,
ﬁind sus8inutf de experien8a ultimilor zece ani a unor 8fri de dimensiuni
mici, cum sunt Irlanda, Finlanda sau Israelul. (vezi Anexa nr. 3.)
Discourse and ‘transition’ in Central and Eastern Europe
523


În ultimii ani au intervenit schimbfri importante în evolu8ia societf8ii, cu un
impact major asupra modului în care gândim, muncim, interac8ionfm, pet-
recem timpul liber 7i în mod special, asupra modului în care realizfm produsele
7i serviciile. Schimbfrile majore care au produs acest impact 7i care vor marca
evolu8ia societf8ii în perspectiva noului mileniu sunt legate în principal de
globalizarea competi8iei 7i a pie8ei 7i de progresele ob8inute în domeniul TIC.
În acest context ce deﬁne7te Societatea Informa8ionalf, asistfm la impunerea
cunoa7terii ca un factor critic, determinant, al cre7terii economice 7i al stand-
ardului de via8f. De la o diviziune a lumii în raport cu accesul la cunoa7tere 7i
la utilizarea noilor tehnologii din domeniu (‘global digital divide’) se poate
ajunge prin strategii adecvate, elaborate la nivel na8ional 7i global, la noi 
oportunitf8i oferite dezvoltfrii societf8ii la nivel planetar (‘global digital
opportunity’, The Okinawa Summit of the G7/G8’, iulie 2000).
Globalizarea 7i noile TIC impun realizarea produselor 7i serviciilor la
nivelul standardelor existente pe pia8a externf/globalf, în special pe pia8a
internf a UE, în care aceste standarde sunt la nivelul cel mai ridicat.
Realizarea produselor 7i serviciilor inovative la acest nivel nu se poate
asigura decât prin men8inerea 7i dezvoltarea unei capacitf8i de cercetare-
dezvoltare-inovare sus8inutf 7i de un transfer tehnologic activ cftre producf-
torii de bunuri 7i servicii. Con7tientizarea acestei stfri impune elaborarea unei
strategii a dezvoltfrii economiei na8ionale 7i a unor sectoare viabile ale acesteia
care sf facf fa8f competi8iei pe pia8a internf 7i externf, mai ales a UE.
Având exemplul 8frilor amintite mai sus 7i prezentate în anexe (Irlanda,
Israel, Finlanda), România trebuie sffacfo op8iune fundamentalfpentru dez-
voltarea unei ramuri a economiei care sf realizeze produse 7i servicii cerute de
societatea informa8ionalf, bazatf pe tehnologiile informa8iei 7i comunica8iilor.
Text 3: English translation of Text 2
Overall objectives
The widespread use of ICT produces profound implications for socio-
economic life, and fundamental transformations in the way of producing
goods and services and in human behaviour. Capitalising more on these tech-
nologies can ensure the socio-economic progress characteristic of informa-
tion societies as long as objectives and orientations of a strategic nature are
adopted through policies appropriate to the actual societies in which we live:
1. Consolidation of democracy and the institutions of the state through
the participation of citizens in political life and the facilitation of 
524
Globalisation and ‘transition’


non-discriminatory access to public information, the improvement of the 
quality of public services and the modernisation of public administration
(e-government, e-administration).
2. Development of a market economy and progressive movement
towards the new economy, growth in the competitiveness of economic
agents and the creation of new jobs in the high-technology sector through
developing electronic commerce, tele-work, and new methods of business
management, ﬁnancial management and management of human resources,
incorporation of ICT capacities in new goods and services and develop-
ment of the ICT sector.
3. Improving the quality of life by using new technologies in areas such 
as: social welfare, health, education, protection of the environment and
monitoring of disasters, transport security etc., and thereby integration
into Euro-Atlantic structures and the Global Information Society.
4. Consolidation and development of a national economic framework
which ensures the production of goods and services which are compe-
titive on internal and external markets, as the evolution of the modern
world demands. A branch of the economy based on goods and services
which capitalise on ICT for the internal market and especially for export
would permit a maximally efﬁcient use of human resources, compared
with other branches, because speciﬁcally information society goods and
services contain expanded added value associated with minimal use of
material resources and energy. Such an option corresponds to forecasts
about the development of human society in the twenty-ﬁrst century, and is
conﬁrmed by the experience of several small countries over the last ten
years, such as Ireland, Finland and Israel (see Annex nr 3).
Important changes in the development of society have taken place in recent
years, which have had a major impact on the way we think, work, interact,
spend our free time and, especially, on the way we produce goods and services.
The major changes which have produced these effects and which will shape
the development of society in the new millennium are linked especially to the
globalisation of competition and the market and progress in the ﬁeld of ICT.
In this context of the Information Society we are witnessing the imple-
mentation of knowledge as a critical, determining, factor in economic growth
and the standard of living. From the division of the world on the basis of access
to knowledge and use of new technologies in the ﬁeld (‘global digital divide’),
we can, with appropriate strategies developed at national and global levels,
move towards new opportunities for social development at a planetary level
(‘global digital opportunity,’ The Okinawa Summit of the G7/G8, July 2000).
Discourse and ‘transition’ in Central and Eastern Europe
525


Globalisation and new ICT mean producing goods and services to the
standard of external/global markets, especially the internal market of the EU,
where standards are the highest.
The production of innovative goods and services at this level can only be
achieved through maintaining and developing a capacity for sustained research-
development-innovation and for active technology transfer between producers
of goods and services. Making people aware of this entails developing a 
strategy for development of the national economy and for viable sectors within
it, which can compete on internal and external markets, especially the EU.
Given the example of the countries referred to above and presented in the
appendix (Ireland, Israel, Finland), Romania should make a fundamental
choice to develop a branch of the economy which produces the goods and 
services demanded by the information society, based on ICT.
Notes
1. Godin (2004) lists some 75 terms for societal transformation between 1950
and 1984 alone, including ‘post-industrial society’, ‘neocapitalism’, and
‘management society’.
2. The stance of key states (notably the US, European states, Japan) and inter-
national institutions and agencies (the World Bank, the IMF etc.) towards
strategies and discourses is one important factor in the outcome of struggles
for hegemony. Godin (2004) traces the displacement of ‘national systems of
innovation’ (NSIs) by ‘knowledge-based economy’ as the favoured strategy of
the OECD in the 1990s.
3. In Fairclough 2003, I suggest analysis of the texturing of relations of ‘equiva-
lence’ and ‘difference’ as the operationalisation in textual analysis of the view
of the political (which one can extend more generally to social action) in Laclau
and Mouffe (1985) as constituted through the simultaneous operation of the
‘logics’ of ‘equivalence’ and ‘difference’. I see this as a case of textual analysis
being enriched through transdisciplinary dialogue.
4. The discourse of ‘social exclusion’, which is widely used in the EU, is not
widely used in Romania. The discourse of ‘poverty’, which was, for instance,
displaced by the discourse of ‘social exclusion’ in the UK in the language 
of New Labour (Fairclough 2000b), is, by contrast, widely used, though it
appears only once in this document – the issue of poverty is not otherwise
referred to.
5. I use the term ‘state of right’ as equivalent to the German term ‘Rechtsstaat’.
526
Globalisation and ‘transition’


S e c t i o n  G
Language and education


This page intentionally left blank


Introduction
T
he two papers in this ﬁnal section of the book represent an educational
application of CDA developed with Lancaster colleagues specialising 
in various aspects of educational linguistics, especially Romy Clark, Roz
Ivanim and Marilyn Martin-Jones. A joint paper was presented at the 1987
annual meeting of the British Association for Applied Linguistics, and subse-
quently published as Clark, Fairclough et al. (1990, 1991), and later develop-
ments were brought together in a collection of papers (Fairclough 1992b).
This work was a response to the enthusiasm during the 1980s for ‘language
awareness’ in schools (Hawkins 1984, NCLE 1985). Our concern was that
language awareness programmes should be informed by critical views of 
language and discourse, as well as a conception of language learning which
integrated the development of language awareness with the learner’s own
prior experience and with the development of capacities for practice, includ-
ing creative and innovative forms of practice.
‘Critical language awareness and self-identity in education’ locates educa-
tion within the general social problematic of language and power in contem-
porary society. Not only is education itself a key domain of linguistically
mediated power, it also mediates other key domains for learners, including 
the adult world of work. But it is additionally at its best a site of reﬂection upon
and analysis of the sociolinguistic order and the order of discourse, and in so
far as educational institutions equip learners with a critical language aware-
ness, they equip them with a resource for intervention in and reshaping of 
discursive practices and the power relations that ground them, both in other
domains and within education itself. The paper contrasts the assumptions
and objectives of critical and non-critical approaches to language awareness. It
then turns to a particular application of critical language awareness work in the


reﬂexive analysis of relations of power which are implicit in the conventions
and practices of academic discourse, and in struggles on the part of learners to
contest and transform such practices. I use this example for some reﬂections
on the difﬁculties facing those dealing with issues of language and power in the
complex sociocultural circumstances of contemporary societies, and argue
that critical language awareness must not go beyond providing a resource 
for people to use in making their own decisions – it must scrupulously avoid
setting out blueprints for emancipatory practice.
Paper 22 (‘Global capitalism and critical awareness of language’) was 
published in 1999, a decade after the early papers on critical language aware-
ness. They were based upon the conviction that because of changes affecting
the role of language in social life, a critical awareness of language was ‘a 
prerequisite for effective democratic citizenship, and should therefore be 
seen as an entitlement for citizens, especially children developing towards 
citizenship in the educational system’ (Fairclough 1992b: 2–3). We argued
that CLA should be a basic concern in language education. Has the case for
this weakened or strengthened in the intervening years? I argue in this paper
that as the shape of the new global social order has become clearer, so too has
the need for a critical awareness of language as part of people’s resources for
living in new ways in new circumstances. Our educational practices have some
way to go before they begin to match up to our educational needs. At the same
time, it has also become clearer that what is at issue is a critical awareness of
discourse which includes other forms of semiosis as well as language: visual
images in particular are an increasingly important feature of contemporary
discourse (Kress and van Leeuwen 1996).
I discuss several key features of recent society which help make the case for
critical awareness of discourse: the relationship between discourse, know-
ledge and social change in the ‘information’ or ‘knowledge-based’ society;
what Smith (1990) has called the ‘textually-mediated’ nature of contemporary
social life; the relationship between discourse and social difference; the 
commodiﬁcation of discourse; discourse and democracy. I then draw these
together by tying the case for CLA to the nature of the new global capitalism.
530
Language and education


21. Critical language awareness and 
self-identity in education1
T
he issue of language and power in education is just a part of the more 
general social problematic of language and power, and ought not in my
view to be isolated from it. At least in developed capitalist countries, we live in
an age in which power is predominantly exercised through the generation of
consent rather than through coercion, through ideology rather than through
physical force, through the inculcation of self-disciplining practices rather
than through the breaking of skulls. (Though there is still unfortunately no
shortage of the latter, and indeed there has been a reversion to it on the grand
scale in certain parts of the world (e.g., the former socialist countries) in the
past few years.) It is an age in which the production and reproduction of the
social order depend increasingly upon practices and processes of a broadly
cultural nature. Part of this development is an enhanced role for language 
in the exercise of power: it is mainly in discourse that consent is achieved, 
ideologies are transmitted, and practices, meanings, values and identities 
are taught and learnt. This is clear from the generally acknowledged role of 
the mass media as probably the single most important social institution in
bringing off these processes in contemporary societies. And it is recognised 
in the salience given to language and discourse (the ‘linguistic turn’) in the
work of theorists of modern and contemporary society including Heidegger,
Foucault, Derrida, Bourdieu and Habermas.
We also live in an age of great change and instability in which the forms of
power and domination are being radically reshaped, in which changing cul-
tural practices are a major constituent of social change, which in many cases
means to a signiﬁcant degree changing discursive practices, changing prac-
tices of language use. I have discussed, for example, how the marketisation of
discursive practices is constitutive of more general processes of institutional


marketisation, and discursive facets of sociocultural processes of detradition-
alisation and informalisation (Paper 4) and the technologisation of discourse
as a peculiarly contemporary form of intervention in discursive practices to
shape sociocultural change (Paper 5).
Educational institutions are heavily involved in these general develop-
ments affecting language in its relation to power. First, educational practices
themselves constitute a core domain of linguistic and discursive power and 
of the engineering of discursive practices. Much training in education is 
orientated to a signiﬁcant degree towards the use and inculcation of particular
discursive practices in educational organisations, more or less explicitly inter-
preted as an important facet of the inculcation of particular cultural meanings
and values, social relationships and identities, and pedagogies. Second, many
other domains are mediated and transmitted by educational institutions. For
example, one general consequence of processes of societal post-traditionalisation
and informalisation for various domains of work (in the context of the emer-
gence of the supposedly dehierarchised, ‘ﬂat’, organisation) is a great increase
in expectations of and demands upon the dialogical capacities of workers,
which educational institutions are widely expected to meet through a new
emphasis on spoken language ‘skills’. Third, educational institutions are to a
greater or lesser extent involved in educating people about the sociolinguistic
order they live in. In some cases they are aiming to equip them with what 
has in my view become, because of the enhanced social and cultural role of 
language and because of the technologisation of discourse, an essential 
prerequisite for effective democratic citizenship, the capacity for critique of
language. No doubt the critique of language is in the best cases already carried
out reﬂexively, i.e., is directed at the practices of the educational institution
itself (and even at the practices of the critical classroom) and towards issues of
language and power in education.
Anticipated changes in the linguistic and discoursal needs of work are a
major factor in shaping language education in schools. The established shift
towards the service sector at the expense of manufacturing is one element,
entailing a focus on interaction with publics, customers or clients. Another is
the shift from a Fordist, Taylorist mode or organisation within manufacturing
to a post-Fordist organisation, alluded to above. There is an emphasis on the
future worker as ‘multiskilled’, on work as exploiting talents it has not hitherto
exploited, including a range of what have hitherto been seen as ‘life skills’
rather than occupational skills, including conversational forms of talk. Hence
in part the new ofﬁcial interest in spoken language education. Barnes (1988)
has pointed to the often uncomfortable coexistence of Old Right and New
Right priorities in ofﬁcial educational policy: on the one hand maintenance 
532
Language and education


of traditional language practices and values around standard English with 
‘back to basics’ appeals on spelling and grammar; on the other hand the new
emphasis on oracy and spoken language education. The Kingman and Cox
reports on the teaching of English in schools (DES 1988, DES 1989) contain
elements of both (Fairclough 1990b).
I believe that the problematic of language and power is fundamentally a
question of democracy. Those affected need to take it on board as a political
issue, as feminists have around the issue of language and gender. If problems
of language and power are to be seriously tackled, they will be tackled by the
people who are directly involved, especially the people who are subject to 
linguistic forms of domination and manipulation. This is as true in educa-
tional organisations as it is elsewhere. Struggle and resistance are in any case a
constant reﬂex of domination and manipulation: the will to impose discursive
practices or engineer shifts in discursive practices from above is one thing, but
in actuality the conditions in which such a will to power must take its chance
may include a diversity of practices, a resistance to change, and even contrary
wills to transform practices in different directions. Of course, struggle against
domination has varying degrees of success, and one factor in success is the
theoretical and analytical resources an opposition has access to. Critical 
linguists and discourse analysts have an important auxiliary role to play here 
in providing analyses and, importantly, in providing critical educators with
resources for programmes of what I and my colleagues have called ‘critical 
language awareness’ (Clark, Fairclough et al. 1990, 1991, Fairclough 1992a)
– programmes to develop the capacities of people for language critique,
including their capacities for reﬂexive analysis of the educational process
itself.
I have described in other papers an approach to the general societal 
problematic of language and power, and I want to indicate here its particular
applicability to the forms which that problematic takes within educational
organisations. The ﬁrst element in this approach is the development of a crit-
ical tradition within language studies and discourse analysis, which has been
extensively discussed elsewhere in this book. The second element, which is
described in the next section, is the application of this critical theory and
method in the development of critical language awareness work within
schools and other educational organisations. In the ﬁnal part of the paper I
shall discuss an example, based upon analyses carried out by colleagues at
Lancaster University, of how critical language awareness work can lead to
reﬂexive analysis of practices of domination implicit in the transmission and
learning of academic discourse, and the engagement of learners in the struggle
to contest and change such practices. I shall ﬁnally use this example for some
Critical language awareness and self-identity in education
533


reﬂections on the difﬁculties facing those dealing with issues of language and
power, in education and elsewhere, in the complex and often confusing socio-
cultural circumstances of contemporary societies; and the opportunities and
dangers faced by CDA as its focus shifts from critique of existing practices to
exploration and even advocacy of possible alternatives.
1 Language awareness: critical and non-critical approaches
In recent years, language awareness, knowledge about language, has been
widely advocated as an important part of language education in Britain, by
those associated with the ‘language awareness’ movement (Hawkins 1984,
NCLE 1985), independently and in some cases earlier (Doughty et al. 1971),
and in reports on the teaching of English in schools within the national 
curriculum (DES 1988, DES 1989). While welcoming this development, I
think language awareness work has been insufﬁciently critical: it has not 
given sufﬁcient focus to language-related issues of power which ought to be
highlighted in language education, given the nature of the contemporary socio-
linguistic order. What is needed is an approach based upon a critical view of
language and language study such as the one described in this book. In this
section I shall contrast such a critical language awareness (henceforth CLA)
with the non-critical conception just referred to (henceforth LA – I shall 
refer mainly to Hawkins (1984)), in terms of: rationale for language awareness
work; conceptions of language awareness work; the relationship envisaged
between language awareness and other elements of language education.
A rationale for critical language awareness work emerges from the general
contemporary problematic of language and power described at the beginning
of the paper: given that power relations work increasingly at an implicit level
through language, and given that language practices are increasingly targets
for intervention and control, a critical awareness of language is a prerequisite
for effective citizenship, and a democratic entitlement. There is some similar-
ity between this rationale for CLA and part of the rationale for LA, in that the
latter attempts like the former to use language education as a resource for tack-
ling social problems which centre around language. But the arguments are
cast in very different terms. In Hawkins (1984), this dimension of the rationale
for LA refers to social aspects of educational failure (which I discuss below), 
a lack of understanding of language which impedes parents in supporting 
the language development of their children, and an endemic ‘linguistic
parochialism and prejudice’ affecting minority languages and non-standard
varieties. These are indeed problems which language awareness can help to
address, but from a CLA perspective they are just particular points of salience
534
Language and education


within the much broader contemporary problematisation of language I have
indicated. A fundamental difference between LA and CLA is their assump-
tions about what language awareness can do for such problems. Within LA,
schools seem to be credited with a substantial capacity for contributing to
social harmony and integration, and smoothing the workings of the social and
sociolinguistic orders. Language awareness work is portrayed as making 
up for and helping to overcome social problems (e.g., making up for a lack of
‘verbal learning tools’ in the home, extending access to standard English to
children whose homes do not give it to them). In the case of CLA, the argu-
ment is that schools dedicated to a critical pedagogy (Giroux 1983, Freire
1985) ought to provide learners with understanding of problems which 
cannot be resolved just in the schools, and with the resources for engaging, if
they so wish in the long-term, multifaceted struggles in various social domains
(including education) which are necessary to resolve them. I shall suggest
below, in discussing the treatment of standard English, that the LA position
can in fact have unforeseen detrimental social consequences.
There are a number of other elements in the rationale for LA. I referred
above to social aspects of educational failure, and Hawkins refers in this con-
nection to evidence that schools have had the effect of ‘widening the gap’
between children who get ‘verbal learning tools’ at home and those who don’t
(1984: 1). Language awareness work can help all children ‘sharpen the tools of
verbal learning’ (1984: 98). LA is particularly sensitive to the need to improve
study skills in the ‘difﬁcult transition from primary to secondary school lan-
guage work, especially the start of foreign language studies and the explosion
of concepts and language introduced by the specialist secondary school 
subjects’ (Hawkins 1984: 4). The poor record of British schools in foreign
language learning is part of the rationale; there is an emphasis upon developing
‘insight into pattern’ and ‘learning to listen’ as conditions for success in foreign
language learning. A related educational problem which LA seeks to address
is the absence of a coherent approach to language from the child’s perspective,
including a lack of coordination between different parts of the language cur-
riculum. There is also (NCLE 1985: 23) reference to the particular linguistic
demands arising from rapid social change, where ‘many more events require
interpretation’, especially interpretation of linguistic signals.
Although CLA highlights critical awareness of non-transparent aspects of
the social functioning of language, that does not imply a lack of concern with
issues such as linguistic dimensions of educational failure or inadequacies 
in foreign language learning. Nor, turning to a comparison of conceptions of
language awareness work, does it imply a lack of concern with formal aspects
of language, which take up a large proportion of LA materials. I would see the
Critical language awareness and self-identity in education
535


position of CLA rather as claiming that these important issues and dimensions
of language awareness ought to be framed within a critical view of language; 
for example, we must develop the capacity for sensitive attention to formal 
linguistic features of texts, and the capacity to frame such textual analysis
within a critical discourse analysis. Having made these points, I shall focus 
my comparison of conceptions of language awareness work upon views of 
linguistic variation, and especially the treatment of standard English.
LA, like the Kingman and Cox Report (DES 1988, DES 1989), takes the
position that it is vital for schools to teach pupils standard English, while treat-
ing the diversity of languages in the classroom as ‘a potential resource of great
richness’, and recognising that all languages and varieties of languages ‘have
their rightful and proper place’ in children’s repertoires and ‘each serves 
good purposes’ (Hawkins 1984: 171–5). Standard English and other varieties 
and languages are presented as differing in conditions of appropriateness.
Vigorous arguments are advanced for the ‘entitlement’ of children to educa-
tion in standard English, especially standard written English, as part of the
‘apprenticeship in autonomy’ which schools should provide (Hawkins 1984:
65). Stigmatisation of particular varieties or accents is attributed to parochi-
alism or prejudice.
There is no doubt whatsoever that learning standard English does give
some learners life chances they would not otherwise have. On the other hand,
this view of standard English and language variation misses important issues
and can I think have detrimental effects. Firstly there is an assumption that
schools can help iron out the effects of social class and equalise the ‘cultural
capital’ (Bourdieu 1984) of access to prestigious varieties of English. I think
this assumption needs cautious handling, because it is easy to exaggerate the
capacity of schools for social engineering; the class system is reproduced in
many domains, not just education. Secondly, there is no sense in LA work that
in passing on prestigious practices and values such as those of standard
English without developing a critical awareness of them, one is implicitly leg-
itimising them and the asymmetrical distribution of cultural capital I have just
referred to. Thirdly, portraying standard English and other languages and
varieties as differing in conditions of appropriateness is dressing up inequality
as diversity: standard English is ‘appropriate’ in situations which carry social
clout, while other varieties are ‘appropriate’ at the margins. Fourthly, attribut-
ing the stigmatisation of varieties to individual prejudice papers over the 
systematic, socially legitimised stigmatisation of varieties. Elevating the stand-
ard means demoting other varieties. Again, there is likely to be a mismatch
between the liberalism and pluralism of the schools, and the children’s experi-
ence. It is these mismatches, based upon well-meaning white lies about 
536
Language and education


language variation, that carry the risk of detrimental effects; either they will
create delusions, or they will create cynicism and a loss of credibility, or most
probably a sequence of the former followed by the latter. I think a CLA posi-
tion on the treatment of standard English is that one should teach written 
standard English for pragmatic reasons, but one should also expose learners
to views about standard English, including the critical views I have alluded to
here. And one should raise with the learners the question of whether and why
and how dominant rules of ‘appropriateness’ might be ﬂouted and challenged
(see further below).
At the root of the different conceptions of language awareness work are dif-
ferent conceptions of language, and of sociolinguistic variation. LA is based in
a tradition which sees a sociolinguistic order as a given and common-sense
reality, effectively a natural domain rather than a naturalised domain, which is
‘there’ to be described. The question of why it is there scarcely arises, and
there is certainly not the focus upon sociolinguistic orders being shaped and
transformed by relations of power and power struggle, which characterises
the critical approach to language study.
Let me come ﬁnally to the relationship envisaged between language aware-
ness and other elements of language education. There is agreement between
LA and CLA that, as Hawkins puts it (1984: 73–4), ‘awareness’ affects 
‘competence’ – or as I would prefer to put it, awareness affects language capab-
ilities. LA does not, however, set out to build into language education explicit
connections between developing awareness and developing capabilities: 
language awareness work is isolated from other parts of language education 
as a separate element in the curriculum. By contrast, a central theme in a critical
approach is that language awareness should be fully integrated with the 
development of practice and capabilities.
The diagram below (from Clark et al. 1991) gives one representation of 
this integration. This model incorporates the important principle that critical
Critical language awareness and self-identity in education
537
Figure 21.1 A model of language learning
Language capabilities: potential
Language awareness
Language capabilities: experience
Purposeful discourse


language awareness should be built from the existing language capabilities and
experience of the learner. The experience of the learner can, with the help of
the teacher, be made explicit and systematic as a body of knowledge which can
be used for discussion and reﬂection, so that social causes for experiences
(e.g., of constraint) can be explored. At the same time, links should constantly
be made between work on the development of language awareness and the 
language practice of the learner. This practice must be ‘purposeful’: that is, it
must be tied in to the learner’s real wishes and needs to communicate with
speciﬁc real people, because this is the only way for the learner to experience
authentically the risks and potential beneﬁts of particular decisions. When
critical awareness is linked to such decisions, it broadens their scope to
include decisions about whether to ﬂout sociolinguistic conventions or to 
follow them, whether to conform or not conform (in the use of standard
English, for instance, as mentioned above). It also allows such decisions to be
seen as in certain circumstances collective rather than individual ones, asso-
ciated with the political strategies of groups.
2 Critical language awareness in practice: identity in 
academic writing
Critical language study and critical language awareness work can, as I indi-
cated earlier, be reﬂexively applied within educational organisations to the
practices of such organisations. They constitute a resource for investigating,
and intervening in, issues of language and power in education. I have been
suggesting that there is an intimate relationship between the development of
people’s critical awareness of language and the development of their own lan-
guage capabilities and practices. Accordingly, such reﬂexive work could involve
learners and teachers in analysis of and possibly change in their own practices,
as speakers and listeners (and viewers), writers and readers. In this section 
I want brieﬂy to describe one sort of reﬂexive application of CLA in work by
colleagues at Lancaster (Clark 1992, Ivanic and Simpson 1992), and to use
this example for some closing reﬂections on the difﬁculty of tackling issues of
language and power in complex and often opaque contemporary societies.
The focus of this research is on what I earlier referred to as the identity
function of discourse, and speciﬁcally the sort of self-identities that are con-
stituted by/for writers in the process of academic writing. Traditional forms 
of academic discourse, especially in science and social science, demand an
impersonal style, and part of the ‘apprenticeship’ of a student in an academic
discipline is the effacing of prior identities in academic writing in order to join
the new ‘discourse community’ (Clark 1992). This can be an uncomfortable
538
Language and education


and alienating process, perhaps especially for older students with extensive
experience or established professional backgrounds. The pressure on stud-
ents to conform is illustrated in an example given by Clark. An academic made
the following comment on an essay written by one of Clark’s students: ‘Your
arguments are undermined by the use of the personal pronoun (meaning the
ﬁrst person pronoun I). [Name of student] is not an established authority . . .
or not yet, anyway. Avoid the use of personal pronouns and expressions like
“in my view” in all academic work’.
Both the Clark paper and the Ivanic and Simpson paper describe experi-
ences of working with a CLA framework with students who are resistant to the
constraints of conventional academic writing. In both cases, there are attempts
to develop styles of writing which allow students to project self-identities
which they feel more comfortable with. Clark’s paper reports her work on a
study skills course for postgraduates taking Diploma or MA degrees in a
department of politics (see also Clark, Constantinou et al. 1990). The focus of
the course is the written assignments which students have to produce for their
politics courses (their practice on the course is thus ‘purposeful’ in the sense
of the last section). The course begins with an exercise designed to raise stud-
ents’ consciousness about the writing process (more fully described in Clark
and Ivanim 1992), and the ongoing discussion of the writing process then
informs and is fed by collaborative writing workshops and tutorials in which
students work on assignments set for their politics courses. Discussion of the
writing process leads to work on the development of critical awareness of lin-
guistic resources and conventions, which in turn feeds back into the students’
writing. The class used a past student essay to focus a debate on issues of
objectivity and impersonalness in academic writing, and these issues are then
dealt with in more concrete terms by looking at speciﬁc decisions academic
writers need to take – whether to use the ﬁrst person singular pronoun or not,
whether to use modality and tense forms which express strong commitment to
propositions, or modal forms and hedges which tone down commitment, and
so forth. The objective of the study skills course is to ‘empower’ students by
giving them a critical awareness of academic conventions, their social origins
and effects. The course provides students with the means for ‘emancipation’
through the ﬂouting of conventions and the development of non-conventional
forms of academic writing, though it is up to students themselves whether they
do so (not all do). A major theme of the paper is that students are faced with the
dilemma, which they must resolve for themselves, of whether to conform or
not conform, whether to lean in the direction of fulﬁlling obligations or of
claiming rights. (On emancipation as a concept in CLA, see also Janks and
Ivanim (1992).)
Critical language awareness and self-identity in education
539


The Ivanim and Simpson paper reports on co-research between an aca-
demic (Ivanim) and a mature student (Simpson) who had recently entered
higher education, into the latter’s development as an academic writer (see also
Ivanic and Roach 1990). This paper also focuses upon problems of identity:
given the overwhelming prestige of ‘impersonal’, ‘objective’ academic style,
how can a student – this student – project his own identity in his writing, ‘ﬁnd
the “I”’, show himself as the sort of person he wants to be? ‘Finding the “I”’ is
a matter of responsibility to oneself and to one’s readership: it is a way towards
truthfulness and clarity. The authors suggest that writers may be better able to
tackle their dilemmas over identity if they become conscious of the ‘casts’ or
‘populations’ of identities in the texts they read as well as in their own writing
(Talbot 1990). This is a matter of raising their critical awareness of the stand-
ard conventions of academic writing, and their effects upon identities. The
paper includes an analysis in these terms of three assignments written by
Simpson. The ‘population’ consists of tutors who set the assignments, the
people who wrote what he read, the writer himself, the people he writes about,
and the people who read what he writes. What emerges is a tense relationship
between the pressures upon him to conform to the norms of traditional aca-
demic style and his own often cautious and nervous attempts to project his
own identity and evolve his own academic style. One noteworthy feature of the
paper is that as well as writing about Simpson’s attempts to tackle the problem
of identity, the authors are explicitly trying to tackle it together in the way in
which they write the paper.
The two papers provide useful practical techniques for using CLA in 
educational organisations to work on one problematic aspect of the interface
of language and power in such organisations: the constraints which organisa-
tions, and powerholders within them, place upon the discursively constituted
self-identities of learners. Evidently, there is a microscopic emphasis in both
papers, upon how individual students cope with the tension between a will to
resist the impositions of conventional academic writing and requirements to
conform, and how critical language awareness programmes can help clarify (if
not resolve) such dilemmas. The outcomes of this tension in students’ work
can be described using the framework for critical discourse analysis discussed
elsewhere in this book. One feature of the student work discussed in the 
two papers is that its ‘discourse practice’ tends to be complex, involving the
mixing of genres and discourses (traditional academic ones and, often, ones
drawn from the private domain), and this is realised linguistically in texts
which tend to be heterogeneous in style, meanings and forms. I want, however,
to explore a little how this microscopic focus relates to a more macroscopic
view of the state of hegemonic relations and hegemonic struggle in the orders
540
Language and education


of discourse of educational organisations, in order to raise some issues which
have a more general relevance to the problematisation of language and power
in education.
In my view, a microscopic focus upon individual calculations of risk and
beneﬁt should always be complemented with and contextualised within 
a macroscopic view. Student resistance to academic conventions is wide-
spread in contemporary higher education, but the situation is not uniﬁed 
academic institutions stolidly defending traditional practices against reluctant
students. Traditional practices have already been extensively undermined
from within. For instance, as Ivanic and Simpson point out, academic writing
is ‘becoming less segregated from informal speech’. There has already been a
hegemonic shift which constitutes a favourable environment for the sort of
reﬂexive CLA work that Clark, Ivanic and Simpson are engaged in: practices
of academic writing which achieve a hybridisation of traditional academic
styles and colloquial, informal, spoken styles are now well positioned within
the order of discourse. Personalised writing, space to project identities which
academic writers feel comfortable with, are part of this evolution. This shift is
often construed in terms of a suspect contrast between one’s ‘real self ’ and the
artiﬁcial identities taken on in academic writing. What is I think actually 
at issue is pressure for specialised academic identities to give way to private
domain or ‘lifeworld’ identities. It would be a mistake to overstate the hege-
monic shift or underestimate the continuing power of traditional forms within
certain types of institution and particular disciplines. Nevertheless, the shift 
is clear.
But this shift in educational discursive practices and orders of discourse
needs to be explained, i.e., it needs to be situated within wider sociocultural
changes which it is a part of. I would like at this point to strike a cautionary
note: it is often difﬁcult to assess the full social and cultural import of a change
in discursive practices, and therefore its effect upon power relations and
power struggle in the institution concerned. This underlines for me the
importance of avoiding directive, top-down interventions designed (perhaps
by well-intentioned theorists like myself ) to shift practices in a particular
emancipatory direction: such decisions must be left to the people directly
involved, ‘on the ground’, who are generally better able to weigh up the com-
plex odds and interpret the sometimes ambivalent, complex, and contradic-
tory values, risks and beneﬁts.
Consider for instance the case in point, in the light of my comments in
Paper 6 on the ambivalence of the ‘conversationalisation’ of public discourse.
The impetus in educational organisations to break down barriers between
academic discourse and the more informal and personal practices of the 
Critical language awareness and self-identity in education
541


private sphere is not isolated: it is part of a general rejection in contemporary
societies of elite, professional, bureaucratic, etc., practices, and a valorisation
of ordinariness, naturalness, ‘being oneself ’ and so forth, in discourse and
more generally. It is part of the conversationalisation of public discourse, 
and it ties in with the informalisation of contemporary society and its post-
traditional properties. Seen in these terms, it can be interpreted positively as a
democratising development.
But the push for democracy is not the only source of attacks on tradition,
and not the only impetus for the breaking down of barriers. Education like
other institutions has been and is being marketised, incorporated into the 
consumer society and culture. This entails a standardisation of practices
across institutions on the model of the market. One obvious and indeed 
notorious surface example of this standardisation is the generalisation of the
persona and vocabulary of the ‘consumer’ (or ‘customer’) across institutions,
including the reconstruction of students as consumers. The difﬁculty is that 
it is not always easy to distinguish between attacks upon and attempts to
reconstruct traditional academic practices which are democratically rooted
and those which are rooted in marketisation. How for instance might one
decide whether a student who is resisting the impersonalness of academic
writing is operating from a democratic rejection of elitism, or as someone who
wishes to assert his or her authority as consumer? (On the ‘authority of the
consumer’, see Keat, Whiteley and Abercrombie (1994) and Fairclough
(1994).) One way of reading the difﬁculty in this case is in terms of appro-
priation: one could see the impetus towards marketisation of education as 
having appropriated some of the themes and values, and discursive practices,
of the historically earlier impetus towards anti-elitism – the 1960s being
appropriated by the 1980s, so to speak.
The point is not in any way to retreat from reﬂexive critical language 
awareness work, still less to defend traditional practices. It is to highlight 
the difﬁculty in contemporary society in being entirely conﬁdent about the
target, in the sense of what needs changing, and what it needs changing to.
People on the ground must make up their minds about these complex issues,
as they will whether critical language work is in progress or not. We need 
CLA work of a sensitive, non-dogmatic and non-directive sort. We also need,
in support of it, critical discourse analysis research into the complex and 
ambivalent interdependencies between discursive practices and sociocultural
systems and transformations in education.
This example raises a more general issue. There have recently been pro-
posals that CDA should partly shift its emphasis from critique of existing 
discursive practices to exploration of alternatives.2 This is broadly welcome:
542
Language and education


the founding motivation for critical analysis is emancipation and the building
of emancipated forms of social life, not critique per se. Such work must, how-
ever, proceed with caution. Critical analysis can be ‘turned’ and appropriated
by dominant social forces, and critical interventions to build new practices 
can look uncomfortably similar to what I have called technologisation of dis-
course. A more productive orientation on the part of CDA must, I believe, be
framed within a profound commitment to democracy. CDA can contribute to
the social imaginary, to the stock of feasible Utopias which can inform choices
which people make individually and collectively, but the choices must be
made by the people concerned and affected on their own behalf.
Notes
1. The ﬁrst and third sections of this paper appeared in a modiﬁed form as part 
of a paper with the same title in a book edited by D. Corson, Language and
Power in Education. The second section (‘Language awareness: critical and
non-critical approaches’) draws upon collective work with colleagues in
Lancaster, reﬂected in Clark, Fairclough, Ivanim and Martin-Jones (1991).
2. Voiced for instance by Gunther Kress at a conference on Discourse and
Ideology in Vienna, December 1993.
Critical language awareness and self-identity in education
543


22. Global capitalism and critical
awareness of language
A
s the shape of the new global social order becomes clearer, so too does the
need for a critical awareness of language as part of language education. I
discuss, with a focus on discourse, several key features of late modern society
which help make the case for critical awareness of discourse: the relation-
ship between discourse, knowledge and social change in our ‘information’ 
or ‘knowledge-based’ society; what Smith (1990) has called the ‘textually-
mediated’ nature of contemporary social life; the relationship between dis-
course and social difference; the commodiﬁcation of discourse; discourse and
democracy. I then draw these together by tying the case for CLA to the nature
of the new global capitalism, and conclude the paper with discussions of how
CLA is anchored in ‘critical discourse analysis’ (and, through that, in critical
social science generally), and of how the question of CLA is framed within the
wider question of the nature and purposes of education.
It is over 10 years since an initial paper on critical language awareness
(CLA) was given at the British Association for Applied Linguistics annual
conference (later published in Clark et al. 1990, 1991, see also Ivanim 1990,
Fairclough 1992b). The work on CLA was based upon the conviction that
because of contemporary changes affecting the role of language in social life, 
a critical awareness of language is ‘a prerequisite for effective democratic 
citizenship, and should therefore be seen as an entitlement for citizens, espe-
cially children developing towards citizenship in the educational system’
(Fairclough 1992b: 2–3). We argued that CLA should be a basic concern in
language education. Has the case for this weakened or strengthened in the
intervening years? I want to argue that as the shape of the new global social
order becomes clearer, so too does the need for a critical awareness of language
as part of people’s resources for living in new ways in new circumstances. Our


educational practices have some way to go before they begin to match up to
our educational needs. At the same time, although I continue using the
expression ‘critical language awareness’ because it is relatively well known, it
has also become clearer that what is at issue is a critical awareness of discourse
which includes other forms of semiosis as well as language: visual images in
particular are an increasingly important feature of contemporary discourse
(Kress and van Leeuwen 1996).
1 An example: the discourse of ‘ﬂexibility’
I shall begin with an example which points to a number of features of social life
in contemporary (‘late modern’) society which demand a critical awareness of
discourse. Most accounts of change in contemporary social life give a more or
less central place to change in the economic system: the change from ‘Fordism’
to ‘ﬂexible accumulation’, as Harvey (1990) puts it. Fordism is the ‘mass pro-
duction’ form of capitalism (named after the car magnate Henry Ford) which
dominated the earlier part of this century. Flexible accumulation is a more
complex concept but it basically means greater ﬂexibility at various levels – in
production (the production process can be quickly shifted to produce small
batches of different products), in the workforce (part-time and short-term
working, extensive reskilling of workers), in the circulation of ﬁnance, and 
so forth. Harvey points out that some academic analysts see ‘ﬂexibility’ as 
no more than a new discourse which is ideologically motivated – if working 
people can be persuaded that ‘ﬂexibility’ is an unavoidable feature of con-
temporary economies, they are more likely to be ‘ﬂexible’ about their jobs 
disappearing, the need to retrain, deteriorating pay and conditions of work,
and so forth. Harvey disagrees. Flexibility is a real feature of contemporary
economies for which there is ample scientiﬁc evidence – though that does 
not mean that ‘ﬂexible accumulation’ has totally displaced ‘Fordism’; the 
reality is rather a mix of old and new regimes. Nor does it mean that the 
discourse of ﬂexibility is irrelevant to the reality of ﬂexible accumulation. 
Far from it: the discourse is an irreducible part of the reality. The change from
Fordism to ﬂexible accumulation is inconceivable without the change in eco-
nomic discourse. Why? Because the emerging global economy is the site of 
a struggle between the old and the new, and the discourse of ﬂexibility is a 
vital symbolic weapon in that struggle. It is as Bourdieu (1998a) has put it a
‘strong discourse’, that is a discourse which is backed by the strength of all the
economic and social forces (the banks, the multinational companies, politi-
cians, and so on) who are trying to make ﬂexibility – the new global capitalism
– even more of a reality than it already is. Neo-liberal discourse contributes 
Global capitalism and critical awareness of language
545


its own particular, symbolic, form of strength to the strength of these social
forces.
Let me brieﬂy clarify my example. My focus is on the metaphor of 
‘ﬂexibility’ which is at the centre of the economic discourse of ‘ﬂexible 
accumulation’ for which Harvey (1990: 47–97) gives an analytical account 
– including, for example, its construction of the labour market in terms of
‘core’ and ‘periphery’ employees. Elements of this discourse, and especially
the metaphor of ﬂexibility itself, are widely distributed within many types of
non-economic discourse (examples shortly). The discourse of ﬂexible accu-
mulation enters complex and shifting conﬁgurations with other discourses
within a ﬁeld I am calling ‘neo-liberal discourse’ – for instance, with a manage-
ment discourse which centres on the ‘mission statement’ which Swales and
Rogers (1995) have described. This is a complex and unstable area which
needs detailed research.
One accessible place to ﬁnd the discourse of ﬂexibility used within this
struggle over global economy is in the books written by management ‘gurus’
which seem to dominate airport and railway station bookshops (for example,
Peters 1994). But it is a discourse that turns up in many other contexts. 
One of them is politics – New Labour’s ‘Third Way’, for instance, can be
summed up as follows: economic ﬂexibility (on the model of the World Bank
and the IMF) is inevitable, but government must strive to include those it
socially excludes. Here is Blair in his ﬁrst major speech after becoming Prime
Minister:
We must never forget that a strong, competitive, ﬂexible economy is the 
prerequisite for creating jobs and opportunities. But equally we must never
forget that it is not enough. The economy can grow while leaving behind a
workless class whose members become so detached that they are no longer
full citizens. (Blair 1997)
But the discourse of ﬂexibility also penetrates into everyday language. Here
for instance is an extract from an ethnographic interview with ‘Stephen’ from
Cleveland in north-east England who does ‘ﬁddly jobs’, i.e., works illegally in
the black economy while claiming social beneﬁts. He is talking about the work
he does:
It’s a matter of us being cheaper. It’s deﬁnitely easier than having a lot of lads
taken on permanently. It would cost them more to put them on the books or
pay them off. It’s just the ﬂexibility. You’re just there for when the jobs come
up, and he [the ‘hirer and ﬁrer’] will come and get you when you’re needed.
You need to be on the dole to be able to do that. Otherwise you’d be sitting
546
Language and education


there for half the year with no work and no money at all. (Quoted in
MacDonald 1994: 515)
We might pessimistically think of everyday language as colonised by this dis-
course of the powerful, and that is no doubt partly true, but here is ‘Stephen’
appropriating the discourse in constructing his own perfectly coherent 
rationale for his (illegal) way of living. One aspect of economic ﬂexibility 
from his perspective is that companies need the ﬂexibility of workers doing
ﬁddly jobs.
Like other prominent discourses, the discourse of ﬂexibility draws some
comment and critique – a critical awareness of language is not wholly some-
thing which has to be brought to people from outside, it arises within the 
normal ways people reﬂect on their lives as part of their lives. But this ordin-
ary form of critique has its limits. People need to know about discourses 
like this – for instance, what insights it gives us into the way economies work 
or could work, and what other insights it cuts us off from; whose discourse 
it is, and what they gain from its use; what other discourses there are 
around, and how this one has become so dominant. People practically need 
to know such things, because not knowing them makes it harder for them 
to manage in various parts of their lives: as trade unionists – whether 
resisting shifts to part-time and short-time work is ﬁghting the inevitable; 
as managers – what strengths and limitations the metaphor of ﬂexibility has 
for their organisations; as citizens – whether there is a ‘Third Way’; as parents
– what sort of world to prepare their children for. But such knowledge 
about discourse has to come from outside, from theory and research, via 
education.
I want to proceed by discussing, with a focus on discourse, several key fea-
tures of late modern society which this example touches on, and which I think
help make the case for critical awareness of discourse. Actually the earlier 
ones arise more easily from the example of the discourse of ﬂexibility than 
the later ones. I discuss these features of late modernity under the following
headings: the relationship between discourse, knowledge and social change in
our ‘information’ or ‘knowledge-based’ society; what Smith (1990) has called
the ‘textually-mediated’ nature of contemporary social life; the relationship
between discourse and social difference; the commodiﬁcation of discourse;
discourse and democracy. I shall then draw these together by tying the case for
CLA to the nature of the new global capitalism, and conclude the paper with
discussions of how CLA is anchored in ‘critical discourse analysis’ (and,
through that, in critical social science generally), critical discourse awareness
and critical pedagogy.
Global capitalism and critical awareness of language
547


2 Discourse, knowledge and social change
The example points to a relationship between change in economic discourse,
new economic knowledge, and change in economic practices. As I stated ear-
lier, it is a matter of discourse, not just language – knowledges are increasingly
constituted in multi-semiotic ways in contemporary society (Kress and 
van Leeuwen 1996, New London Group 1996). Information- or knowledge-
based late modern societies are characterised, as Giddens has put it, by
enhanced reﬂexivity – we are constantly reshaping our social practices on the
basis of knowledge about those practices. This is true in the domain of work
but also, for instance, in how people conduct their personal relationships – 
the media are full of expert advice. On one level, reﬂexivity is an inherent 
property of all social practices – any social practice includes the constructions
of that practice produced by its practitioners as part of the practice. What is
different about late modernity is the ways in which ‘expert systems’ (such as
the sciences and social sciences) are systematically integrated into reﬂexive
processes (Giddens 1991).
These expert systems can be thought of as evaluating existing knowledges
in the practical domain in focus (for example, the economy) and producing
new knowledges. Since knowledges are constituted as discourses, particular
ways of using language, this means that they are in the business of evaluating
and changing discourses. Evaluating discourses means setting them against
shifting understandings of what material possibilities there are in the practical
domain concerned (for example, the economy), which are, in turn, instan-
tiated within new discourses. In such practical contexts, discourses are 
evaluated not in terms of some impossible ‘absolute truth’, but in terms of
‘epistemic gain’ – whether they yield knowledges which allow people to
improve the way in which they manage their lives.
The business of evaluating and changing knowledges and discourses is
something which an increasing number of people are involved in as part of 
the work they do. It is a major concern of educational institutions to teach
them how to do this, and part of the current preoccupation with ‘learning to
learn’, and other thematisations of ‘learning’ in contemporary education 
and business – ‘the learning society’, businesses as ‘learning organisations’,
‘lifelong learning’ – see, for example, the Dearing Report on universities
Higher Education in the Learning Society (National Committee of Inquiry
into Higher Education 1997). What I want to argue is that the resources 
for learning and for working in a knowledge-based economy include a critical
awareness of discourse – an awareness of how discourse ﬁgures within 
social practices, an awareness that any knowledge of a domain of social life is
548
Language and education


constituted as one discourse from among a number of coexisting or con-
ceivable discourses, that different discourses are associated with different 
perspectives on the domain concerned and different interests, an awareness of
how discourses can work ideologically in social relations of power, and so
forth. It is on the basis of such understandings of how discourse works within
social practices that people can come to question and look beyond existing
discourses, or existing relations of dominance and marginalisation between
discourses, and so advance knowledge. If on the other hand language and
other semiotic modalities are viewed as simply transparent media for reﬂect-
ing what is, the development of knowledge is likely to be impeded.
3 Textually mediated social life
The presence of the discourse of ﬂexibility in Stephen’s talk is an illustration
of the textual mediation of social life: in contemporary societies, the dis-
courses/knowledges generated by expert systems enter our everyday lives and
shape the way we live them. Contemporary societies are knowledge-based not
only in their economies but even, for instance, in the ways in which people
conduct their personal relationships. Expert knowledges/discourses come to
us via texts of various sorts which mediate our social lives – books, magazines,
radio and television programmes, and so forth. These processes of textual
mediation bind together people who are scattered across societies into social
systems – one of Smith’s examples is how textually mediated constructions of
femininity lock women scattered across social space into the economic system
of commodity production and consumption, in that femininity is constructed
in terms of the purchase and use of commodities such as clothes (Smith 1990).
Moreover, the distances in space and time across which these processes of 
textual mediation operate are increasing. Modernity can be seen as a process
of ‘time/space compression’, the overcoming of spatial and temporal distance,
and late modernity is marked by a twist in that process which is widely referred
to as ‘globalisation’ (Harvey 1990, Giddens 1991). The vehicles for this spatio-
temporally extended textual mediation are the new media – radio, television
and information technology.
As everyday lives become more pervasively textually mediated, people’s
lives are increasingly shaped by representations which are produced elsewhere.
Representations of the world they live in, the activities they are involved 
in, their relationships with each other, and even who they are and how they
(should) see themselves. The politics of representation becomes increasingly
important – whose representations are these, who gains what from them, what
social relations do they draw people into, what are their ideological effects,
Global capitalism and critical awareness of language
549


and what alternative representations are there? The example of Stephen’s talk
is a case in point. His representation of his own life in the black economy draws
upon the discourse of ﬂexibility. We might question whether his construction
of his own life and identity has been ideologically invested, drawn into the
social relations between the powerful groups who control economies and back
neo-liberalism and the rest of us. However, the picture is more complex and
more hopeful. As I suggested earlier, his talk does not simply reproduce the
discourse of ﬂexibility, it works it in a particular – and ironic – way into a ratio-
nale for his own way of living based on a perfectly coherent, if non-standard,
view of the new capitalism – part of the ﬂexibility that companies need is the
ﬂexibility of illegal black labour. The example shows that people are not 
simply colonised by such discourses, they also appropriate them and work
them in particular ways. Textually mediated social life cuts both ways – it
opens up unprecedented resources for people to shape their lives in new ways
drawing upon knowledges, perspectives and discourses which are generated
all over the world. But in so doing it opens up new areas of their lives to the play
of power. There is a colonisation–appropriation dialectic at work. Whether on
balance people gain or lose depends on where they are positioned in social life
– the fact that new possibilities are opened up does not mean people are
unconditionally free to take them. But my main point is this: if people are to
live in this complex world rather than just be carried along by it, they need
resources to examine their placing within this dialectic between the global and
the local – and those resources include a critical awareness of language and 
discourse which can only come through language education.
4 Discourse, social difference and social identity
Discourses are partial and positioned, and social difference is manifest in the
diversity of discourses within particular social practices. Neo-liberal economic
discourse, for instance, is only one of many economic discourses and, as I have
indicated earlier, it corresponds to a speciﬁc perspective and set of interests.
Critical awareness in this case is a matter of seeing the diversity of discourses
and their positioned nature.
But there are other aspects of social difference. Late modern societies are
increasingly socially diverse societies, not only in that migration has led to
greater ethnic and cultural diversity, but also because various lines of differ-
ence which were until recently relatively covered over have become more
salient – differences of gender and sexual orientation, for example. Differences
are partly semiotic in nature – different languages, different social dialects, 
different communicative styles, different voices, different discourses. The
550
Language and education


predominant ethos, for instance, in European societies is that differences
which have in the past been suppressed should now be recognised. But since
people need to work together across difference, differences have to be nego-
tiated. People need to work across differences in work, politics, cultural 
activities and everyday life. But it is increasingly understood that social differ-
ence is not only difference between people but also difference within people.
Indeed, recognising the difference within is the basis for being open to a non-
suppressive negotiation of differences between people and groups (Barat
1998). Working across differences is a process in our individual lives, within
the groups we belong to, as well as between groups. Working across differ-
ences entails semiotic hybridity – the emergence of new combinations of 
languages, social dialects, voices, genres and discourses.
Hybridity, heterogeneity, intertextuality are salient features of contempor-
ary discourse also because the boundaries between domains and practices 
are in many cases ﬂuid and open in a context of rapid and intense social change
– the negotiation of social difference includes, for instance, the negotiation 
of differences between educators, advertisers and business managers, and
between students and consumers of commodities, within educational institu-
tions which are increasingly forced into operating in market ways. But negoti-
ating differences is simultaneously negotiating identities – working out how I
or we relate to others is simultaneously working out who I am or who we are.
The radical disarticulations and rearticulations of contemporary social life
radically unsettle social identities, and the search for and construction of iden-
tities is a constant process and a major preoccupation, but it should be framed
in terms of the problem of learning to live with difference (New London
Group 1996). Once again, people need from education a range of resources
for living within socially and culturally diverse societies and avoiding their
dangers, including chauvinism and racism. A critical awareness of discourse 
is part of what is needed.
5 Commodiﬁcation of discourse
There is still a link, if a more tenuous one, between my next theme and the
example of the discourse of ﬂexibility. I referred earlier to the books of 
management gurus which ﬁll airport bookstalls and are ﬁlled with neo-liberal
economic discourse. These books are about big business, but they are also big
business themselves. They are generally rather successful commodities, as
one can see from the impressive sales ﬁgures which are often emblazoned on
their covers. The stuff these commodities are made of is, of course, paper, ink
and so forth, but it is also language and other sorts of semiotic stuff. They are
Global capitalism and critical awareness of language
551


worked up into commodities, carefully designed to sell. Semiotic stuff is a 
feature of a great many commodities these days – the nature of commodities
has been changing, with a shift in emphasis broadly from goods that are more
physical than cultural (like cars) to goods that are more cultural than physical
(like books, or television programmes, or advertisements). Many goods now
are services, like what you pay for in a smart restaurant which is not just the
food but the ambience, which includes the appearance, behaviour and talk of
the staff – language is part of the service, part of the goods. As commodities
become semioticised, discourse becomes commodiﬁed (Lyotard 1986–7) – it
becomes open to processes of economic calculation, it comes to be designed
for success on markets. For instance, service industries are full of forms of
ostensibly ordinary talk which are designed to seem ordinary, to mobilise all
the selling power of ordinariness in a society which values it even in institu-
tional and organisational contexts.
The commodiﬁcation of discourse could be seen as part of a more general
application of instrumental or ‘means-end’ rationality to discourse which also
takes the form of government and other organisations making discourse more
bureaucratic. I have referred to this elsewhere as ‘technologisation of dis-
course’ (Fairclough 1996) – instrumental rationality applied in the shaping
and reshaping of discursive practices (such as interviews) within more general
processes of engineering institutional cultures to enhance their ‘performativ-
ity’ (Lyotard 1984). Technologisation of discourse produces general formulas
for change which tend to ignore differences of context, so that one effect of
such cultural technologisation is normalisation, homogenisation and the
reduction of difference – for instance, the imposition of a standardised audit
culture and the discourse that goes with it (the discourse of ‘quality control’)
throughout the public domain, including education. This process rests upon
a critical awareness of discourse, but it also calls for a critical awareness of 
discourse among those who are on the receiving end of it, people who work 
in commercial, governmental and public service organisations in a variety of
capacities.
6 Discourse and democracy
The discourse of ﬂexibility is predominant within the political systems of, for
instance, Great Britain and the USA – all of the major parties use it and take it
for granted. It is part of a widely observed narrowing down of the political
spectrum – parties are becoming increasingly similar in their policies, and the
differences between them are increasingly differences of style. One aspect 
of this process is what Marcuse identiﬁed 30 years ago as ‘the closing down 
552
Language and education


of the universe of discourse’ (Marcuse 1964) – the predominance of a single
economic–political discourse across the political spectrum.
We might see the narrowing of political discourse as a symptom of the polit-
ical system becoming cut off from the sources of political diversity and change
in social life. This has been widely debated in recent years as a crisis of the
‘public sphere’ (Habermas 1989, Calhoun 1992), troubles to do with the
apparent absence of effective spaces and practices where people as citizens can
deliberate over issues of common social and political concern, and their delib-
erations can shape the policy decisions that are made. The broadcast media
are full of dialogue on such issues, but it is a dialogue that is deeply ﬂawed in
terms of its public sphere credentials – in terms of who has access to it, in terms
of what gets onto its agendas, in terms of who controls its ﬂow, and in terms of
it being designed to maximise audience and entertain. The task of recon-
structing the public sphere is at the heart of the defence and enhancement of
democracy. It is already being undertaken within social movements which are
active outside the ofﬁcial political system. But it is also a task for educational
institutions including schools and universities, whose standing as public
spheres has been undermined by recent institutional changes (Giroux 1997).
One way forward here is suggested by Billig (1991): that we conceive of teach-
ing people to think as teaching people to argue, and put our energies into 
making educational institutions as open as possible as spaces for argument.
Negotiating across difference is again a central concern for the contemporary
public sphere – political dialogue in socioculturally diverse societies has to be
oriented to alliances around particular sets of issues. In this case, a critical
awareness of discourse is essential for the work of experimentation and design
which is necessary to ﬁnd effective forms of dialogue which facilitate open
argumentation and forms of action in common and which do not suppress 
difference (Fairclough 1998).
7 Critical awareness of discourse and the new global capitalism
I began from the example of neo-liberal economic discourse. The choice of
example was not incidental, because it is the new global capitalism which this
discourse simultaneously represents and constitutes that makes critical aware-
ness of discourse an increasingly necessary resource for people. The new
global capitalism opens up new possibilities for people yet at the same time
creates new problems. A critical awareness of discourse is necessary for both
– on the one hand, for opening up new knowledges in the knowledge-based
economy, and for exploring new possibilities for social relationships and iden-
tities in socially diverse communities; on the other hand, for resisting the
Global capitalism and critical awareness of language
553


incursions of the interests and rationalities of economic, governmental and
other organisational systems into everyday life – such as the commodiﬁcation
of the language of everyday life, the colonising incursions of textually medi-
ated representations and the threat of global capitalism to democracy, for
example, in the ways it manipulates national governments. Late modernity 
is characterised by increasing reﬂexivity including language reﬂexivity, and
people need to be equipped both for the increasing knowledge-based design
of discursive practices within economic and governmental systems, and for
critique and redesign of these designed and often globalised practices as 
workers, consumers, citizens, members of social and lifestyle groups (for ex-
ample, as women, Blacks, trade unionists, environmental activists, and so forth).
8 Critique: social science, discourse analysis, discourse
awareness
The need for critical awareness of discourse in contemporary society should
make it a central part of language education in schools, colleges and univer-
sities. I come to some educational issues later. Such a critical discourse aware-
ness programme would rest upon and recontextualise (Bernstein 1990) critical
research on discourse, which in turn is based in critical traditions in social 
science. While these are obviously not the focus of this paper, readers may ﬁnd
useful a brief sketch of one view of critical discourse analysis and critical social
science, starting with the latter.
Social life can be seen as constituted by networks of social practices, each of
which consists of various elements including discourse (as well as material
activities, institutional rituals, social relations, beliefs and values) articulated
together in a dialectical relationship, such that each element internalises all
others without being reducible to them – each element has its own distinctive
logic and generative power (Collier 1994, Harvey 1996, Chouliaraki and
Fairclough 1999). A critical social science explicates both structural relations
between and within social practices within such networks, and the dialectical
tension between structure and event which makes structures both precon-
ditions for events and (transformed) outcomes of them (Bourdieu and
Wacquant 1992, Chouliaraki and Fairclough 1999). One view of critique is
the concept of ‘explanatory critique’ associated with ‘critical realism’ (Bhaskar
1986, Collier 1994): critique involves four stages – identiﬁcation of a prob-
lem, identiﬁcation of what it is in the network of social practices that gives rise
to the problem, consideration of whether and how the problem is functional 
in sustaining the system (for example, whether it works ideologically), and
identiﬁcation of real possibilities within the domain of social life in question
554
Language and education


for overcoming the problem. What constitutes a problem can only be estab-
lished through dialogue between those involved – often not an easy process, or
one that yields clear answers.
Critical research on discourse has been carried out under the names of
‘critical discourse analysis’ and ‘critical linguistics’ (Fairclough and Wodak
1997). Critical discourse analysis aims to provide a framework for systemat-
ically linking properties of discoursal interactions and texts with features of
their social and cultural circumstances. The network of social practices is
described from a speciﬁcally discoursal perspective as an ‘order of discourse’
consisting of discourses and genres in particular relationships with each other,
but with an orientation to shifts in boundaries within and between orders of
discourse as part of social and cultural change. Particular discursive events
and longer-term series of events tied to speciﬁc social conjunctures are
described in terms of the potentially innovative ways in which they draw upon
the orders of discourse which condition them – it is that relationship to orders
of discourse that mediates the connection between detailed semiotic/linguistic
features of texts and interactions, and social and cultural structures and pro-
cesses. Problems of two sorts are in focus: needs-based problems – discursive
practices which in some way go against people’s needs (for example, forms of
doctor–patient communication which do not allow patients to recount what
they see as all the relevant aspects of their health problems); and problems
with representations (for example, constructions of social groups such as
women or cultural minorities which have detrimental social consequences for
them).
Critical discourse awareness programmes will be concerned to recon-
textualise this body of research in ways which transform it, perhaps quite 
radically, into a practically useful form for educational purposes, including a
metalanguage.
8.1 Critical discourse awareness and education1
Recent educational reforms have sharply raised the question of what educa-
tion is for, and for whom. The dominant view of education – evident, for
instance, in the recent Dearing Report Higher Education in the Learning
Society (National Committee of Inquiry into Higher Education 1997) – sees it
as a vocationally oriented transmission of given knowledge and skills. What is
perhaps most distinctive about this view of education is its focus upon the
teaching and learning of ‘key skills’ which are seen as transferable from one
sphere of life to another, and as the basis for future success including success-
ful ‘lifelong learning’. Given that one of these key skills is ‘communication’ (the
Global capitalism and critical awareness of language
555


others identiﬁed in the Dearing report are numeracy, information technology
and learning to learn), this view of education rests upon a view of discourse –
discourse as ‘communication skills’.
What is wrong with seeing discourse as communication skills? Let me
focus on three problems. First, it is assumed that a communication skill, once
learnt, can be freely transferred from one context to another. I think there is an
interesting connection between this assumption and the tendencies I have
identiﬁed as textually mediated social life and the technologisation of dis-
course – discursive practices are indeed transferred across contexts in late
modern social life. But what this ﬁrst assumption misses is what I have referred
to as the colonisation–appropriation dialectic (which is also a global–local
dialectic) – even where such transfers take place, it does not mean that we ﬁnd
the same discursive practice in all contexts, for even the most globally dis-
persed discursive practice is always locally recontextualised, transformed 
and appropriated. It is inviting disaster to assume that if you have learnt to
interview candidates for admission to university, you know how to interview 
personalities on a television chat show.
Second, it is assumed that there is a simple relationship between what is
actually said (or more generally done) in the course of some social practice,
and skills, internalised models of how to say/do it – that discourse is a mere
instantiation of such models (Fairclough 1988). On the contrary, discourse is
a complex matching of models with immediate needs in which what emerges
may be radically different from any model, ambivalent between models, or a
bafﬂing mixture of models, and where ﬂair and creativity may have more
impact than skill. Thirdly, and most seriously, it is assumed that there is a given
and accepted way of using language to do certain things, as if discourse was a
simple matter of technique, whereas any way of using language which gets to
be given and accepted does so through applications of power which violently
exclude other ways, and any way of using language within any social practice
is socially contestable and likely to be contested. From this point of view, any
reduction of discourse to skills is complicit with efforts on the part of those
who have power to impose social practices they favour by getting people to see
them as mere techniques.
In critiquing the view of discourse as communication skills, I am also cri-
tiquing the view of education as a transmission of knowledge and skills. For
viewing discourse as skills is just one aspect of viewing knowledge and skills in
general as determinate, uncontested, and given externally to the learner; and it
is only on such assumptions about what is to be taught and learnt that the pro-
cess can be viewed as ‘transmission’. We can broaden out the argument against
discourse as skills into a different view of knowledge and skills in education:
556
Language and education


they are always provisional and indeterminate, contested and, moreover, at
issue in social relationships, within which all teachers and learners are posi-
tioned. In a critical view of education, knowledge and ‘skills’ are indeed taught
and learnt, but they are also questioned – a central concern is what counts as
knowledge or skill (and therefore what does not), for whom, why, and with
what beneﬁcial or problematic consequences. In the Dearing Report, higher
education promotes knowledge, skills and understanding; my comments here
take understanding to mean a questioning of knowledge and skills, and prob-
lematise the foregrounding of ‘key skills’ in the Report.
Perhaps it has always been the case that education has been relatively crit-
ical for some, though usually for a small elite. In the new work order (Gee et al.
1996), there is a need for a small elite of symbolic–analytic workers for whom
the new system may demand a critical education (including a critical aware-
ness of discourse). The danger is a new form of educational stratiﬁcation
which separates them from those likely to become other categories of workers
(routine production workers, and workers in service industries) or to join the
‘socially excluded’ (including unemployed). That would be in line with the
contemporary tendency of the purposes of education to narrow down towards
serving the needs of the economy. The alternative is some vision of education
for life within which a critical awareness of discourse is necessary for all.
Note
1. Although pedagogy is not my major concern here, I envisage the sort of 
four-part pedagogy set out by the New London Group (1996). Its elements
are: development of the ability to engage successfully in a range of practices
through immersion in authentic Situated Practice; an awareness and under-
standing of these practices through Overt Instruction; a capacity to critique
those practices as socially particular and partial actualities from within a wider
range of possibilities through Critical Framing; and Transformed Practice,
experimentation with new practices reﬂexively informed by Overt Instruction
and especially Critical Framing. What is envisaged, then, is a link between
awareness and practice, awareness opening up new possibilities for practice.
Global capitalism and critical awareness of language
557


Bibliography and
references
Abercrombie, N., Hill, S. and Turner, B. (1980) The Dominant Ideology Thesis.
London: Routledge.
Ackroyd, S. (2000) Connecting organisations and societies: A realist analysis of
structures. In S. Ackroyd and S. Fleetwood (eds), 87–108.
Ackroyd, S. and S. Fleetwood (eds) (2000) Realist Perspectives on Management and
Organisations. London: Routledge.
Adorno, T.W. (1951/1974) Minima Moralia: Reﬂections from Damaged Life. 
(E.F.N. Jephcott, trans.) NLB: London.
Adorno, T.W. (1966/1973) Negative Dialectics. (E.B. Ashton, trans.). London:
Routledge & Kegan Paul.
Adorno, T.W. (1994) Hegel: Three Studies. (S.W. Nicholson, trans.). Cambridge,
Mass: MIT Press.
Althusser, L. (1971) Ideology and ideological state apparatuses, Lenin and
Philosophy and Other Essays. London: New Left Books.
Althusser, L. and Balibar, E. (1970) Reading Capital. London: New Left Books.
Anastasoaie, V. et al. (2003) Breaking the Wall: Representing Anthropology and
Anthropological Representations in Post-Communist Eastern Europe. Cluj-Napoca:
EFES.
Ansel, C.K. (2001) Legitimacy: political. International Encyclopedia of Social and
Behavioural Sciences. Elsevier, Amsterdam, 8704–6.
Archer, M. (1982) Morphogenesis versus structuration: on combining structure and
action. British Journal of Sociology, 33(4): 455–83.
Archer, M. (1995) Realist Social Theory: The Morphogenetic Approach. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Archer, M. (2000) Being Human. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Arendt, H. (1958) The Human Condition. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Argyle, M. (1978) The Psychology of Interpersonal Behaviour (Third edn). Har-
mondsworth: Penguin.


Aristotle (1991) The Art of Rhetoric. H.C. Lawson-Tancred (Trans.). London:
Penguin Classics.
Aristotle (1998) The Metaphysics. H.C. Lawson-Tancred (Trans.). London:
Penguin Classics.
Atkinson, J. and Drew, P. (1979) Order in Court. London: Macmillan.
Austin, J. (1962) How to Do Things with Words. London: Oxford University Press.
Bakhtin, M. (1981) The Dialogical Imagination. Austin: University of Texas Press.
Bakhtin, M. (1986) Speech Genres and Other Late Essays. Austin: Texas University
Press.
Barat, E. (1998) Women’s identities: A tension between discourses and experience.
Paper delivered at conference on Critical Discourse Analysis, Brasilia, May.
Barbu, D. (1999) Republica absenta. Bucharest: Editura Nemira.
Barnes, D. (1988) The politics of oracy. In M. Maclure et al. (eds) Oracy Matters.
Milton Keynes: Open University Press.
Barnett, A. (1998) All power to the citizens, Marxism Today, special edition on New
Labour, 44–47.
Barratt Brown, M. and Coates, K. (1996) The Blair Relevation Spokesman Books.
Barthes, R. (1977) Introduction to the structural analysis of narratives, Image, Music,
Text. London: Fontana.
Bauman, Z. (1998a) On glocalization: Or globalization for some, localization for 
others. Thesis Eleven, 54: 37–49.
Bauman, Z. (1998b) Globalization. Cambridge: Polity Press.
Beciu, C. (2000) Politica discursiv: practici politice într-o campanie electoral.
Bucharest: Polirom.
Beck, U. (1992) The Risk Society: Towards a Different Modernity. London: Sage.
Beetham, D. (1991) The Legitimation of Power. Atlantic Highlands NJ: International
Humanities Press.
Bell, A. (1991) The Language of News Media. Oxford: Blackwell.
Bell, A., Coupland, N., Jaworski, A. and YlaÈnne-McEwen, V. (1997) Editorial.
Journal of Sociolinguistics, 1: 1–5.
Bell, D. (1976) The Cultural Contradictions of Capitalism. London: Heinemann.
Benhabib, S. (1992) Situating the Self. Cambridge: Polity Press.
Benhabib, S. (ed.) (1996) Democracy and Difference. Princeton University Press.
Benson, D. and Hughes, J.A. (1983) The Perspective of Ethnomethodology. London:
Longman.
Benton, T. (1981) Realism in Social Science. Radical Philosophy, 27: 13–21.
Bergmann, G. (1951) Ideology. Ethics 61(3): 205–218.
Bernstein, B. (1975) Class, Codes and Control 3: Towards a Theory of Educational
Transmissions. London: Routledge.
Bernstein, B. (1982) Class, modalities and cultural reproduction: a model. In 
M. Apple (ed.) Cultural and Economic Reproduction in Education. London:
Routledge.
Bernstein, B. (1990) The Structuring of Pedagogical Discourse. London: Routledge.
Bibliography and references
559


Bernstein, B. (1996) Pedagogy, Symbolic Control and Identity. London: Taylor &
Francis.
Berti, E. (1978) Ancient Greek dialectic as expression of freedom of thought and
speech. Journal of the History of Ideas, 39(3): 347–370.
Bhaskar, R. (1979) The Possibility of Naturalism. Hassocks: Harvester.
Bhaskar, R. (1986) Scientiﬁc Realism and Human Emancipation. London: Verso.
Bhaskar, R. (1989) Reclaiming Reality. London: Verso.
Billig, M., Condor, S. et al. (1988) Ideological Dilemmas. London: Sage.
Billig, M. (1991) Ideology and Opinion. London: Sage.
Billig, M. (1995) Banal Nationalism. London: Sage.
bin Mohamad, M. (2002) Extracts from speech at the East Asia Economic Summit
Executive Intelligence Review Online, 18 October 2002.
Birch, D. and O’Toole, M. (1988) Functions of Style. London: Frances Pinter.
Blair, T. (1997) Speech at the Aylesbury Housing Estate, Southwark, 2 June.
Blair, T. (1998a) The Third Way: New Politics for the New Century, Fabian Society
pamphlet.
Blair, T. (1998b) ‘Publication of annual report’, speech 30 July.
Blair, T. (1998c) Speech at the Confederation of British Industry Annual Dinner, 
27 May.
Bloom, S.F. (1943) Man of his century: A reconsideration of the historical signi-
ﬁcance of Karl Marx. The Journal of Political Economy, 51(6): 494–505.
Boden, D. (1994) The Business of Talk: Organisations in Action. Cambridge: Polity
Press.
Boden, D. and Zimmerman, D. (1991) Talk and Social Structure. Cambridge: Polity
Press.
Boia, L. (1999) History and Myth in Romanian Consciousness. Budapest: Central
European University Press.
Boltanski, L. and Chiapello, E. (1999) Le nouvel esprit du capitalisme. Paris:
Gallimard.
Boltanski, L. and Thévenot, L. (1991) De la justiﬁcation. Paris: Gallimard.
Bora, A. and Hausendorf, H. (2000) Annex 1 of the ﬁnal PARADYS research 
submission to the EU. IWT, Bielefeld University, PO Box 10 01 31, D-33501
Germany.
Bora, A. and Hausendorf, H. (2001) Communicating citizenship in decision 
making procedures. Towards an interdisciplinary and cross-cultural perspective.
Outline of an international and interdisciplinary workshop at the Centre for
Interdisciplinary Research (ZiF). Bielefeld, June 2001. IWT, Bielefeld University,
PO Box 10 01 31, D-33501 Germany.
Bora, A., Furchner, I., Hausendorf, H. and Münte, P. (2001) State of the art report:
Currents of thought on the main issues of the PARADYS project. IWT, Bielefeld
University, PO Box 10 01 31, D-33501 Germany.
Borzeix, A. (2003) Language and agency in organizations, in A. Müller and A. Kieser
(eds) Communication in Organizations. Frankfurt-am-Main: Peter Lang, 65–79.
560
Bibliography and references


Bourdieu, P. (1977) Outline of a Theory of Practice. (R. Nice, trans.), Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Bourdieu, P. (1984) Distinction: A Social Critique of the Judgement of Taste. 
(R. Nice, trans.), London: Routledge and Kegan Paul.
Bourdieu, P. (1988) Homo Academicus. Cambridge: Polity Press.
Bourdieu, P. (1990) The Logic of Practice (R. Nice, trans.) Stanford, CA: Stanford
University Press.
Bourdieu, P. (1991) Language and Symbolic Power. London: Polity.
Bourdieu, P. (1998a) A reasoned utopia and economic fatalism. New Left Review,
227: 125–130.
Bourdieu, P. (1998b) L’essence du neo-liberalisme. Le Monde Diplomatique, March:
65–7.
Bourdieu, P. (1998c) Practical Reason: On the Theory of Practice. London: Polity.
Bourdieu, P. (2000) Pascalian Meditations. London: Verso.
Bourdieu, P. and Wacquant, L. (1992) An Invitation to Reﬂexive Sociology. Cam-
bridge: Polity Press.
Bourdieu, P. and Wacquant, L. (2001) New Liberal Speak: Notes on the New
Planetary Vulgate. Radical Philosophy, 105: 2–5.
Brown, B.M. and Coates, K. (1996) The Blair Revelation: Deliverance for Whom.
Nottingham: Spokesman.
Brown, G. (1994) Fair is Efﬁcient, Fabian Society pamphlet.
Brown, G. and Yule, G. (1983) Discourse Analysis. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Brown, P. and Levinson, S. (1978) Universals of language usage: politeness phenom-
ena. In E. Goody (ed.) 1978, 56–324.
Brunsdon, C. (1990) Television: aesthetics and audiences. In P. Melancamp (ed.)
Logics of Television. Bloomington, IN: Indiana University Press.
Buci-Glucksmann, C. (1980) Gramsci and the State. London: Lawrence & 
Wishart.
Burawoy, M. et al. (2000) Global Ethnography. Berkeley, CA: University of Cali-
fornia Press.
Burawoy, M. and Verdery, K. (1999) Uncertain Transition: Ethnographies of
Change in the Postsocialist World. New York: Rowan and Littleﬁeld.
Burks, R.V. (1949) A conception of ideology for historians. Journal of the History of
Ideas, 10(2): 183–198.
Butler, J. (2000) Dynamic Conclusions, in J. Butler, E. Laclau, and S. Zizek,
Contingency, Hegemony, Universality: Contemporary Dialogues on the Left.
London: Verso, 263–280.
Calhoun, C. (1992) Habermas and the Public Sphere. MIT Press.
Callinicos, A. (1987) Making History. Cambridge: Polity Press.
Cameron, A. and Palan, R. (2004) The Imagined Economies of Globalization.
London: Sage.
Cameron, D. (1985) Feminism and Linguistic Theory. London: Macmillan.
Bibliography and references
561


Cameron, D. (1995) Verbal Hygiene. London: Routledge.
Campbell, D.T. (1969) Variation and selective retention in socio-cultural evolution.
General Systems, 14: 69–86.
Candlin, C. and Lucas, J. (1986) Interpretation and explanation in discourse modes
of ‘advising’ in family planning. In Ensink, T. (ed.) Discourse Analysis and Public
Life. Foris Publications.
Cardiff, D. (1980) The serious and popular: aspects of the evolution of style in radio
talk 1928–1939. Media Culture & Society, 2.1.
Carpignano, P., Anderson, R., Aronowitz, S. and Difazio, W. (1990) Chatter in the
age of electronic reproduction: talk television and the ‘public mind’. Social Text,
25/26: 33–55.
Carver, T. (1998) The Postmodern Marx. Manchester University Press.
Castells, M. (1996) The Rise of the Network Society. Cambridge: Blackwell.
Chia, R. (1995) From modern to postmodern organizational analysis. Organization
Studies, 16/4: 580–605.
Chiapello, E. and Fairclough, N. (2002) Understanding the new management ideo-
logy: A transdisciplinary contribution from critical discourse analysis and new
sociology of capitalism. Discourse and Society, 13/2: 185–208.
Chilton, P. (2004) Analysing Political Discourse. London: Routledge.
Chilton, P. (2005) Missing links in mainstream CDA: modules, blends and the 
critical instinct, in R. Wodak and P. Chilton (eds) A New Agenda in (Critical)
Discourse Analysis. Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Chomsky, N. (2003a) Where’s the Security in Bush’s National Security Strategy?,
Lecture at the University of Florida, October 21, 2003.
Chomsky, N. (2003b) Hegemony or Survival: America’s Quest for Global Dominance.
New York: Metropolitan Books.
Chouliaraki, L. (1998) Regulation in ‘progressivist’ discourse. Individualized
teacher–pupil talk. Discourse and Society, 9: 5–32.
Chouliaraki, L. (1999) Media discourse and nationality: Death and myth in a news
broadcast. In R. Wodak and C. Ludwig (eds), Challenges in a Changing World:
Issues in Critical Discourse Analysis. Passagen Verlag.
Chouliaraki, L. and Fairclough, N. (1999) Discourse in Late Modernity. Edinburgh:
Edinburgh University Press.
Chouliaraki, L. and Fairclough, N. (2000) Language and power in Bourdieu: on
Hasan’s ‘The Disempowerment Game’. Linguistics and Education, 10(4):
399–409.
Cicourel, A.V. (1976) The Social Organisation of Juvenile Justice. London:
Heinemann.
Clark, R. (1992) Principles and practice of CLA in the classroom. In Fairclough, N.
(ed.) Critical Language Awareness. London: Longman.
Clark, R., Constantinou, C., Cottey, A. and Yeoh, O.C. (1990) Rights and obliga-
tions in student writing. In Clark, T. et al. (eds) Language and Power: Proceedings
of the BAAL Annual Meeting, Lancaster 1989. London: CILT.
562
Bibliography and references


Clark, R., Fairclough, N., Ivanic, R. and Martin-Jones, M. (1990) Critical language
awareness Part 1: A critical review of three current approaches. Language and
Education, 4(4): 249–60.
Clark, R., Fairclough, N., Ivanic, R. and Martin-Jones, M. (1991) Critical language
awareness Part 2: Towards critical alternatives. Language and Education, 5(1):
41–54.
Clark, R. and Ivanic, R. (1992) Consciousness-raising about the writing process. 
In Garrett, P. and James, C. (eds) Language Awareness. London: Longman.
Clark, R. and Ivanim, R. (1997) The Politics of Writing. London: Routledge.
Clarke, J. and Newman, J. (1997) The Managerial State. London: Sage.
Clarke, J. and Newman, J. (1998) A modern British people? New Labour and the 
reconstruction of social welfare. Department of Intercultural Communication 
and Management, Copenhagen Business School. Occasional Paper.
Cole, P. and Morgan, J. (eds) (1975) Syntax and Semantics 3: Speech Acts. New York:
Academic Press.
Colletti, L. (1975) Introduction. In Marx, K. (1975). Early Writings. (Livingstone, R.
and Benton, G. trans.), (pp. 7–56). London: Penguin.
Collier, A. (1994) Critical Realism. London: Verso.
Coman, M. (2003a) Mass Media in România Post-comunista. Bucharest: Polirom.
Coman, M. (2003b) Mass Media, Mit i Ritual. Bucharest: Polirom.
Conein, B. et al. (1981) Materialités discursives. Lille: Presses Universitaires de 
Lille.
Connerton, P. (ed.) (1976) Critical Sociology: Selected Readings. Harmondsworth:
Penguin.
Connolly, W. (1991) Identity/Difference. Ithaca: Cornell University Press.
Cook, D.J. (1982) Marx’s critique of philosophical language. Philosophy and
Phenomenological Research, 42(4): 530–554.
Coulthard, M. and Montgomery, M. (eds) (1981) Studies in Discourse Analysis.
London: Routledge & Kegan Paul.
Coupland, N. (1998) What is sociolinguistic theory? Journal of Sociolinguistics, 
2: 110–117.
Courtine, J.-J. and Marandin, J.-M. (1981) Quel object pour l’analyse de discourse?
In Conein (1981).
Coward, R. and Ellis, J. (1977) Language and Materialism: Developments in
Semiology and the Theory of the Subject. London: Routledge & Kegan Paul.
Crowley, T. (1989) The Politics of Language. London: Macmillan.
Daianu, D. (2000) încotro se îndreapt rile postcommuniste? Bucharest: Polirom.
Davis, K. (1988) Power under the Microscope: Toward a Grounded Theory of Gender
Relations in Medical Encounters. Dordrecht: Foris.
D’Entreves, M. (1994) The Political Philosophy of Hannah Arendt. London:
Routledge.
Department for Education and Employment (1998) The Learning Age. London: The
Stationery Ofﬁce.
Bibliography and references
563


Department of Education and Science (DES) (1988) Report of the Committee of
Enquiry into the Teaching of English Language. London: HMSO. (Kingman
Report.)
Department of Education and Science (DES) (1989) English for Ages 5 to 16.
London: HMSO. (Cox Report.)
Department of Social Security (1998) New Ambitions for Our Country: A New Con-
tract for Welfare(Green Paper on Welfare Reform). London: The Stationery Ofﬁce.
Department of Trade and Industry (1998) Our Competitive Future: Building the
Knowledge-Driven Economy, London: HMSO. http://www.dti.gov.uk/comp/
competitive.wh_int1.htm.
Derrida, J. (1978) Structure, sign and play in the discourse of the human 
sciences. In Writing and Difference. Chicago: University of Chicago Press,
278–293.
Derrida, J. (1994) Specters of Marx. London: Routledge.
Dews, P. (1988) Logics of Disintegration. London: Verso.
Dillon, M. (2007) Governing terror: the state of emergency of biopolitical emergence,
in: International Political Sociology, 1: 7–28.
Doughty, P., Pearce, J. and Thornton, G. (1971) Language in Use. London: Edward
Arnold.
Drew, P. and Heritage, J. (1992) Talk at Work. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.
Dreyfus, H. and Rabinow, P. (1982) Michel Foucault: Beyond Structuralism and
Hermeneutics. Brighton: Harvester Press.
Driver, S. and Martell, L. (1998) New Labour: Politics after Thatcherism.
Cambridge: Polity Press.
Dubiel, H. (1985) Theory and Politics: Studies in the Development of Critical Theory.
Cambridge, Mass: MIT Press.
Dufﬁeld, M. (2001) Global Governance and the New Wars: the Merging of
Development and Security. London: Zed Books.
Eagleton, T. (1991) Ideology. Verso.
Eagleton, T. (2000) The Idea of Culture. Oxford: Blackwell.
ECLAC (2002) UN Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean
report ‘Globalization and Development’, (http://www.eclac.cl).
Edmondson, W. (1981) Spoken Discourse: A Model for Analysis. London: Longman.
Eizenstat, S. (1999) On the threat to a more open global system, speech to 
the Democratic Council (http://canberra.usembassy.gov/hyper/WF990120/
publog3.htm).
Ellis, J. and Ure, J. (eds) (1982) Register Range and Change. International Journal 
of the Sociology of Language, 35.
Engels, F. (1976) (1877–78) Anti-DNhring. Peking: Foreign Languages Press.
ENQA (European Network for Quality Assurance in Higher Education) (2005)
Follow-up to the Bologna declaration: a European quality assurance system, a
564
Bibliography and references


position paper submitted to Bergen meeting of Ministers of Education (http://
www.enqa.net.bologna.lasso).
Fairclough, N. (1982) Review of Bolinger, Language – the Loaded Weapon.
Language in Society, 11: 110–120.
Fairclough, N. (1985) Critical and descriptive goals in discourse analysis. Journal of
Pragmatics, 9: 739–63.
Fairclough, N. (1988a) Register, power and sociosemantic change. In D. Birch and
M. O’Toole (eds) The Functions of Style. London: Pinter Publications.
Fairclough, N. (1988b) Discourse representation in media discourse. Socio-
linguistics, 17: 125–39.
Fairclough, N. (1989a) Language and Power. London: Longman.
Fairclough, N. (1989b) Michel Foucault and the analysis of discourse. Centre for
Language in Social Life Research Paper 10. Lancaster University.
Fairclough, N. (1989c) Language and ideology. English Language Research Journal,
3: 9–27.
Fairclough, N. (1990a) What might we mean by ‘enterprise discourse’? In R. Keat
and N. Abercrombie (eds), Enterprise Culture (pp. 38–57). Routledge.
Fairclough, N. (1990b) Critical linguistics, ‘New Times’ and language education. 
In R. Clark et al. (eds) Language and Power: Proceedings of the BAAL Annual
Meeting, Lancaster 1989. London: CILT.
Fairclough, N. (1992a) Discourse and Social Change. Cambridge: Polity Press.
Fairclough, N. (ed.) (1992b) Critical Language Awareness. London: Longman.
Fairclough, N. (1992c) Review of B. Torode (ed.) Text and Talk as Social Practice.
Sociolinguistics, 18: 144–50.
Fairclough, N. (1992d) The appropriacy of ‘appropriateness’, in Fairclough 
1992b.
Fairclough, N. (1992e) Discourse and text: linguistic and intertextual analysis within
discourse analysis, Discourse & Society, 3.2: 193–217.
Fairclough, N. (1993) Critical discourse analysis and the marketization of public 
discourse: the universities, Discourse and Society, 4/2: 133–168.
Fairclough, N. (1994) Conversationalisation of public discourse and the authority of
the consumer. In R. Keat, N. Whiteley and N. Abercrombie (eds) The Authority 
of the Consumer. London: Routledge, 253–68.
Fairclough, N. (1995a) Critical Discourse Analysis, ﬁrst edn. London: Longman.
Fairclough, N. (1995b) Media Discourse. London: Edward Arnold.
Fairclough, N. (1996) Technologisation of discourse. In C. Caldas-Coulthard and
M. Coulthard (eds) Texts and Practices: Readings in Critical Discourse Analysis.
London: Routledge.
Fairclough, N. (1997) Discourse across disciplines. Discourse analysis in researching
social change. AILA Review, 12: 3–17.
Fairclough, N. (1998) Public space as discourse: Monarchy – the Nation Decides.
Quarderni di studi linguistici, 4/5.
Bibliography and references
565


Fairclough, N. (1999) Democracy and the public sphere in critical research on 
discourse. In R. Wodak and C. Ludwig (eds) Challenges in a Changing World:
Issues in Critical Discourse Analysis. Vienna: Passagen Verlag.
Fairclough, N. (2000a) Discourse, social theory and social research: the discourse of
welfare reform: Journal of Sociolinguistics, 4.2, 2000: 163–195.
Fairclough, N. (2000b) New Labour, New Language? London: Routledge.
Fairclough, N. (2000c) Represenciones del cambio en discurso neoliberal.
Cuadernos de Relaciones Laborales, 16, 2000: 13–36.
Fairclough, N. (2001a) The discourse of New Labour: Critical discourse analysis. 
In M. Wetherell, S. Taylor and S. Yates (eds) Discourse as Data: a Guide for
Analysis. London: Sage/Open University, 229–266.
Fairclough, N. (2001b) Review of A Giddens the Third Way and its Critics. The
Spokesman, 70: 77–81.
Fairclough, N. (2001c) The dialectics of discourse. Textus, 14, 231–242.
Fairclough, N. (2003) Analysing Discourse: Textual Analysis for Social Research.
London: Routledge.
Fairclough, N. (2005a) Critical discourse analysis, organizational discourse, and
organizational change. Organization Studies, 26: 915–939.
Fairclough, N. (2005b) Critical discourse analysis, Marges Linguistiques, 9: 76–94.
Fairclough, N. (2005c) ‘Transition’ in Central and Eastern Europe, British and
American Studies (University of Timisoara), 11: 9–34.
Fairclough, N. (2005d) Critical discourse analysis in transdisciplinary research. In 
R. Wodak and P. Chilton (eds) A New Agenda in (Critical) Discourse Analysis.
Amsterdam: John Benjamins (2005), 53–70.
Fairclough, N. (2006) Language and Globalization. Routledge, London.
Fairclough, N. (2009) Language, reality and power. In J. Culpeper, F. Katamba, 
P. Kerswill and R. Wodak (eds) English Language and Linguistics. London:
Palgrave Macmillan.
Fairclough, N. et al.(2000) Language in new capitalism. [Online collection] Available
from the World Wide Web: http://www.uoc.es/humﬁl/nlc/LNC-ENG/lnc-eng.html.
Fairclough, N., Graham, P., Lemke, J. and Wodak, R. (2001) Introduction. Critical
Discourse Studies, 1(1).
Fairclough, N., Graham, P., Lemke, J. and Wodak, R. (2004) ‘Editorial’. Critical
Discourse Studies, 1: 1–7.
Fairclough, N., Jessop, B. and Sayer, A. (2004) Critical Realism and Semiosis. In 
J. Joseph and J. Roberts (eds) Realism, Discourse and Deconstruction, 23–42.
London: Routledge.
Fairclough, N. and Ivanic, R. (1989) Language education or language training? A 
critique of the Kingman model of the English language. In J. Bourne (ed.) The
Kingman Report, Committee on Language in Education.
Fairclough, N. and Thomas, P. (2004) The globalization of discourse and the dis-
course of globalization. In D. Grant et al. (eds) Handbook of Organizational
Discourse. London: Sage, 379–396.
566
Bibliography and references


Fairclough, N. and Wodak, R. (1997) Critical discourse analysis. In T. van Dijk (ed.)
Discourse as Social Interaction, 258–84. London: Sage.
Featherstone, M. (1991) Consumer Culture and Postmodernism. London: Sage.
Fenves, P. (1986) Marx’s doctoral thesis on two Greek atomists and the post-Kantian
interpretations. Journal of the History of Ideas, 40(3): 353–368.
Firth, J.R. (1957) Papers in Linguistics 1934–1951. London: Oxford University
Press.
Fishman, J.A. (1972) The relationship between micro- and macro-sociolinguistics 
in the study of who speaks what language to whom and when. In J. Pride and 
J. Holmes (eds) Sociolinguistics. Harmondsworth: Penguin, 15–34.
Forgacs, D. (1988) A Gramsci Reader. London: Lawrence & Wishart.
Foucault, M. (1971) L’ordre du discours. Paris: Gallimard.
Foucault, M. (1972) Archaeology of Knowledge. London: Tavistock Publications.
Foucault, M. (1979) Discipline and Punlish: The Birth of the Prison. Harmondsworth:
Penguin.
Foucault, M. (1981) History of Sexuality vol. 1. Harmondsworth: Penguin.
Foucault, M. (1984) The order of discourse. In M. Shapiro (ed.) Language and
Politics. Oxford: Blackwell, 108–138.
Fowler, R. (1991) Language in the News. London: Routledge.
Fowler, R., Hodge, R., Kress, G. and Trew, T. (1979) Language and Control.
London: Routledge.
Fowler, R. and Kress, G. (1979) Rules and regulations. In Fowler et al. 1979.
Franklin, B. (1998) Tough on Soundbites, Tough on the Causes of Soundbites: New
Labour and News Management. Catalyst Pamphlet 3. London: The Catalyst
Trust.
Fraser, L. (1986) Where? What? And How? Awkward questions in the theory of 
ideology. Language and Politics Working Paper, 1986. Lancaster University.
Fraser, N. (1989) Unruly Practices. Cambridge: Polity Press.
Fraser, N. (1995) From redistribution to recognition? Dilemmas of justice in a 
‘post-socialist’ age. New Left Review, 212: 68–93.
Freire, P. (1985) The Politics of Education. London: Macmillan.
Frow, J. (1985) Discourse and power. Economy and Society, 14.
Furusten, S. (1999) Popular Management Books. London: Routledge.
Galbraith, J.K. (1955) The Great Crash 1929. London: Hamish Hamilton.
Garnham, N. (2001) The Information Society: Myth or Reality? Bugs, Globalism and
Pluralism Conference, Montreal, Quebec.
Gee, J., Hull, G. and Lankshear, C. (1996) The New Work Order: Behind the
Language of the New Capitalism. London: Allen & Unwin.
Giddens, A. (1976) New Rules of the Sociological Method: A Positive Critique of
Interpretative Sociologies. London: Hutchinson.
Giddens, A. (1981) Agency, institution and time–space analysis. In K. Knorr-Cetina
and A.V. Cicourel (eds) Advances in Social Theory and Methodology: Towards an
Integration of Micro- and Macro-Sociologies. London: Routledge & Kegan Paul.
Bibliography and references
567


Giddens, A. (1984) The Constitution of Society. Cambridge: Polity Press.
Giddens, A. (1991) Modernity and Self-Identity. Cambridge: Polity Press.
Giddens, A. (1994) Beyond Left and Right. Cambridge: Polity Press.
Giddens, A. (1998) The Third Way. Cambridge: Polity Press.
Gille, Z. (2000) Cognitive cartography in a European wasteland: multinational 
capital and Greens vie for village allegiance. In Burawoy (ed.) (2000) 240–267.
Girin, J. (2001) La théorie des organisations et la question du langage. In A. Borzeix
and B. Fraenkel (eds) Langage et Travail. CNRS Editions, 167–185.
Giroux, H. (1983) Theory and Resistance in Education: A Pedagogy for the Opposi-
tion. New York: Heinemann.
Giroux, H. (1997) Pedagogy and the Politics of Hope. Boulder, CO: Westview Press.
Givón, T. (1979) On Understanding Grammar. New York: Academic Press.
Godin, B. (2004) The Knowledge-based Economy: Conceptual Framework or
Buzzword? Project on the History and Sociology of S. & T. Statistics, Working
Paper, 24.
Goody, E. (ed.) (1978) Questions and Politeness. London: Cambridge University
Press.
Gould, P. (1998) The Unﬁnished Revolution: How the Modernisers Saved the Labour
Party. London: Little, Brown & Co.
Graham, P. (1999) Critical systems theory: A political economy of language, thought,
and technology. Communication Research, 26(4): 482–507.
Graham, P. (2000) Hypercapitalism: A political economy of informational idealism.
New Media and Society, 2(2): 131–156.
Graham, P. (2001) Space: irrealis objects in technology policy and their role in a new
political economy. Discourse & Society, 12(6): 761–788.
Graham, P. (2002) Hypercapitalism: New media, language, and social perceptions 
of value. Discourse & Society, 13(2) [special issue on Language in the New
Capitalism. N. Fairclough, issue editor]: 227–249.
Graham, P. (forthcoming) Critical discourse analysis and political economy of 
communication.
Gramsci, A. (1971) Selections from the Prison Notebooks. London: Lawrence &
Wishart.
Grant, D. and C. Hardy (2004) Introduction: Struggles with organizational dis-
course. Organization Studies, 25/1: 5–13.
Grant, D., Harvey, C., Oswick, C. and Putnam, L. (2004) ‘Introduction: Organ-
izational discourse, exploring the ﬁeld’ in Handbook of Organizational Discourse.
London: Sage, 1–35.
Grant, D., Keenoy, C. and Oswick, C. (2001) Organizational discourse: key contribu-
tions and challenges. International Studies of Management and Organization, 
31: 5–24.
Gray, J. (1993) Beyond the New Right: Markets, Government and the Common
Environment. London: Routledge.
Green Party UK (2005) Manifesto (http://manifesto.greeparty.org.uk/).
568
Bibliography and references


Gregory, M. and Carroll, S. (1978) Language and Situation: Language Varieties and
Their social Contexts. London: Routledge.
Grice, H.P. (1975) Logic and conversation. In P. Cole and J. Morgan (eds) 1975:
1–58.
Grote, G. (1872) Aristotle (Vol. 1). London: John Murray.
Haberland, H. and Mey, J. (1977) Editorial: Linguistics and pragmatics. Journal of
Pragmatics, 1: 1–12.
Habermas, J. (1976) Legitimation Crisis. London: Heinemann.
Habermas, J. (1977) Hannah Arendt’s communications concept of power. Social
Research, 44: 44–65.
Habermas, J. (1984) The Theory of Communicative Action, vol. 1. London:
Heinemann.
Habermas, J. (1987) The Philosophical Discourse of Modernity: Twelve Lectures.
Cambridge: Polity.
Habermas, J. (1989) (1962) Structural Transformation of the Public Sphere.
Cambridge: Polity Press.
Habermas, J. (1996) Between Facts and Norms. Cambridge: Polity Press.
Hall, S. (1982) The rediscovery of ‘ideology’: return of the repressed in media 
studies. In M. Gurevitch, T. Bennet, J. Curran and J. Woollacott (eds) Culture,
Society and the Media. London, Methuen, 56–90.
Hall, S. (1988) The toad in the garden: Thatcherism among the theorists. In 
C. Nelson and L. Grossberg (eds) Marxism and the Interpretation of Culture.
London: Macmillan.
Hall, S. (1994) Some ‘politically incorrect’ pathways through PC. In S. Dunant (ed.)
The War of the Words: The Political Correctness Debate. London: Virago Press,
164–184.
Hall, S. (1998) The great moving nowhere show, Marxism Today special issue on
New Labour, 9–14.
Hall, S., Critcher, C., Jefferson, T., Clarke, J. and Roberts, B. (1978) Policing the
Crisis. London: Macmillan.
Halliday, M.A.K. (1978) Language as Social Semiotic. London: Edward Arnold.
Halliday, M.A.K. (1993) New ways of meaning: a challenge to applied linguistics. 
In Language in a Changing World. Applied Linguistics Association of Australia,
1–32.
Halliday, M.A.K. (1994a) ‘So you say pass . . . thank you three muchly’: How 
conversation means – contexts and functions. In A. Grimshaw (ed.) What’s 
Going on Here? Contemporary Studies of Professional Talk. Norwood, NJ: Ablex, 
175–229.
Halliday, M.A.K. (1994b) An Introduction to Functional Grammar, second edn,
London: Edward Arnold.
Halliday, M.A.K. and Hasan, R. (1976) Cohesion in English. London: Longman.
Halliday, M.A.K. and Hasan, R. (1985) Language, Context and Text. Geelong:
Deakin University Press.
Bibliography and references
569


Hansen, A.H. (1921) The technological interpretation of history. Quarterly Journal
of Economics, 36(1): 72–83.
Haroche, C., Henry, P. and Pêcheux, M. (1971) La sémantique et la coupure 
saussurienne: langue, langage, discours. Languages, 24.
Hart, K. (1999) The Memory Bank: Money in an Unequal World. London: Proﬁle.
Harvey, D. (1990) The Condition of Postmodernity. Oxford: Blackwell.
Harvey, D. (1996) Justice, Nature and the Geography of Difference. Oxford:
Blackwell.
Harvey, D. (2003) The New Imperialism. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Hasan, R. (2000) The disempowerment game: a critique of Bourdieu’s view of 
language. Linguistics and Education, 10.
Hawkins, W. (1984) Awareness of Language: An Introduction. Cambridge: Cam-
bridge University Press.
Hay, C. (2007) Why We Hate Politics. Cambridge: Polity.
Hay, C. and Marsh, D. (2000) Introduction: demystifying globalization. In 
C. Hay and D. Marsh (eds) Demystifying Globalization. London: Palgrave, 
1–17.
Hay, C. and Rosamond, B. (2002) Globalization, European integration and the 
discursive construction of economic imperatives. Journal of European Public
Policy, 9.2.
Hegel, G.W.F. (1807/1966) The Phenomenology of Mind. J.B. Baillie (trans.).
London: George Allen & Unwin.
Hegel, G.W.F. (1830/1998) Philosophy of subjective spirit. In S. Houlgate (ed.) The
Hegel Reader. London: Blackwell, 293–318.
Hegel, G.W.F. (1833/1995) Lectures on the History of Philosophy (Vol. 1): Greek 
philosophy to Plato. E.S. Haldane (trans.). London: Nebraska University Press.
Hegel, G.W.F. (1910) The Phenomenology of Mind vol. 2, translated J.B. Baillie.
London: Sonnenschein.
Held, D., McGrew, A., Goldblatt, D. and Perraton, J. (1999) Global Transforma-
tions: Politics, Economics and Culture. Cambridge: Polity Press.
Heller, A. (1999) A Theory of Modernity. Oxford: Blackwell.
Henriques, J. et al. (1984) Changing the Subject. London: Methuen.
Hennessy, R. (1993) Materialist Feminism and the Politics of Discourse. London:
Sage.
Hermann, E. and Chomsky, N. (1988) Manufacturing Consent: The Political
Economy of the Mass Media. Pantheon Books.
Hobsbawm, E. (1977) Gramsci and political theory. Marxism Today, July 1977.
Hochschild, A.R. (1983) The Managed Heart. Berkeley: University of California
Press.
Hodge, R. and Kress, G. (1988) Social Semiotics. Cambridge: Polity Press.
Hoey, M. (2001) Textual Interaction. London: Routledge.
Honderich, T. (2003) After the Terror (revised edition). Edinburgh: Edinburgh
University Press.
570
Bibliography and references


Hook, S. (1928a) The philosophy of dialectical materialism I. The Journal of
Philosophy, 25(5): 113–124.
Hook, S. (1928b) The philosophy of dialectical materialism II. The Journal of
Philosophy, 25(6): 141–155.
Horkheimer, M. and Adorno, T. (1947/1998) Dialectic of Enlightenment. London:
Verso.
Huczynski, A. (1993) Management Gurus: What Makes Them and How to Become
One. London: Routledge.
Huxley, J. (1950) New bottles for new wine: Ideology and scientiﬁc knowledge.
Journal of the Royal Anthropological Institute of Great Britain and Ireland, 
80(1/2): 7–23.
Hymes, D. (1972) On communicative competence. In Pride, J. and Holmes, J.
Sociolinguistics. Harmondsworth: Penguin.
Iedema, R. (1998) Institutional responsibility and hidden meanings. Discourse &
Society, 9(4): 481–500.
Iedema, R. (1999) Formalizing organizational meaning. Discourse & Society, 10(1):
49–66.
Iedema, R. (2003) Discourses of Post-bureaucratic Organization. Amsterdam: John
Benjamins Publishing.
Iedema, R., Degeling, P., Braithwaite, J. and White, L. (2004) ‘It’s an interesting con-
versation I’m hearing’: the doctor as manager. Organization Studies, 25/1: 15–33.
Ieocu, I. (2006) Discourse Analysis and Argumentation Theory: Analytical Frame-
work and Applications. Bucharest: Editura Universitaoii Bucureslti.
Ivanim, R. (1990) Critical language awareness in action. In R. Carter (ed.) Knowledge
about Language – The LINC Reader. London: Hodder & Stoughton.
Ivanim, R. (1997) Writing and Identity: The Discoursal Construction of Identity in
Academic Writing. Amsterdam: Benjamins.
Ivanim, R. and Roach, S. (1990) Academic writing, power and disguise. In Clark, N.,
Fairclough, N. et al. (eds) (1990).
Ivanim, R. and Simpson, J. (1992) Who’s who in academic writing? In Fairclough, N.
(ed.) (1992b).
Jackson, B. (2001) Management Gurus and Management Fashions. London:
Routledge.
Jackson, R. (2005) Writing the War on Terrorism. Manchester: Manchester
University Press.
Jakobson, R. (1990) On Language. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Jameson, F. (1984) Postmodernism, or the cultural logic of capitalism. New Left
Review, 146.
Janks, H. and Ivanic, R. (1992) Critical language awareness and emancipator 
discourse. In Fairclough, N. (ed.) (1992b).
Jessop, R. (2000) The crisis of the national spatio-temporal ﬁx and the ecological
dominance of globalizing capitalism. International Journal of Urban and Regional
Studies, 24(2): 273–310.
Bibliography and references
571


Jessop, B. (2001) Institutional (re)turns and the strategic-relational approach.
Environment and Planning A, 33(7): 1213–37.
Jessop, B. (2002) The Future of the Capitalist State. Cambridge: Polity Press.
Jessop, B. (2004) Critical semiotic analysis and cultural political economy. Critical
Discourse Studies, 1(2), 2004: 159–74.
Jessop, B. (2008) The cultural political economy of the knowledge-based economy
and its implications for higher education. In Norman Fairclough, Bob Jessop and
Ruth Wodak (eds) Education and the Knowledge-Based Economy in Europe.
Amsterdam: Sense Publishers.
Jessop, B. and Sum, N.-L. (2001) Pre-disciplinary and post-disciplinary perspectives
in political economy. New Political Economy, 6: 89–101.
Jessop, B. and Sum, N.-L. (2006) Beyond the Regulation Approach. London: Edward
Elgar.
Jones, N. (1999) Sultans of Spin: The Media and the New Labour Government.
London: Victor Gollancz.
Jordan, B. (1996) A Theory of Poverty and Social Exclusion. Cambridge: Polity Press.
Jordanidou, A. (1990) Read Me the Old News: A Study of Discourse Practice.
Lancaster University PhD Thesis.
Kanter, R.M. (2001) Evolve! Boston: Harvard University Press.
Keane, J. (1984) Public Life in Late Capitalism. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.
Keat, R. and Abercrombie, N. (1990) Enterprise Culture. London: Routledge.
Keat, R., Whiteley, N. and Abercrombie, N. (1994) The Authority of the Consumer.
London: Routledge.
Keenoy, T. and Oswick, C. (2004) Organizing textscapes. Organization Studies,
25/1: 135–142.
Kennedy, E. (1979) ‘Ideology’ from Destutt de Tracy to Marx. Journal of the History
of Ideas, 40(3): 353–368.
Kennedy, P. (1998) Coming to terms with contemporary capitalism: beyond the ideal-
ism of globalisation and capitalist ascendancy arguments. Sociological research
online, 3(2). [Online journal]. Retrieved 7 October 1998 from the World Wide
Web: http://www.socioresonline.org.uk/socioresonline/3/2/6.html.
Kieser, A. and Müller, A. (2003) Foreword. In A. Müller and A. Kieser (eds)
Communication in Organizations. Frankfurt-am-Main: Peter Lang, 7–17.
Kress, G. (1988) Linguistic Processes in Sociocultural Practice. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Kress, G. (1993) Cultural considerations in linguistic description. In D. Graddol et al.
(eds) Language and Culture. London: Multilingual Matters.
Kress, G. and Hodge, B. (1979) Language as Ideology. London: Routledge & Kegan
Paul.
Kress, G. and van Leeuwen, T. (1996) Reading Images: The Grammar of Visual
Design. London: Routledge.
Kress, G. and van Leeuwen, T. (2000) Multimodal Discourse. London: Arnold.
572
Bibliography and references


Kristeva, J. (1980) Word, dialogue and novel. In Kristeva, J. (ed.) Desire in
Language. Oxford: Blackwell.
Labov, W. and Fanshel, D. (1977) Therapeutic Discourse. New York: Academic
Press.
Labov, W. and Waletzky, J. (1967) Narrative analysis: oral versions of personal 
experience. In J. Helms (ed.) Essays on the Verbal and Visual Arts. University of
Washington Press.
Laclau, E. (1979) Politics and Ideology in Marxist Theory. London: Verso.
Laclau, E. (1996) Why do empty signiﬁers matter in politics? In Emancipations.
London: Verso, 36–46.
Laclau, E. and Mouffe, C. (1985) Hegemony and Socialist Strategy. London: 
Verso.
Langholm, O. (1998) The Legacy of Scholasticism in Economic Thought: Antecedents
of Choice and Power. Cambridge, Mass: Cambridge University Press.
Larrain, J. (1979) The Concept of Ideology. London: Hutchinson.
Larrain, J. (1989) The Concept of Ideology. London: Hutchinson.
Lash, S. (1990) The Sociology of Postmodernism. London: Routledge.
Latour, B. (2004) Politics of Nature: How to Bring the Sciences into Democracy.
Catherine Porter (Trans.) Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Lave, J. (1998) Cognition in Practice, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Law, J. (1994) Organizing Modernity. Oxford: Blackwell.
Lawson-Tancred, H.C. (1998) Introduction. In Aristotle, A. (1998) The Metaphysics
(pp. xi–lviii). (Lawson-Tancred, H.C. trans.). London: Penguin Classics.
Leech, G.N. (1974) Semantics. Harmondsworth: Penguin.
Leech, G.N. (1983) Principles of Pragmatics. London: Longman.
Lemke, J. (1988) Text structure and text semantics. In R. Veltman and E. Steiner
(eds) Pragmatics, Discourse and Text: Systemic Approaches. London: Pinter.
Lemke, J. (1995) Textual Politics. London: Taylor & Francis.
Lemke, J. (1998) Resources for attitudinal meaning. Evaluative orientations in text
semantics, Functions of Language, 5, 1: 33–56.
Lepschy, G. (1985) Linguistics. In Z. Baranski and G. Short (eds) Developing
Contemporary Marxism. London: The Macmillan Press, 199–228.
Levinson, S. (1979) Activity types and language. Linguistics, 17: 365–99.
Levinson, S. (1983) Pragmatics. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Levitas, R. (1998) The Inclusive Society? Social Exclusion and New Labour. London:
Macmillan.
Lipset, S.M. (1966) Some further comments on ‘The End of Ideology’. The American
Political Science Review, 60(1): 17–18.
Livingstone, S. and Lunt, P. (1994) Talk on Television. London: Routledge.
Lyotard, J.-F. (1984) The Postmodern Condition. Manchester: Manchester Univer-
sity Press.
Lyotard, J.-F. (1986/7) Rules and paradoxes and the svelte appendix. Cultural
Critique, 5: 209–19.
Bibliography and references
573


Lyotard, J.-F. (1988) The Differend: Phrases in Dispute. Manchester: Manchester
University Press.
MacDonald, R. (1994) Fiddly jobs, undeclared working and the something for 
nothing society. Work, Employment and Society, 8(4): 507–30.
MacIntyre, A. (1985) After Virtue: A Study in Moral Theory. Second edition. London:
Duckworth.
Maguire, S. (2004) The co-evolution of technology and discourse: A study of substitu-
tion processes for the insecticide DDT. Organization Studies, 25(1): 113–134.
Maingueneau, D. (1987) Nouvelles tendances en analyse du discours. Paris: Hachette.
Makdisi, G. (1974) The scholastic method in mediaeval education: An inquiry into
its origins, law, and theology. Speculum, 49(4): 640–661.
Maldidier, S. (1984) Michel Pêcheux: une tension passionnée entre la langue et 
l’histoire. In Histoire et linguistique. Paris: Editions de la Maison des Sciences de
L’homme.
Malinowski, B. (1923) The problem of meaning in primitive languages. Supplement
1. In C. Ogden and I.A. Richards (eds) The Meaning of Meaning. New York:
Harcourt Brace.
Mandel, E. (1978) Late Capitalism. London: New Left Books.
Marcuse, H. (1964) One-Dimensional Man. London: Abacus.
Margerison, C. (1987) Conversation Control Skills for Managers. London: Mercury
Books.
Marquand, D. (1998) The Blair paradox, Prospect, May, 19–22.
Marsden, R. (1999) The Nature of Capital: Marx after Foucault. London: Routledge.
Martin, J. (1989) Factual Writing. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Martin, J. (1992) English Text. Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Marx, K. (1843/1975) Critique of Hegel’s Doctrine of the State. In Marx, K. (1975) Early
Writings. R. Livingstone and G. Benton (Trans.). London: Penguin, 157–198.
Marx, K. (1844/1975a) Economic and Philosophical Manuscripts. In Marx, K. (1975)
Early Writings. R. Livingstone and G. Benton (Trans.). London: Penguin,
279–400.
Marx, K. (1844/1975b) Excerpts from James Mill’s ‘Elements of Political Economy’.
In Marx, K. (1975) Early Writings. R. Livingstone and G. Benton (Trans.).
London: Penguin, 259–278.
Marx, K. (1844/1977) Economic and Philosophic Manuscripts of 1844. London:
Lawrence & Wishart.
Marx, K. (1851–2/1973) The Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Bonaparte. In Surveys
from Exile. Harmondsworth: Penguin, 38–64.
Marx, K. (1857/1973) Grundrisse: Foundations of the Critique of Political Economy
(M. Nicolaus, Trans.). London: Penguin.
Marx, K. (1875/1972) Critique of the Gotha program. In R.C. Tucker (ed.), The
Marx–Engels Reader. New York: W.W. Norton, 382–405.
Marx, K. (1970) A Contribution to the Critique of Political Economy (S.W.
Ryazlanskaya, Trans.). Moscow: Progress.
574
Bibliography and references


Marx, K. (1974) Capital. A Critique of Political Economy (Vol. 1), (S. Moore and 
B. Aveling Trans). London: Lawrence & Wishart.
Marx, K. (1976) Capital: A Critique of Political Economy (Vol. 1), (B. Fowkes,
Trans.). London: Penguin.
Marx, K. (1978) Capital: A Critique of Political Economy (Vol. 2), (D. Fernbach,
Trans.). London: Penguin.
Marx, K. (1981) Capital: A Critique of Political Economy (Vol. 3), (D. Fernbach,
Trans.). London: Penguin.
Marx, K. and Engels, G. (1846/1972) The German Ideology. In R.C. Tucker (ed.),
The Marx–Engels Reader. New York: W.W. Norton, 110–166.
Marxism Today. Special Issue on Blairism. October 1998.
McKeon, R. (1928) Thomas Aquinas’ doctrine of knowledge and its historical 
setting. Speculum, 3 (4): 425–444.
McTaggart, J.E. (1893) Time and the Hegelian dialectic. Mind [New Series], 2(8):
490–504.
Melucci, A. (1996) Challenging Codes: Collective Action in the Information Age.
Cambridge: CUP.
Meehan, J. (1995) Feminists Read Habermas. London: Routledge.
Mey, J. (1985) Whose Language? A study in Linguistic Pragmatics. Amsterdam: John
Benjamins.
Michel, V. (1927) Why scholastic philosophy lives. The Philosophical Review, 36(2):
166–173.
Miroiu, M. (1999) Societatea Retro. Bucharest: Editura Trei.
Mischler, E. (1984) The Discourse of Medicine. Dialectics of Medical Interviews.
Norwood NJ: Ablex.
Montgomery, M. (1999) Speaking sincerely: public reactions to the death of Diana.
Language and Literature, 7: 5–33.
Morley, D. (1980) The ‘Nationwide’ Audience. London: BFI.
Morley, D. (1983) Cultural transformations: the politics of resistance. In H. Davis
and P. Walton (eds) Language, Image, Media. Oxford: Blackwell.
Mouffe, C. (2005) On the Political. London: Routledge.
Mouzelis, N. (1990) Post-Marxist Alternatives. London: Macmillan.
Mumby, D. and Clair, R. (1997) Organizational discourse. In T.A. van Dijk (ed.)
Discourse as Structure and Process: Discourse Studies Volume 2. London: Sage.
Mumby, D.K. and Stohl, C. (1991) Power and discourse in organizational studies:
Absence and the dialectic of control. Discourse and Society, 2: 313–332.
Mumby, D.K. and Stohl, C. (1996) Disciplining organizational communication 
studies. Management Communication Quarterly, 10/1: 50–73.
Muntigl, P. (2002) Politicization and depoliticization: Employment policy in the
European Union. In P. Chilton and C. Schäffner (eds) Politics as Text and Talk.
Amsterdam: John Benjamins, 45–79.
Myers, G. (1998) Displaying opinions: topics and disagreements in focus groups.
Language in Society, 27: 85–111.
Bibliography and references
575


National Committee of Inquiry into Higher Education (1997) Higher Education in
the Learning Society (The Dearing Report). London: HMSO.
National Congress on Language in Education (NCLE) (1985) Language Awareness.
London: CILT.
Neill, T.P. (1949) The physiocrats’ concept of economics. Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 63(4): 532–553.
Nellhaus, T. (1998) Signs, Social Ontology, and Critical Realism. Journal for the
Theory of Social Behaviour, 28(1): 1–24.
New London Group (1996) A pedagogy of multiliteracies: Designing social futures.
Harvard Educational Review, 66(1): 60–92.
Nietzsche, F. (1990/1886) Beyond Good and Evil. Harmondsworth: Penguin.
Norris, C. (1992) Uncritical Theory. London: Lawrence & Wishart.
O’Barr, W. (1982) Linguistic Evidence: Language, Power and Strategy in the
Courtroom. New York: Academic Press.
Ollman, B. (1993) Dialectical Investigations. London/New York: Routledge.
O’Neill, J. (2001) Markets and the environment: The solution is the problem.
Economic and Political Weekly, 36(21): 1865–1873.
Palonen, K. (1993) Introduction: From policy and polity to politicking and politi-
cization. In K. Paolonen and T. Parvikko (eds) Reading the Political: Exploring the
Margins of Politics. Helsinki: FPSA, 6–16.
Parker, I. (1992) Discourse Dynamics. London: Routledge.
Pêcheux, M. (1982) Language, Semantics and Ideology. London: Macmillan.
Pêcheux, M. (1988) Discourse: structure or event? In Nelson, C. and Grossberg, L.
Marxism and the Interpretation of Culture. London: Macmillan.
Perri 6 (1997) Holistic Government. London: Demos.
Perri 6 (1998) Problem-solving government. In Ian Hargreaves and Ian Christie (eds)
Tomorrow’s Politics. London: Demos, 50–63.
Peters, T. (1994) The Tom Peters Seminar. London: Vintage Books.
Pickles, J. (1998) Restructuring State Enterprises: Industrial Geography and Eastern
European Transitions. In J. Pickles and A. Smith (eds) Theorising Transition: 
The Political Economy of Post-Communist Transformations. London: Routledge,
172–96.
Pickles, J. and Smith, A. (1998) The Political Economy of Transition. London:
Routledge.
Pieterse, J. (2004) Globalization or Empire? London: Routledge.
Pilger, J. (1992) Distant Voices. London: Vintage.
Platt, S. (1998) Government by Task Force. Catalyst Paper 2. London: Catalyst.
Polanyi, K. (1944) The Great Transformation. Boston: Beacon Press.
Poster, M. (ed.) (1988) Jean Baudrillard: Selected Writings. Cambridge: Polity 
Press.
Potter, J. and Wetherell, M. (1987) Discourse and Social Psychology. London: Sage.
Poznanaski, K. (2000) The morals of transition: decline of public interest and 
runaway reforms in eastern Europe. In S. Antohi and V. Tismaneanu (eds)
576
Bibliography and references


Between Past and Future: The Revolutions of 1989 and their Aftermath. Budapest:
CEU Press.
Pratt, N.L. (1981) The ideology of speech act theory. Centrum (new series), 1: 5–18.
Preoteasa, I. (2002) Intellectuals and the public sphere in post-communist Romania:
a discourse analytical perspective. Discourse and Society, 13: 269–92.
Przeworski, A. (1992) The neoliberal fallacy. Journal of Democracy, 3 (3): 67–84.
Putnam, L. and Fairhurst, G. (2001) Discourse analysis in organizations: Issues and
concerns. In F.M. Jablin and L. Putnam (eds) The New Handbook of Organiza-
tional Communication: Advances in Theory, Research and Methods. Newbury
Park, CA: Sage, 235–268.
Rancière, J. (1995) On the Shores of Politics. London: Verso.
Rancière, J. (2006) Hatred of Democracy. London: Verso.
Randall (Jr), J.H. (1940) The development of scientiﬁc method in the school of
Padua. Journal of the History of Ideas, 1(2): 177–206.
Ranney, A. (1976) ‘The divine science’: Political engineering in American culture.
The American Political Science Review, 70(1): 140–148.
Ray, L. and Sayer, A. (1999) Culture and Economy after the Cultural Turn. London:
Sage.
Rawles, K. (1998) Philosophy and the environmental movement. In D. Cooper 
and J. Palmer (eds) Spirit of the Environment: Religion, Value and Environmental
Concern. London: Routledge, 131–45.
Reed, M. (2000) In praise of duality and dualism: Rethinking agency and structure 
in organizational analysis. In S. Ackroyd and S. Fleetwood (eds) (2000), 45–65.
Reed, M. (2004) Getting real about organisational discourse. In D. Grant et al. (eds)
Handbook of Organizational Discourse. London: Sage, 413–420.
Rentoul, J. (1997) Tony Blair (revised edition). London: Warner Books.
Repere 2.1 (2004) România în lumea contemporan (Colloquium at New Europe
College).
Ricoeur, P. (1997) L’idéologie et l’utopie. Paris: Seuil.
Ringer, Fritz K. (2000) Max Weber’s Methodology: The Uniﬁcation of the Cultural and
Social Sciences. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Robertson, R. (1992) Globalization. London: Sage.
Rose, N. (1999) The Powers of Freedom: Reframing Political Thought. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Rose, N. and Miller, R. (1989) Rethinking the state: governing economic, social and
personal life. (Working Paper.)
Roucek, J.S. (1944) A history of the concept of ideology. Journal of the History of
Ideas, 5(4): 479–88.
Sacks, H. Schegloff, E. and Jefferson, G. (1978) A simplest systematic for the organ-
ization of turn-taking in conversation. In J. Schenkein (ed.) (1978): 7–55.
Salskov-Iversen, D., Hansen, H. and Bislev, S. (2000) Governmentality, global-
ization and local practice: transformations of a hegemonic discourse. Alternatives,
25: 183–222.
Bibliography and references
577


Sartori, G. (1969) Politics, ideology, and belief systems. The American Political
Science Review, 63(2): 398–411.
Saul, J.R. (1992) Voltaire’s Bastards: The Dictatorship of Reason in the West.
Maryborough, Australia: Penguin.
Saul, J.R. (1997) The Unconscious Civilization. Maryborough, Australia: Penguin.
Saul, J.R. (2005) The Collapse of Globalism and the Reinvention of the World.
London: Atlantic Books.
Saussure, F. de (1966/1916) Course in General Linguistics. London: McGraw Hill.
(Wade Baskin, Trans.)
Sayer, A. (1995) Radical Political Economy. Oxford: Blackwell.
Sayer, A. (2000) Realism and Social Science. London: Sage.
Sayer, A. (2005) The Moral Signiﬁcance of Class. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.
Scannell, P. (1991) Broadcast Talk. London: Sage.
Scannell, P. (1992) Public service broadcasting and modern public life. In P. Scannell
et al. (eds) Culture and Power. London: Sage.
Schank, R. and Abelson, H. (1977) Scripts, Plans, Goals and Understanding. New
York: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Schegloff, E. (1992) On talk and its institutional occasions. In P. Drew and 
J. Heritage (eds) (1992): 101–34.
Schenkein, J. (ed.) (1978) Studies in the Organization of Conversational Interaction.
New York: Academic Press.
Secretary of State for Social Security and Minister for Welfare Reform (1998) New
Ambitions for Our Country: A New Contract for Welfare. London: The Stationery
Ofﬁce.
Selden, R. (1990) The rhetoric of enterprise. In R. Keat and N. Abercrombie (eds)
(1990).
Shore and Wright (2000) Coercive accountability: the rise of audit culture in higher
education. In Strathern (ed.) (2000).
Silverstone, R. (1999) Why Study the Media? London: Sage.
Sinclair, J. and Coulthard, R.M. (1975) Towards an Analysis of Discourse: The
English Used by Teachers and Pupils. London: Oxford University Press.
Skogstad, G. (2003) Legitimacy and/or policy effectiveness?: Network governance
and GMO regulation in the European Union. Journal of European Public Policy,
10(3): 321–338.
Smith, A. (1776/1997) The Wealth of Nations (Books I–III). London: Penguin.
Smith, A. (1776/1999) The Wealth of Nations (Books IV–V). London: Penguin.
Smith, D. (1990) Texts, Facts and Femininity. London: Routledge.
Sondermann, K. (1997) Reading politically: national anthems as textual icons. In 
T. Carver and M. Hyvärinen (eds) Interpreting the Political: New Methodologies.
London: Routledge, 128–42.
Spencer, J. and Gregory, M.J. (1964) An approach to the study of style. In N. Enkvist
et al. (eds) Linguistics and Style. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
578
Bibliography and references


Sraffa, P. (1960) Production of Commodities by Means of Commodities: Prelude to 
a Critique of Economic Theory. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Stark, D. and Bruszt, L. (1998) Postsocialist Pathways: Transforming Politics and
Property in East Central Europe. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Steger, M. (2005) Globalism: Market Ideology meets Terrorism. Lanham: Rowman &
Littleﬁeld.
Stelzer, I. (ed.) (2004) Neo-Conservatism. London: Atlantic Books.
Strathern, M. (ed.) (2000) Audit Cultures: Anthropological Studies in Accountability,
Ethics and the Academy. London: Routledge.
Stubbs, M. (1983) Discourse Analysis: The Sociolinguistic Analysis of Natural
Language. Oxford: Basil Blackwell.
Swales, J. and Rogers, P. (1995) Discourse and the projection of corporate culture:
the mission statement. Discourse and Society, 6(2): 223–42.
Talbot, M. (1990) Language, Intertextuality and Subjectivity: Voices and the
Construction of Consumer Femininity. PhD Thesis Lancaster University.
Tannen, D. (1986) That’s Not What I Meant! How Conversational Style Makes or
Breaks Your Relationship with Others. New York: William Morrow.
Tannen, D. (1991) You Just Don’t Understand: Women and Men in Conversation.
London: Virago.
Tannen, D. and Wallat, C. (1986) Medical professionals and parents: a linguistic
analysis of communication across contexts. Language in Society, 15: 295–312.
Taylor, C. (1986) Foucault on discourse and truth. In D.C. Hoy (ed.) Foucault: 
A Critical Reader. Oxford: Blackwell.
ten Have, P. (1989) The consultation as a genre. In B. Torode (ed.) Talk and Text as
Social Practice. Foris.
Therborn, G. (1980) The Ideology of Power and the Power of Ideology. London: 
Verso.
Thibault, P. (1991) Social Semiotics as Praxis. University of Minnesota Press.
Thibault, P. (1997) Re-reading Saussure. London: Routledge.
Thompson, J.B. (1984) Studies in the Theory of Ideology. Cambridge: Polity Press.
Thompson, J.B. (1990) Ideology and Modern Culture. Cambridge: Polity Press.
Thorne, N., Kramarae, C. and Henley, N. (1983) Language, Gender and Society.
London: Newbury House.
Threadgold, T. (1989) Talking about genre: ideologies and incompatible dis-
courses. Cultural Studies, 3(3): 101–27.
Tolson, A. (1991) Televized chat and the synthetic personality. In P. Scannell (ed.)
(1991).
Tomlinson, J. (1999) Globalization and Culture. Cambridge: Polity Press.
Touraine, A. (1997) What is Democracy? Westview Press.
Tsoukas, H. and Chia, R. (2002) On organizational becoming: Rethinking organiza-
tional change. Organization Science, 13/5: 567–585.
Tucker, R.C. (1972) Introduction. In R.C. Tucker (ed.), The Marx-Engels Reader.
New York: W.W. Norton xv–xxxiv.
Bibliography and references
579


Turner, W. (1904) Recent literature on scholastic philosophy. The Journal of
Philosophy, Psychology and Scientiﬁc Methods, 1(8): 200–207.
Ure, J. (1982) Introduction: approaches to the study of register range. In J. Ellis and
J. Ure (eds) (1982).
van Dijk, T. (1987) Handbook of Discourse Analysis. 4 vols. New York: Academic
Press.
van Dijk, T. (1988) News as Discourse. Erlbaum.
van Dijk, T. (1998) Ideology: An Interdisciplinary Approach. London: Sage.
Van Eemeren, F. and Houtlosser, P. (eds) (2002) Dialectic and Rhetoric: The Warp
and the Woof of Argumentation Analysis. Dordrecht: Kluwer.
van Leeuwen, T. (1987) Generic strategies in press journalism. Australian Review of
Applied Linguistics, 10(2): 199–220.
van Leeuwen, T. (1993) Genre and ﬁeld in critical discourse analysis. Discourse &
Society, 4(2): 193–223.
van Leeuwen, T. (1995) Representing social action. Discourse and Society, 6(1):
81–106.
van Leeuwen T. (1996) The Representation of Social Actors. In C.R. Caldas-
Coulthard and M. Coulthard (eds) Texts and Practices. London: Routledge.
Van Leeuwen, T. (2007) Legitimation in discourse and communication. Discourse &
Communication, 1: 91–112.
Van Leeuwen, T. and Wodak, R. (1999) Legitimizing immigration control: a 
discourse-historical analysis. Discourse Studies, 1.1: 83–118.
Veblen, T. (1907) The socialist economics of Karl Marx and his followers. Quarterly
Journal of Economics, 21(2): 299–322.
Verdery, K. (2000) Privatisation as Transforming Persons. In S. Antohi and 
V. Tismaneanu (eds) Between Past and Future: The Revolutions of 1989 and Their
Aftermath, 87–104. Budapest: Central European University Press.
Volosinov, V.I. (1973) Marxism and the Philosophy of Language. New York: Seminar
Press.
Warminski, A. (1995) Hegel/Marx: Consciousness and life. Yale French Studies(88).
[Depositions: Althusser, Balibar, Macherey, and the Labor of Reading], 118–
141.
Weber, M. (1946) Politics as a vocation. In H. Gerth and C.W. Mills (eds) From Max
Weber: Essays in Sociology. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 224–46.
Weber, M. (1947) The Theory of Social and Economic Organization. New York: Free
Press.
Weick, K. (1979) The Social Psychology of Organizing. 2nd edn. Boston, MA:
Addison-Wesley.
Weinberg, J. (1968) Abstraction in the formation of concepts. In P.P. Werner (ed.)
Dictionary of the History of Ideas: Studies of Selected Pivotal Ideas: Vol. I. New
York: Charles Scribner and Sons, 1–9.
Wenger, E. (1998) Communities of Practice: Learning, Meaning and Identity.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
580
Bibliography and references


Wernick, A. (1991) Promotional Culture. London: Sage.
West, C. and Zimmerman, D.E. (1983) Small insults: a study of interruptions in
cross-sex conversations between unacquainted persons. In N. Thorne et al. (eds)
(1983).
Wilkin, P. (2001) The Political Economy of Global Communication: An Introduction.
London: Pluto Press.
Williams, G. (1999) French Discourse Analysis. London: Routledge.
Williams, R. (1976) Keywords. London: Fontana.
Williams, R. (1981) Culture. London: Fontana.
Winograd, T. (1982) Language as a Cognitive Process v.1. London: Addison-
Wesley.
Wodak, R. et al. (1990) ‘Wir Sind Alle Unschuldige Täter’. Diskurshistorische
Studien zum Nachkriegsantisemitismus. Frankfurt-am-Main: Suhrkamp.
Wodak, R. and Meyer, M. (2001) Methods in Critical Discourse Analysis. London:
Sage.
Woolgar, S. (1988) Science: The Very Idea. Chichester: Ellis Horwood.
Woolgar, S. (2002) Interpreting public concerns about GMOs: Questions of 
meaning. In C. Deane-Drummond and B. Szerszynski (with R. Grove-White)
(eds) Re-Ordering Nature: Theology, Society and the New Genetics. Edinburgh:
T&T Clark, 221–248.
Wouters, C. (1986) Formalization and informalization: changing tension balances in
civilizing processes. Theory, Culture & Society, 3(2): 1–18.
Zima, P. (1981) Les mécanismes discursifs de l’idéologie. Revue de l’institut de 
sociologie (Solvay), 4.
Bibliography and references
581


abstraction 306–8, 310, 321, 339, 340
academic conferences 109–10
academic writing 538–42
Ackroyd, S. 361–2
action 396–7, 405
advertising
academic 102–8, 116, 141–5
Althusser, L. 42, 56, 57, 59, 62, 67,
177, 294
ambivalence 152–3, 156, 184, 335
American national security strategy 452,
478–80, 483, 485–92
analysis 4–10, 26
‘anti-language’ 37
appropriateness 208, 209, 212, 537
Archer, M. 207
Arendt, H. 378, 394, 396–7, 398–9,
400
Argyle, M. 138, 139
Aristotle 306–7, 309, 319
Aristotle’s Categories 309, 310
articulation 188, 234, 400, 512–13,
516, 517
Atkinson, J. 47
authority in texts 117
authority relationships 116–17, 125,
158
‘autonomous subject effect’ 46
Index
background knowledge (BGK) 31,
34–5, 36
and goals 45–7, 50
Bakhtin, M. 174
Balibar, E. 177
Baudrillard, J. 169
Bernstein, B. 28, 76, 78, 169, 178, 181,
188, 228, 231, 368, 396, 398,
399, 520
Bhaskar, R. 175–6, 226, 235, 355
Billig, M. 64
‘biopower’ 96
body language 234, 357, 389
Bourdieu, P. 78, 169, 175, 185, 273,
282, 283, 291, 309, 390, 393,
406, 413, 414, 416, 519, 531,
545 
Butler, J. 169
Candlin, C. 143
capitalism 255–80, 281–3, 451, 
510
changes in 225, 227–8, 543
global 544, 545, 547, 553–4
influence of 82, 83, 96–100, 128
language of new capitalism 255–6,
263
new capitalism 301–3


New Labour 171
research on new capitalism 289–93,
298–9
social research 393
Cardiff 157
causal explanation (erklären) 203, 204,
205, 219 
causal powers 204–5, 209, 212, 215,
219, 355, 359,  363
of discourse 452, 502
causality 75, 165, 355, 489
‘chat’ 93, 146, 148, 157
Chia, R. 362–4
Chilton, P. 252
Chomsky, N. 480–1, 489
Chouliaraki, L. 78, 182, 226, 398
Cicourel, A.V. 36, 37
citizenship 412–18, 433–6, 530, 534,
544
Clarke, J. 179
classification 165, 181, 185–8, 193,
298, 398, 403
co-hyponyms 288, 290
collocation 385
commensurability 6
commodification of discourse 99, 
102, 141–3, 547, 551–2, 
554
communication skills 555–6
‘computational paradigm’ 50
computer-friendliness 50
consent 452, 501
construal 209–10, 501
construction 209
consumption of texts
conflation of discourses 207
contestation 211
context 95
context-free techniques 139, 140, 144,
145
contradictions in texts 134, 151, 156,
482–3, 484
convention 92–3
conversationalisation
of discourse 98, 118, 135–6, 139,
140, 542
of public discourse 157
conviction 493
‘Cooperative Principle’ 48–9
counselling 66, 97, 130, 135, 136, 143–4
Coupland, N. 168
crises 5–6, 13, 14–21
strategies 17–19, 20–1
critical discourse analysis 9, 264–7,
304–5, 357–61, 381–2,
417–20, 503–5, 555
contribution to political economic
analysis 460–3
definition of 10–11
main features 503–5
manifesto for 14–21
role for 18–19
critical language awareness (CLA)
529–30, 533, 534–43, 544–5,
547, 548–9, 550, 551, 552,
553–5
critical realism 165, 173, 354–7, 502, 554
and semiosis 165–6, 174, 202–20
approach to organisational studies
361–2
critical research priorities 17
critical research strategies 17–19
critical semiotic analysis (CSA) 212, 214
critique 7–9
critical social research 509
explanatory 554
of ideology 68
of language 532, 533
of strategies 14
of texts 229
negative 7, 14
positive 7, 14
role of 20–1
strategic 509
‘cultural political economy’ 453, 458,
484, 507
Index
583


‘cultural politics’ 437, 441, 443, 
445–6
culture, changing 172, 379, 437, 
440–4
‘culture industries’ 439
curriculum vitae 110–12
decontextualisation 76
delegitimation 493
democracy 393–4, 533, 554
globalisation 459, 461
democratisation of discourse 65,
135–6, 139–40, 265
denaturalisation 30, 129
depoliticisation 227, 241–2, 246–7,
249, 251
de-sacrilisation 280
‘descriptive approach’ 45–51
‘detraditionalisation’ 169
dialectical-relational approach 230–53,
356, 363
dialectical relations 4, 9, 19, 173, 266,
419, 451
dialectics 28, 77, 78–9, 82, 502
aim 311
appropriation/colonisation 76, 80,
293, 369, 464,  500, 518, 550,
556
arguments 310
of discourse 173–4, 266, 382,
443–4, 485
method 308–11
social practices 444
difference 165, 188–92, 550–1, 553
disarticulation 188
discoursal change 64–6, 101, 102–8,
discoursal rearticulation 62–3
Discourse 263, 273–80
discourse 3–6, 503–5
analysis as social practice 94, 95
classification 185–8
big ‘D’ 352
conventions 129, 135
definition 75, 79, 358, 381
globalisation 451, 454–5, 456–9,
476, 478
hegemony 127–31
hybrid security 479, 481, 492
nodal 465, 507
promotional 100–25, 141–5, 385–7
small ‘d’ 352
social practice 264–5
text 58–61, 75–6
transition 452
war on terror 474–5
discourse of flexibility 545–7, 549, 550,
551, 552
discourse practice 94, 102–4, 540
and hegemony 126, 130
changes in 100, 140, 541
complexity of 146
creativity of 146
mixing of 135, 136, 141, 146
normalisation and standardisation of
140, 145
of universities 100–17
policing of 138–9
public sphere 398–401
redesign of 126
shift in 116, 117–18
discourse strategies 5–6, 480, 481, 482
discourse techniques 139, 143
discourses 176
analysis 181
authority relations 431
configurations of
constructed 41–2
definition 418, 443
emergence of 19
globalisation 459–62
interpretation 174–5
interrelation with genres 434–5
materialisation 233
relations between 19–20
research methodology 508–9
‘reweaving’ 364, 367
584
Index


semiosis 213–14, 215, 232, 234
transition 505–6
‘discursive formation’ 42–3
disfluency 153–6, 158
displacement 452, 480, 482, 483, 501
distantiation 360
doctrine of abstraction 306–8
dominance 265
Drew, P. 47
‘duality of praxis’ 176
‘duality of structure’ 38, 175
‘e-Europe 2002 Action Plan’ 511
‘e-Europe+ Action Plan’ 511, 514
education 440, 464–5, 529–30, 531,
532–3, 542, 551, 555–7
educational institutions 532–3, 538,
548, 551, 553
Eizenstat, S. 461–2, 463
emergence 367–8, 398, 404–6
enactment 233, 266, 267, 369, 442–3,
444
equivalence 165, 188–92, 298, 384–5, 
relations of 512, 513, 517
equivalence/difference relations 298
ethics 100
European Area of Higher Education
464–5
‘Europeanisation’ 451
evaluating discourses 548
‘expert systems’ 98–9
‘explanatory critique’ 235
fields 175, 176, 177, 192, 232, 233, 356
Fishman, J.A. 39
Fleetwood, S. 361–2
focus groups 392–3, 395
form of texts 60
Foucault, M. 51, 58, 66, 67, 96, 97,
126, 137, 169, 358, 531
Fowler, R. 39, 60
framing 165, 181–4, 193, 398, 403, 405
Franklin, B. 179
Fraser, L. 169
French discourse analysis 93
Friedman, M. 13
Frow, J. 66
generic chaining 179–81, 302
see also genres, chaining of
genre-mixing 148, 152, 153, 154–5,
156
genre networks 244–5
genres 75–6, 78, 79, 93, 96–7, 144–5,
174, 175, 176, 177, 191, 264,
266, 268–71
ambivalence 184
analysis 181
and framing 181–4
boundary 180
chaining of 76, 182, 211, 293, 466
see also generic chaining
definition 96, 174, 358, 418–19
features 512
governmental 382
integration with discourses 189
interrelation with discourses 434–5
promotional 99, 102, 116, 141
semiosis 213–14, 215, 232, 234
social practice 443–4
struggles 423–7
Giddens, A. 38, 98, 99, 118, 548
global communications 468–71
global issues 11–12, 13, 241, 244
in research 237, 238,
global networks 473
global resources 510
global space-time 285–6, 287, 290, 293
globalisation 76–7, 78, 80, 293, 451,
454–76, 478, 484–5, 509, 549
as a discourse 451
‘globalism’ 13–14, 451, 456, 459–63,
469, 485
core claims 459
goals 31, 37, 45–51, 242
governing, modes of 164, 165
Index
585


government 176–8
Gramsci, A. 27, 56, 61, 62, 67, 94, 126,
128, 130, 140
Gray, J. 298
Grice, H.P. 48–9
Habermas, J. 89, 97, 157, 169, 208, 241,
378, 393, 394, 395, 396, 398,
399, 400, 402, 405, 493, 531 
habitus of a person 444
Hall, S. 440, 445, 446, 447
Halliday, M.A.K. 38, 92, 114, 360
Haraway, D. 169
Harvey, D. 296, 358, 400, 485, 546
Hasan, R. 173, 294
Hawkins, W. 534, 535, 537
Hayek, F. 13
hegemonic relations, restructuring 129
hegemony 28, 56, 58, 61–7, 94, 95,
126–31, 265, 368
and technologisation of discourses 137
definition 367
restructuring 140, 157–8
Heller, A. 298
hermeneutics 204, 218
heterogeneity of texts 28, 134, 141–2,
146, 151, 156
historical variables 96
Humean concept of causation 204 
hybridity 102–4, 117, 127, 156, 180,
249, 272, 290, 384, 400, 403,
472, 479, 482, 500, 510, 512,
541, 551
ideational meaning 26
identity 540, 541 
collective 398–9, 404
enactment 427–8
identity function of discourse 538
‘ideological dilemmas’ 64
ideological-discursive formation (IDF)
26–7, 30, 43–4, 46, 47, 48, 50,
51, 53
‘ideological formations’ 42–3 
‘ideological practices’ 36
ideological propositions 34, 35
ideological representations 34, 36, 42,
79
naturalisation of 44
ideologism 457
ideology 8, 9, 25–9, 46–7, 56–68, 69,
129, 311–13, 481, 502
and mediation 72–4, 78–9 
definition 46, 257
globalism 460
limits of 67–8
location of 57–8
properties of texts 57
rationalisations and 47
structures or events 27, 57
illegitimacy 493
image 61
imaginaries 266, 292, 366, 382, 444,
480, 482, 488, 507
impersonality 107, 114, 129, 538, 539,
540
implicit propositions 33–4
incompatibilities 384
inculcation 233, 266–7, 370, 444, 446
individualism 82–3
indirect readers 386
‘information society’ (IS) 452, 510–13
informalisation 98, 542
information society (IS) 506–8,
510–11, 513–17
instrumental rationality 552
instrumentalisation of discursive
practices 99
‘interdiscourse’ 58
interdiscursive analysis 7, 238, 249,
290, 291, 359, 500
interdiscursivity 94, 95, 96, 102–4,
105, 107, 170, 234, 299, 352,
360, 382, 421
international relations, changes in 452
interpersonal form/meaning 105–6
586
Index


interpretation 63
according to context 70–2
see also mediation
by social agents 208
interpretative understanding (verstehen)
204, 219
intertextual chains 420–1
intertextuality 94, 95, 175, 176, 192,
215, 234, 352–3, 420–1, 551
interview 97, 206
iterative relationships 414–15
justificatory regimes 260–3
Kanter, R. Moss 228, 255, 259, 263,
269, 272, 273, 274
‘key skills’ 555, 557
knowledge 301–2, 548, 549, 557 
definition 46
‘knowledge base’ 36, 37, 42
‘knowledge-based economy’ (KBE)
452, 506–8, 510–13
Laclau, E. 62, 165, 169, 178, 181, 188,
219, 228, 298
Lancaster 48
language 294–5, 302, 303, 313–16
awareness 534–8 
cultural changes 437–8, 441, 442,
443, 445–6, 447–8, 531
and ideology 56–68
and power 25, 28, 43–4, 304, 531,
533, 534, 541
acquisition 207
borrowed 332, 334, 335
educational failure 534, 535
functions of 92
globalisation 455, 476
in education 531–6
in new capitalism 282–3, 304
Marx’s view 336, 338–9, 340
New Labour 377–8, 380–4
skills 532
language education 529–30, 532–4,
536–7, 544–5, 550, 554
Lash, S. 99
late modernity, features of 547
learning 217
legitimacy 452, 492–4, 496, 501
deficit 493
Weber’s concept 257, 493–4
legitimation 242, 246, 273, 395, 448,
457, 493–6, 502
Levinson, S. 47, 49
linguistic analysis 7, 348, 500
Lisbon Declaration 511, 512, 513, 514,
516, 517
extract 521–2
Lucas, J. 143
Lyotard, J.-F. 169
management of contradictions 354
market research 116, 186
marketisation of discourse 14, 91, 99,
100–25, 141–3
Marx, K. 14, 175, 228–9, 257, 303–11
as a critical discourse analyst 301,
303, 316–40
meaning of texts 60
meaning-making 80, 233
and texts 72–3, 74–5, 79
see also mediation
media 79, 157, 159, 169, 405–6, 531
creation of cultural conditions 468
globalisation 451, 469–70
institutions 79
reporting violence 469–71
spin 172, 179, 180, 245, 380, 386
strategy 179
texts 73, 76, 78
mediation 28, 29, 69, 69–74, 78–9, 94
definition 72–3
of experience 471–2
medical interview 133–6
mentalities 81, 83
methodology 225–9, 234–9, 361
Index
587


Miller, R. 137
modality 94, 106–7, 112, 141, 142,
248, 272, 389
mode of signification 99–100
modernity
discursive practices 97–100, 117–18
social research on 168–70
monarchy debate 401–6, 407–11
monologue 386
Mouffe, C. 62, 165, 169, 178, 181, 188,
219, 228, 298
Mouzelis, N. 172
multi-semiotic discourse 169
Myers, G. 392, 395
national space–time 286–9, 290
naturalisation 30, 31, 34, 36, 37, 44, 48,
62, 67
neo-liberal capitalism 11–14, 16,
17–18, 20–1, 393
networks of texts 76
New Labour 164, 165, 167, 170–2,
176–82, 190–1, 245, 290,
380–5, 388–9, 546
language 377–8
‘new management ideology’ 255, 256
Newman, J. 179
nominalisation 107, 114, 214, 287,
360, 430
norms 44, 46, 48, 50
compliance with 52–3
of language use 92
objectivism 457
opacity 44, 46, 48, 80–1, 93, 337, 352
operationalisation 20, 233, 244, 266,
369–70, 459, 500
definition 367
of imaginaries 480 
opinions 392
‘orderliness’ 31, 34–5, 37
orders of discourse 28, 59, 265, 294,
295, 382, 555
and change 64, 65
as conventions 93
definition 74, 96, 358, 359, 504
rearticulation of 62
relationships between 93, 292–3
rescaling 282–3
restructuring 144, 147, 158, 282–3
semiotic dimension 232–3, 500
social 401
structuring of 58, 130,
textual action 176 
organisational discourse 347–54, 361–70
postmodernist approach 349, 350,
362
positivist approach 349, 362
realist view 349, 350, 362, 370
organisational change 347, 350, 362–71
assumptions about 366
strategies 366, 368
organisations 229, 283
oscillation in text 184
overdetermination 294–5
paratactic syntax 248, 270–1, 384
Pêcheux, M. 42–3, 56, 57
personal identity 428, 459
personalisation 102, 105–7, 114–15,
116, 388
politeness conventions 58, 60
political correctness (PC) 378–9,
437–42, 445–8
political dialogue, conflicts in 241–2
political discourse 62, 149, 151, 157–8,
292, 504, 553 
analysis 239–42, 377–90
of New Labour 178, 213
political rhetoric 249
political text analysis (samples) 242–54
text selection 245
politicisation 227, 241–2, 251
position–practice system 176
power 4, 6, 8, 9, 25–6, 27, 43, 48,
49–50, 126, 480
588
Index


and language 25, 28, 43–4, 304, 531,
532, 533, 534
and ‘technologies’ 126
asymmetry 65–6, 457
‘hard’ 463, 473, 485
‘ideological/discoursal’ 43–4, 63
ideology as a modality of power 73,
79
in education 531, 532
legitimacy 493
neglect of 48, 49, 50
political 62
relations 26, 62, 67, 77, 79, 83, 93,
96, 116–17, 130, 231
on a global scale 169
‘soft’ 463, 473, 485
techniques of 96
theory of 128
practical adequacy 501
process types 112
promotion
academic 100–25, 141–5
function of discourse
government 178
promotional culture 99
public information discourse
public sphere 392–406, 413, 553
quality assurance 465–7
quality of explanations 9
quantity of explanations 8–9
reasons as causes 205–6
recontextualisation 11, 20, 28, 29, 70,
76, 77, 78, 79, 80, 165, 181,
185–6, 187, 189, 193, 231,
233, 249, 277, 293, 368–9,
399, 401, 422, 518
definition 367, 483, 500, 520
discourses 20, 78, 81
‘global English’ 476
strategies and discourses 464
television 405
reflexivity 98–9
enhanced 548
‘regulation theory’ 506
relations of difference 275–8
relations of equivalence 277–8, 288, 290
representations 549–50
rescaling 76–7, 80, 82, 243–4, 281,
282–3, 463–8, 509
research object construction 413–17,
508, 519
restructuring 76–7, 243–4, 281, 282–3,
448
rhetoric, definition 502
rhetorical structure 512, 513, 514, 515,
516
rhetoricism 457
Romania 464–8, 513, 515–19
‘National Strategy’ 511, 513, 514,
518
extract 523–6
Rose, N. 137
rules 493
sampling 51
Saussure, F. de 38
Scannell, P. 157
Schumpeter, J. 257
self-identities 538, 539, 540
self-promotion 100, 102, 105, 107,
110–13
semantic incongruity 483, 484
semiosis 69, 74–7, 78, 79, 92, 99,
230–1, 232, 290–1, 552
and critical realism 165–6, 174,
202–20
and habitus 207–8
and methodology 226
and reasons 205–6 
causal explanation 203–4
context 206–10
forms of 357
in social structuration 210–12
transition 510
Index
589


semiotic orders 213
signifying systems 438–9
Silverstone, R. 28, 72–3, 78
skills 555–7
social activity 9–10
social change 76–7, 131, 357, 390, 418,
437–44, 447, 504, 505, 531,
548, 551
social class 25–6, 27, 42, 61, 439, 536
social constructivism 457
social events 232
social identity 140, 141, 172, 427,
428–9, 459
social institutions 39–44, 51, 52–3
determination of 40
pluralism of 42–3
struggles within 42
social linguistics 168–70, 192
social order 265
social organisation 95
social practices 78, 79, 80, 108, 172–3,
192, 232, 264–5, 294, 355–6,
421–2,
and semiosis 206
changes 443, 504
critical discourse analysis 503–4
delineated through discourse 382
dialectical view 444
networks 175, 176–7, 192, 213, 291,
292, 351, 356,  358, 359, 504,
554, 555
shift in 157
social relations 3–4, 36, 264
hegemony 63–4
hierarchical 467
changes in 141, 169
social research 164, 167, 168–70, 193,
228, 392–4
methodology 234–9
‘social skills training’ 137–8
social structure 38, 39, 74, 79, 232,
analysis of 172
and texts 206
social structuration and semiosis 210–12
social theory 91–2, 96, 164, 167–93
social welfare reform 167, 170, 172,
178–92
socialisation 39–40
sociolinguistic 
conventions 538
order 532, 537
theory 167–8, 192
Sombart, W. 258
space–time 296–8
Sraffa, P. 219
staff appraisal 467
state 127–8
ethical 128
status 48–9, 50
symbol 71
Steger, M. 459, 460, 461, 462, 484, 485
strategies 
discourse 5–6, 480, 481, 482
for change 452, 452–3, 507
globalisation/globalism 458, 462–4,
475, 479, 485
nodal 463–4, 485
political 242, 444–6
rhetorical 293
survival 472
terrorism 474
structure/action divide 175–6
struggle 42, 61–2, 64, 65, 66, 68, 79,
93, 533
emancipatory 394–5 
genre 423–7
global economy 545, 546
globalisation 451, 473
hegemonic 129, 130–1, 136, 144,
265, 368 
recontextualisation 77
style 61, 75, 76, 78, 79, 174, 175, 176,
268, 271–3,  358, 419, 427–30
political 382
semiosis 213–14, 215, 232, 234
social practice 444
590
Index


‘subject positioning’ 422–3
summaries 180–1
‘synthetic personalisation’ 65, 98, 99
technologisation of discourse 3, 98,
126–7, 130, 136, 137–45, 543,
552
tense 248
terrorism 452, 456, 473–5, 487,
488–90, 495–9
text 94, 131–2, 173–4, 294, 351–3,
359, 360
advocative 249
and meaning-making 72–3, 74–5,
79, 206
see also mediation
as an actualisation of potentials 487
definition 95
effects 362
combination 189, 190, 191
‘connectivity’ 336, 337
division 189, 190–1
semiotic dimension 232, 233
selection 245
societal 169
‘textscape’ 352
textual analysis 6–7, 10, 419–20, 484,
487, 500
general method in CDA 238
texturing 10, 174, 191, 193, 215, 216,
218, 275–9, 288–9, 360, 367,
491–2, 512
theories, types 519–20
theory of cognition 307
Thompson, J.B. 66
time 248
Tolson, A. 146
Touraine, A. 393, 399
transdisciplinary 
approach 164, 167, 168, 169, 192,
193, 255–80, 295, 305, 398,
520
methodology 5–6, 225, 226, 227,
228
research 230–1, 279, 357, 364, 506
transdisciplinarity 295–6
transformation 
of text 73, 76
social 76–7
transformational model 9
transition 452, 505–6
theorising 506–10
transitivity 94, 107
truth 208, 209, 212
truthfulness 208, 209, 212
Tsoukas, H. 362–4
turn-taking 49, 58, 59, 60
unequal encounters 48, 49
universities 101–2
marketisation 101–25, 141
university prospectus 141–4
values 272, 329
verbal interactions 37–8, 41
Wacquant, L. 282, 283, 390
war 456, 473–5
war on terror 474–5, 485, 495–6
Weber, M. 256, 257
Williams, R. 438–9
Winograd, T. 36, 50
wrongs 226, 227, 231, 232, 235–9,
243–50 
Index
591