Inside the CNN Center in Atlanta.


CABLE NEWS NETWORK
A PROFILE IN GEORGIA’S BUSINESS HISTORY
Cable News Network (CNN) is an international news 
outlet that is headquartered in Atlanta, Georgia. CNN 
broadcasts from several U.S. cities, has numerous 
affiliates, and reaches countries throughout the world. 
CNN broke ground as the first 24-hour news channel. 
Around the clock, CNN gathers and delivers information 
to audiences in the United States and internationally. 
It began in the cable television market, and has grown 
to offer the latest news via the internet and multimedia 
technology. CNN has provided news coverage of 
important domestic and international events over the 
past four decades, winning awards and often being the 
first to uncover major stories. 
CNN’s exciting news revolution began in Atlanta and the 
company continues to have a significant impact on the 
state of Georgia.


THE FOUNDATION FOR CNN
You might imagine that the first 24-hour news network 
started in New York City or Washington, D.C., but 
the story of live news available around-the-clock 
started in Georgia. Headquartered in Atlanta, the 
Cable News Network (CNN) broadcasted live for 
the first time on June 1, 1980, but the journey to 
that point started decades earlier.   
Robert Edward Turner III, better known as 
Ted Turner, inherited his father’s outdoor 
advertisement business, Turner Advertising 
Company, in his twenties. As billboard 
advertisement became less popular, Ted Turner 
successfully expanded the empire by investing in 
radio and television. The first channel, WTCG, 
was an Atlanta-based UHF (Ultra-High 
Frequency) channel. UHF channels travel 
on higher frequency wavelengths but 
the wavelengths themselves are shorter 
than a lower frequency wave. They 
could only cover one city or region 
and required a special antenna, which 
made them harder to receive and more 
expensive to afford. 
By 1968, only half of the television sets 
in homes could receive UHF channels. 
Instead of waiting for the number of 
UHF-ready homes to grow, the company 
switched to cable to broadcast WTCG. 
While initially costly, the investment proved 
worthwhile. CATV (Community Antenna 
Television, or cable television) services could 
reach most regions in Georgia, and parts of 
Ted Turner while working for his father’s 
business, Turner Advertising Company


Alabama and Florida. New cable channels, as well as UHF channels, could come through the cable 
hookup and have equal picture quality. Most of Turner’s competitors, such as ABC, NBC, and CBS, 
only used UHF, making them noticeably more expensive and less accessible, especially for more rural 
states such as Georgia.  
In 1976, the cable industry evolved again, as Turner Communications Group employed satellites as 
the means of distribution for cable television. Satellite broadcasting gave subscribers a high-quality 
picture, regardless of weather and distance. A satellite could beam television to multiple providers 
across the U.S. Buying satellite access was expensive, but Turner took the risk. WTCG, renamed WTBS 
(Turner Broadcasting System or TBS), aired its first satellite transmission on December 17, 1976.  
On June 1, 1980, Turner’s most ambitious and transformative project aired. Cable News Network 
(CNN) was specifically named to advertise its use of cable and news. It was available to cable 
subscribers across the nation, unlike UHF channels. In establishing the world’s first 24-hour, all-news 
channel, Ted Turner created his own niche in the television industry. News programs were highly 
profitable segments, but no other network made it their sole focus until then.
BUILDING CNN FROM THE BOTTOM UP 
Launching CNN took over 11 months of grueling work. Turner bought the Progressive Club, a Jewish 
country club in midtown Atlanta. The space was renovated to provide studio and office space for 
CNN. In the meantime, Turner hired staff to run the new channel. This proved difficult because it was 
impossible to know whether cable news would be popular. To make the channel work on a budget, 
he hired college students as “veejays” who could work long hours to gain in-field experience for 
little pay, thus creating the position now known as Video Journalists. 
Left: Ted Turner with WTCG camera . Right: TBS satellite dish.


At first, CNN was not treated like a legitimate 
news outlet. It was not granted press access 
to the White House because it was not seen 
as worthy to cover Capitol news. In 1982, 
the Supreme Court of Georgia declared that 
excluding CNN from the White House was a 
violation of the first amendment, which protects 
freedom of the press. Being the underdogs, CNN 
looked for creative ways to gain new subscribers. 
For example, as a promotion, Turner offered the 
channel to cable distributors free for a 24-hour 
trial, which exposed cable subscribers to an all-
news channel. Many viewers enjoyed CNN, and 
its subscription ratings gradually increased. 
CNN developed CNN2 (later renamed Headline 
News), which first aired on January 1, 1982. 
Unlike CNN, it worked on a wheel system: 
news aired on a 30-minute cycle of headline 
stories, followed by 2 minutes of local news. 
Entertainment, sports, and weather were also 
announced at specific times in each cycle. Each 
cycle presented updated and revised information. 
The system was fast, brief, and informative. 
Viewers could watch short segments and learn 
enough to stay up-to-date. If there was “breaking 
news,” the cycle would be interrupted to let the 
headline story take center stage. 
Other networks toyed with the idea of their 
own all-news stations, including Westinghouse 
Electric Corporation partnering with American 
Broadcasting Companies (ABC) to form Satellite 
News Channel. Turner bought their project, 
thereby eliminating CNN’s main competitor. CNN 
would not face similar competition again until the 
establishment of MSNBC and Fox News in 1996.
As CNN grew, Turner acquired the Omni 
International Hotel in downtown Atlanta. He 
made it CNN’s headquarters and renamed it the 
CNN Center in 1985. The move boosted Atlanta’s 
downtown economy, and today the Center is 
a popular tourism spot where visitors can tour 
CNN’s headquarters. 
CNN Cable News Studio, May 31, 1980


COVERING NEWS WORLDWIDE 
A meeting in 1982 sparked Ted Turner’s desire for CNN to be a worldwide news outlet. Fidel Castro, 
a huge fan of CNN, invited Turner to Cuba for a meet-and-greet in February. Castro became a fan 
of the channel when he bought a satellite dish and realized he could receive the network’s satellite 
signal. After their meeting, Turner wanted to bring nations into dialogue with one another through 
television news. Once CNN accrued stable profitability, it established headquarters in several 
European nations. In 1985, CNN International launched, reporting live from foreign nations. By 2000, 
it expanded to Asia Pacific, Latin America, and South Asia.
In October of 1990, CNN interviewed Saddam Hussein, which attracted substantial criticism. CNN 
was criticized by some American viewers for giving Hussein a platform to share his views. However, 
CNN believed in reporting unbiased news. Preparing to conduct a second interview with Hussein, 
CNN reporters Bernard Shaw, John Holliman, and Peter Arnett were at CNN’s Iraqi headquarters 
when Operation Desert Storm began. During the operation, the reporters covered the invasion live, 
giving a play-by-play of the attack for both Americans and Iraqis. The coverage caused a significant 
growth in CNN subscription. This was CNN’s big break in worldwide news coverage. 
CNN broke ground in news on the Internet as well. In 1995, CNN launched its website, CNN.com. 
At first, it was an experiment known as CNN Interactive. Since its launch, the website has come to 
incorporate American and international news, press releases, live television, and more. 
Left: CNN’s live coverage of the Gulf War. 
Right: President Ronald Reagan talks with 
CNN’s Bernard Shaw and Ted Turner.


In 1996, Turner Broadcasting System (TBS), 
CNN’s parent company, merged with Time 
Warner, Inc., making it a subsidiary of Time 
Warner. Time Warner combined with America 
Online (AOL) in 2001, making CNN part of the 
world’s largest multimedia conglomerate. 
From an office building in Atlanta, Georgia, 
to an iconic headquarters in that city and 
38 editorial stations worldwide, CNN rapidly 
grew under Ted Turner’s leadership within 
only a few decades. CNN subscribers receive 
informative, live news coverage not only 
in America, but around the globe 24 hours 
a day. Because of CNN, the television and 
news industries have been dramatically 
transformed. The company continues to 
revolutionize news around the world.
The Time Warner Center houses CNN’s New York studio. 
Today CNN primarily broadcasts from its studios in New York,  
Washington, D.C., and Los Angeles.


CNN’S ENTREPRENEURIAL 
FOUNDER: TED TURNER 
For Ted Turner, success seems to come naturally. However, he 
was not always so successful. Ted Turner has earned a legacy 
of accomplishment and philanthropy through dedication, 
innovation, and a willingness to take risks, which are qualities 
he developed through experiences from a young age and 
throughout his adult life.
As a teenager, Turner attended McCallie School, a Christian military academy. There, he excelled on the 
school’s competitive debate team. Turner believed this experience taught him to seek unconventional 
approaches to problems, which he later used in his business challenges. Over his summer vacations, 
Turner’s father employed him to work for Turner Advertising Company. He developed a strong work 
ethic and gained business experience while his classmates enjoyed their vacations. 
His sense of adventure and competitive nature came from his years of sailing. As a child he 
accompanied his father to the marina where he learned the sport. He competed while in college at 
Brown University, and for decades after kept racing. In 1977, he competed and won the America’s 
Cup, a prestigious, international yacht race. These experiences developed Turner into an adroit and 
driven entrepreneur. 
Later, after a meeting with Fidel Castro in Cuba, Turner became passionate about creating 
communication between foreign nations. In 1985, Turner founded a non-profit, Better World Society, 
to increase awareness of global issues. Taking place during the Cold War rivalry with the Soviet Union, 
its biggest project, the Goodwill Games, was highly controversial. As a response to the American 
boycott of the 1980 Moscow Olympic Games, and the Soviet boycott of the 1984 Los Angeles Olympic 
Games, the Goodwill Games provided an opportunity for athletes to compete without pressure from 
the Cold War. They were hosted in the Soviet Union, where American and Russian athletes peacefully 
participated. In the end, Turner lost $25 million over the venture, but the games had helped in 
mending the relationships between the nations and their athletes.
Since stepping down as vice chair of Time Warner in 2003 and the board of directors in 2006, Turner 
has immersed himself in philanthropic work. With his private business, Turner Enterprises, Inc., he works 
to restore ecological sustainability on his ranches, including its wildlife. The buffalo population has 
especially grown, as the private land protects them from hunters. Turner Foundation, Inc. likewise seeks 


to revive natural ecosystems. In 2010, Ted Turner was 
named a Georgia Trustee by the Georgia Historical 
Society for his work in media and philanthropy. 
Turner received a News & Documentary Emmy® 
Award for Lifetime Achievement in 2015 because of 
his lasting impact on the industry. 
Turner believes the founding of CNN was an 
important accomplishment because of its immense 
impact on discussions of global news. There is no 
doubt that without his leadership, CNN would not 
be the same company, Georgia would not be the 
same state, and the world would not communicate 
the way it does today.
Ted Turner and Hank Aaron were featured on the cover 
of Georgia Trend magazine in February 2010 for their 
induction as Georgia Trustees..


GIVING CNN THE CHANCE IT DESERVED
A CASE STUDY IN GEORGIA’S BUSINESS HISTORY 
To create a successful business, Ted Turner made many profitable decisions, but some decisions 
were mistakes, too. Being an entrepreneur is not easy: It requires risk, courage, and determination, 
as well as leadership abilities and business skills. Turner Broadcasting System, Inc. under Ted Turner’s 
leadership persevered through decades of financial losses and successes as it revolutionized the 
television market. 
Many were skeptical of Turner’s idea for a specialized television channel. The public asked: Was there 
a viable, profitable market for such a channel? Could it compete with competitors like ABC, CBS and 
NBC? Could it compete on a budget that was only a fragment of its competitors? Turner believed 
that many Americans did not want to wait until the evening to receive news and were interested in 
specialized networks, so he was willing to take the risk to try.
Entrance to the CNN Center in Atlanta.


Once CNN aired in 1980, many mockingly called it the 
“Chicken Noodle Network” because of its small financial 
resources, and many believed it would not last. At first, the 
fees from CNN’s 1.7 million subscribers could not cover the 
channel’s operating costs. While Turner promoted CNN as 
a channel, cable television itself grew in popularity. Many 
television companies like HBO and CBS followed Turner 
and began to provide satellite cable services and stopped 
providing UHF and over-the-air services. As a result, more 
homes in America gained cable access and CNN drastically 
grew to 33 million by 1983.  
As the channels CNN and TBS grew, Turner bought Metro-
Goldwyn-Mayer Studios, Inc. (MGM), a film and television 
program company. With the 1985 purchase, Turner aimed 
to acquire its films to air on his channels. However, MGM 
was financially unstable, and Turner overlooked its long-term debts while evaluating MGM’s financial 
statements, and he bought the business for more than it was worth. This negatively impacted Turner 
Broadcasting System, Inc.’s finances and he had to work overtime to recover. As a solution, Turner 
continued his trend of risk-taking, and Turner Broadcasting System founded a new channel, Turner 
Network Television (TNT) in 1988. Despite absorbing the loss from the MGM purchase, Turner spent 
more of Turner Broadcasting System’s money to create TNT that many cable providers debated over 
carrying. This time, Turner focused on providing content with which viewers would be familiar, but 
to which they would not have otherwise had regular access. With TNT, Turner used the MGM library 
to play re-runs of old television shows and motion picture films, and occasional original films and 
programs. The channel followed the business models of CNN and CNN2 by generating its profits from 
advertisements and subscriber fees and likewise was a specialized channel for entertainment. Over 
time, it became highly profitable and increasingly generated its own programming rather than relying 
on the MGM archives, which eventually developed into Turner Classic Movies (TCM).
With determination, Turner courageously pursued his vision for the future of television. He pushed 
through many risky decisions to create a television empire from Turner Broadcasting System. Despite a 
small budget and competition, Turner optimized the television market for CNN early on by providing 
only cable services. He did not make cost-effective choices with each business decision, but continued 
to lead the company toward profits. Today, many of his channels remain successful and popular with a 
worldwide audience, despite meager beginnings in Georgia.
Ted Turner on horseback at his ranch.


INDEX OF ACRONYMS
ABC – American Broadcasting Company, a rival 
radio and television company to TBS.
AOL – America Online, an online service provider.
CATV – Community Antenna Television, also 
known as cable television.
CBS – Columbia Broadcasting System, a rival 
radio and television company to TBS. 
CNN – Cable News Network, a cable television 
channel featuring news.
CNN2 – Cable News Network 2, later renamed 
Headline News.
HBO – Home Box Office, a cable and satellite 
television network.
MGM – Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer Studios, Inc., a film 
and television programming company.
MSNBC – Microsoft National Broadcasting 
Company, a rival cable news outlet to CNN.
NBC – National Broadcasting Company, a rival 
radio and television company to TBS.
TBS – Turner Broadcasting System, the company 
owned by Ted Turner, and later a cable television 
channel.
TCM – Turner Classic Movies, a film and television 
programming company.
TNT – Turner Network Television, a cable 
television channel owned by TBS.
UHF – Ultra-High Frequency, a form of television 
channel transmission.
WTBS – Turner Broadcasting System, television 
channel previously called WTCG and later 
renamed TBS.
WTCG – television channel meaning Turner 
Communications Group, also the name of Turner’s 
business before it was renamed to TBS.
CNN FAST FACTS 
» On CNN’s kickoff in 1980, 1.7 million cable 
households could receive the channel. 
» The first cable operators who bought 
CNN paid $0.20 a month per subscriber, and 
$0.15 if they also bought TBS SuperStation. 
» CNN now reaches more than 96.2 million 
household in the U.S. alone. 
» CNN’s networks reach over 200 countries 
and territories and more than 2 billion 
people have access.
» Worldwide, CNN owns 38 editorial 
operations and over 1,000 affiliates to carry 
its coverage. 
» As the number one online news site, CNN 
Digital receives over 1.5 billion page views 
every month.
GEORGIA STANDARDS 
FOR EXCELLENCE
SS8E2: Evaluate the influence of Georgia-
based businesses on the State’s economic 
growth and development. 
a. Describe how profit is an incentive for 
entrepreneurs. 
b. Explain how entrepreneurs take risks to 
develop new goods and services to start a 
business. 
c. Evaluate the economic impact of various 
industries in Georgia including agricultural, 
entertainment, manufacturing, service, and 
technology. 


CNN TIMELINE
1980: CNN launched on June 1st as the first 
24-hour, all-news television channel.
1982: CNN launched a spinoff channel 
called CNN2, or Headline News on 
January 1st. It was the first news station 
to utilize the “wheel” schedule.
1983: Turner bought Satellite News Channel owned by ABC, eliminating 
CNN’s main competitor.
1985: CNN International was launched.
1987: CNN moved into the CNN Center 
in Atlanta.
1991: The Persian Gulf War helped CNN grow its audience with live 
coverage, airing events before other networks.
1995: On August 30th, CNN launched its 
website, CNN.com. At first, it was known as 
CNN Interactive.
1996: CNN merged with Time Warner. 
CNN receives its first major 
competition with the launch of MSNBC and Fox News.
2001: Time Warner and CNN combined with America Online to 
create the world’s largest media conglomerate.
2003: Ted Turner stepped down as Vice Chair of Time Warner.
Christiane Amanpour, 
Chief International 
Anchor for CNN


This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-
NoDerivatives 4.0 International License.
Images throughout the publication are courtesy of CNN.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Battin, Jim. “Profiles: The 2010 Georgia Trustees: Henry Aaron and Ted Turner,” Georgia History Today, Winter 2010, vol. 4 no. 1. 
Savannah, GA: Georgia Historical Society, 2010. http://georgiahistory.com/wp-content/uploads/2013/08/GHT_V.4.1_For_Web.pdf. 
Bibb, Porter. It Ain’t as Easy as It Looks: Ted Turner’s Amazing Story. New York: Crown Publishers, 1993.
Clark, Kenneth R. “Ted Turner responds to network challenge.” Ellensburg Daily Record. (Washington: United Press International), 
August 12, 1981. https://news.google.com/newspapers?id=u0tPAAAAIBAJ&sjid=CY8DAAAAIBAJ&pg=4017%2C4080465. 
CNBC. “Titans Ted Turner.” Films for the Humanities & Sciences, Films Media Group: New York, NY, 2010.
CNN. “How the Man Behind CNN Was Inspired By Classics.” Amanpour. July 31, 2015. http://www.cnn.com/videos/world/2015/07/31/
intv-amanpour-ted-turner-a.cnn/video/playlists/amanpour-ted-turner/ 
CNN. “‘There’s Not One Blemish on My Honor.’” Amanpour. July 31, 2015.  http://www.cnn.com/videos/world/2015/07/31/intv-
amanpour-ted-turner-c.cnn/video/playlists/amanpour-ted-turner/. 
CNN. “Ted Turner Recalls Meeting with Fidel Castro.” Amanpour. July 31, 2015. http://www.cnn.com/videos/world/2015/07/31/intv-
amanpour-ted-turner-b.cnn/video/playlists/amanpour-ted-turner/.   
CNN Library. “Ted Turner Fast Facts.” CNN. May 23, 2017. http://www.cnn.com/2013/07/03/us/primetime-emmys-fast-facts/index.html. 
Doepker, Rachel. “Business Reference Services.” Library of Congress. March 2009. https://www.loc.gov/rr/business/businesshistory/
June/cnn.html.
Flournoy, Don M. and Robert K. Stewart. CNN: Making News in the Global Market. Luton, England: University of Luton Press, 1997.
Hughes, Lain. “CNN.” The New Georgia Encyclopedia. Edited by NGE Staff, 2013. http://www.georgiaencyclopedia.org/articles/arts-
culture/cnn. 
Leon, Charles L. Ponce de. That’s the Way It Is: A History of Television News in America. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2015.
The National Academy of Television Arts and Sciences. “Ted Turner Visionary Founder of CNN Who Revolutionized Television News 
to Receive News and Documentary Emmy® Award for Lifetime Achievement.” Press Release. July 30, 2015. http://emmyonline.com/
news_36th_lifetime_achievement. 
Ted Turner Enterprises, Inc. “About.” Ted Turner Enterprises, Inc. http://www.tedturner.com/about.  
Turner Foundation, Inc. “About Us.” Turner Foundation, Inc. http://www.turnerfoundation.org/about-us/. 
Turner, Ted. Call Me Ted. New York: Grand Central Publishing, 2008.
Whittemore, Hank. CNN, The Inside Story. Boston: Little, Brown, c. 1990. 




See discussions, stats, and author profiles for this publication at: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/242268115
From Network News to Cable Commentary: The Evolution of Television
Coverage of the Party Conventions
Article · January 2005
CITATIONS
4
READS
542
1 author:
Jonathan S. Morris
East Carolina University
43 PUBLICATIONS   2,097 CITATIONS   
SEE PROFILE
All content following this page was uploaded by Jonathan S. Morris on 05 February 2015.
The user has requested enhancement of the downloaded file.


 
 
From Network News to Cable Commentary:  
 
The Evolution of Television Coverage of the Party Conventions 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Jonathan S. Morris, Assistant Professor 
Department of Political Science 
East Carolina University 
Greenville, NC 27858 
morrisj@mail.ecu.edu 
 
 
Peter L. Francia, Assistant Professor 
Department of Political Science 
East Carolina University 
Greenville, NC 27858 
 franciap@mail.ecu.edu 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Paper prepared for presentation at the State of the Parties Conference, University of Akron, 
Akron, OH, October 5-7, 2005. 
 
* We wish to thank Amanda Hodges and Rebecca Buzzard for their assistance on this project.  


 
1 
Modern national party conventions are not what they once were.  Before the late 1960s, 
party leaders dominated the nomination process.  They controlled the party delegates and 
brokered the deals that ultimately determined the party’s presidential nominee.  However, after 
the defeat of Democrat Hubert Humphrey to Republican Richard Nixon in 1968, Democrats 
adopted reforms to their nomination process.  The Democratic Party created the McGovern-
Fraser Commission, which recommended that the presidential nomination process become more 
democratic and open to rank-and-file party members.  To achieve that goal, the Democrats 
reformed their nomination rules so that primaries and caucuses became more important in 
determining the party’s presidential nominee.  Under the new rules, presidential candidates who 
won the primaries and caucuses earned “pledged delegates” and could secure the nomination 
before the actual convention took place.  Shortly after the McGovern-Fraser reforms, the 
Republican National Committee established the Delegates and Organization Committee, which 
also recommended a more democratic nomination process.  By 1976, both political parties had 
effectively transformed their nomination process (see e.g., Polsby 1983; DiClerico and Uslaner 
1984; Crotty and Jackson 1985; Reiter 1985).   
While the reforms created a more democratic system, they also eliminated the suspense 
of multi-ballot voting during the convention that once determined the nomination winner.  With 
the nomination battle now effectively determined before the party convention, there is less 
conflict and infighting on the convention floor and virtually no suspense or conflict to report. As 
a consequence, some in the mass media argue that the party conventions deserve only minimal 
coverage because they contain such little news value.  In the words of former CBS anchor, Dan 
Rather, “The people who run the conventions have given the networks every reason to pass up 
the full coverage of the past by squeezing out any real news” (Lewis and Carter 2004).   


 
2 
In addition, the party itself is no longer the focus of its own convention.  Party 
conventions now promote an image of party cohesion and unwavering support for the 
presidential nominee.  The preordained candidate takes center stage in the dual effort of 
mobilizing the party base and attracting possible swing voters, leading some critics to charge that 
the party conventions resemble highly controlled television “infomercials.”  As the party 
conventions have evolved into what some television network executives consider little more than 
made-for-television propaganda devices, media coverage from the big three broadcast networks 
(i.e., ABC, CBS, NBC) has steadily declined (Karabell 1998).  
While the networks have largely turned away from the conventions, the cable news 
channels have picked up much of the coverage.  CNN, MSNBC, and Fox News committed all of 
their prime time hours to covering each night of the conventions, and their increase in the ratings 
was substantial.  MSNBC’s ratings doubled from 2000 to 2004, and Fox News’ audience 
increased by more than four fold (Kurtz 2004a).  These increases are noteworthy because while 
many pundits and scholars have discussed the waning interest of the broadcast networks in 
covering the conventions, few political observers have given attention to how the cable channels 
have swept in, and how their coverage differs from that of the major networks.   
This study offers an analysis of cable news coverage of the party conventions in 2004 and 
compares it to past and present network coverage.  Our findings indicate that the parties’ 
attempts to control their public image by presenting the conventions as tightly choreographed 
“infomercials” has somewhat backfired in today’s cable news environment.  Unlike the seldom-
watched C-SPAN, which covers the floor speeches without interruption, CNN, MSNBC, and 
Fox News often forgo coverage of speakers and instead showcase analysis and debate among 
pundits, journalists, and politicians in a talk-show format.  We will demonstrate that this type of 


 
3 
analysis is not always complementary and often riddled with political banter that would only 
appeal to those who are the most politically interested and partisan.  This type of coverage also 
runs the risk of embittering and alienating swing voters. 
 
Party Conventions on Network Television 
Philadelphia was host to the first televised party convention in 1948 (Jarvis 2004).  
However, the impact of television coverage was small, as only 350,000 people owned television 
sets at the time.  It was four years later, in 1952, when television began to make a major 
impression on the process and the public.  In total, the networks televised over 128 hours of both 
conventions, and the average household actually viewed more than 10 hours of the coverage 
(Karabell 1998).  According to network estimates, somewhere between one-third and one-half of 
the American public watched at least some portion of party conventions on television (Lang and 
Lang 1984).  The news media had closely covered the party conventions before, but the 
combination of audio and visual coverage brought the spectacle to life for the public in an 
unprecedented manner.  Zachary Karabell observed that: 
Radio allowed people to witness, albeit aurally, what was transpiring in the 
convention hall.  But television added a dimension that radio could not.  By 
transmitting both sound a pictures, television helped transform the convention 
into a spectacular event, one part political process, one part circus, one part down-
home revival meeting (1998, 4) 
 
It was also in 1952 that the parties began to alter their convention proceedings to account 
for the presence of television cameras.  Both parties chose Chicago to allow for prime time 
viewing across time zones, and both parties carefully considered which issues its speakers would 
discuss in full view of the cameras (Karabell 1998).  This practice of designing and organizing 
the convention to accommodate television and its viewers continued throughout the following 


 
4 
decades.  Television producers and the parties entered into an era of “cordial concurrence,” 
where the shared goal of cooperation was to create a television product that was newsworthy and 
entertaining, but still allowed the parties to convey the appropriate image (Smith and Nimmo 
1991; Rosenstiel 1993).  In short, party conventions were being curtailed in terms of length and 
production style to become “made-for-TV” events. 
 
For television broadcasters, the media buzz and public anticipation surrounding the 
conventions turned the events into “the Olympics of newscasting” (Karabell 1998).  The 
convention proceedings themselves were only part of the televised spectacle.  Through the 1950s 
and 1960s, the networks capitalized on the high ratings and national exposure to showcase their 
human and technological talents.  The exposure possibilities gave news anchors and floor 
correspondents a once-in-a-lifetime opportunity to become household names.   
As the efforts to showcase these talents became more obvious, the networks abandoned 
coverage of the more mundane procedures to provide journalists and commentators more time 
for analysis and discussion.  The networks were amidst heated ratings battles, and it became 
clearer to news producers that focusing on the conflict and drama of the conventions was the 
most effective manner of capturing and maintaining a viewing audience.  Mundane procedural 
coverage, it seemed, drove viewers away (Smith and Nimmo 1991; Karabell 1998).  This 
situation led party leaders and the nominees to become increasingly wary that control over their 
image was at risk.  Their response was to move away from cordial concurrence and toward a 
more scripted event. 
 
Additionally, the networks’ search for more captivating happenings was not entirely a 
ratings-driven endeavor.  Following the debacles of the 1960s (the Republicans in 1964 and the 
Democrats in 1968) where the networks aired deep intra-party division and controversies to the 


 
5 
entire electorate, each party instituted even tighter control over how it transmitted its image and 
that of its presidential nominee to the public.  The Democrats still encountered difficulties 
controlling the 1972 convention, as delegates actively debated controversial issues such as 
abortion and homosexuality, and the party’s eventual nominee, George McGovern, endured 
sharp criticisms as an ideological extremist from other Democrats during the convention 
proceedings (Paletz and Elson 1976). By the mid-1970s, however, both parties had become 
better at controlling internal party debates and disagreements at the convention.  The parties, for 
example, increased security to thwart protestors both inside and outside the convention halls, and 
strongly discouraged so-called “party mavericks” from speaking at the convention.  Under this 
more controlled and choreographed environment, television journalists began to turn away from 
happenings on the floor and focus coverage on more newsworthy events transpiring behind the 
scenes (Schudson 1996). 
 
Procedural reforms further contributed to the lack of any “real news” coming from the 
convention proceedings.  While the convention delegates officially voted for the party’s nominee 
at the convention, the primaries process ensured that, in almost all cases, the winner of the 
nomination was a forgone conclusion before the convention convened.  Also, the Democrats 
eliminated their two-thirds majority rule for the nomination in 1936 and adopted the Republican 
rule of a simple majority (Davis 1983; Patterson 2002).1  As a result, no party had gone past the 
first ballot since 1952.  By altering the process, a once deliberative process became part 
coronation, part pep-rally.  The dramatic political spectacle of vote swapping and multiple 
                                                 
1 The Democrats decision to move away from the two-thirds rule was mostly in response to the 1924 convention in 
New York City.  The northern delegates favored New York Governor Al Smith, while those from the south 
supported William McAdoo, son-in-law of former president Wilson (Patterson 2002; Murray 1976).  After 102 
ballots, delegates were eventually released and John W. Davis won on the 103rd ballot. 


 
6 
ballots that characterized so many conventions before essentially vanished from the modern 
scene. 
 
Since the 1970s, broadcast journalists and the public have grown increasingly tired of 
what has become the quadrennial infomercial.  The amount of airtime devoted to convention 
coverage has decreased precipitously, as have the ratings. The thirty plus hours of gavel-to-gavel 
coverage provided by each of the networks in the 1960s has disintegrated to a miniscule three 
hours over four nights in 2004.2  Furthermore, the average ratings have been almost halved from 
30 points in 1960 to barely 15 points in 2004 (Patterson 2004).  Several network journalists have 
publicly condemned the lack of newsworthiness at conventions.  Ted Koppel and the crew of 
ABC’s “Nightline” actually left the Republican National convention in 1996 after the second day 
of coverage, claiming that they were “bored and had better things to do” (Broder 1996).  During 
the Democratic convention of 2004, CBS anchor Dan Rather summed up his views on the 
modern day conventions: 
I wish I could take a stronger argument to my bosses (for more coverage).  But 
it’s basically an infomercial….I understand it’s a public service, but most would 
need a speed-yawning course to get through it (Lewis and Carter 2004). 
 
NBC’s Tom Brokaw echoed a similar sentiment.  While covering the last night of the Republican 
convention, the last of his career, he complained that, “These events are managed down to the 
last semicolon.  That’s why I find it hard to climb those stairs and get into the anchor chair 
anymore” (Carter 2004).  Both during and after the Democratic and Republican National 
Conventions in 2004, there was significant speculation among pundits and journalists that at least 
one of the big three networks may chose not to cover the 2008 conventions at all.  Dan Rather 
                                                 
2 The networks did not cover the second night of the Democratic National Convention, nor did they cover the first 
night of the Republican Convention.  During each of the other three nights, one hour of coverage was slotted on 
each network from 10pm-11pm. 


 
7 
himself noted that CBS executives were considering reducing the already paltry three nights of 
coverage to two (Carter 2004). 
 
Cable Coverage of Party Conventions 
As the networks have deemed the party conventions to be both uninteresting and lacking 
newsworthiness, the cable news channels have been more than happy to fill in the coverage gap.  
Before the 2004 Democratic National convention in Boston, more than one-in-three (36 percent) 
Americans reported that they were interested in following what was going to happen there (Pew 
Research Center 2004).  While this is a stark drop from 53 percent in 1992, the level of interest 
displayed in 2004 still had the potential to translate into significant increases in the ratings for the 
cable news networks in comparison to their regular prime-time lineups.  Indeed, this turned out 
to be the case.  During the Democratic convention, CNN averaged 2.3 million viewers during the 
prime-time hours of 8 pm-11 pm, Fox News averaged 2.1 million viewers, and MSNBC 
averaged 1.3 million viewers (Kurtz 2004a). 
While these numbers do represent a significant boost for the cable news stations, they 
should be placed in context of the network coverage.  For example, on Tuesday night of the 
Democratic convention, there was no network coverage, and the average total cable convention 
audience was an estimated 6 million.  That same night, CBS captured over 9 million viewers for 
the reality shows “Big Brother” and “The Amazing Race” (Ostow 2004).  During the Republican 
convention in September, however, the competition turned in favor of the cable networks, 
particularly the Fox News Network.  Fox News made history by drawing in a larger audience 
than ABC, CBS, and NBC during each of the three nights the networks covered it.  Table 1 
outlines the average ratings for each news station during the Republican convention.  While all 


 
8 
stations showed an increase in ratings across each night of the convention, Fox’s rise was the 
sharpest and the highest each evening. 
[Table 1 here] 
 
 
The unprecedented success of Fox during the Republican convention marked a major 
victory over chief rival CNN in a ratings war that has been ongoing since the late 1990s (see 
Auletta 2003; Collins 2004).  CNN did beat Fox during the Democratic Convention, but the 
overall victory was only by a few hundred thousand viewers.  During the keynote hours of 
10pm-11pm, CNN averaged 4 million viewers while Fox averaged 2.6 million and MSNBC 
averaged 2.2 million.  This victory was much smaller than Fox’s domination during the 
Republican convention.  Furthermore, CNN came nowhere near competing with the networks 
during the Democratic convention. 
 
The war over cable news ratings and the apparently imminent withdrawal of the 
broadcast networks from covering the party conventions has led to an interesting dynamic on the 
cable news stations.  Each of the cable news networks now aggressively covers the convention.  
In the weeks preceding the conventions, Fox News, CNN, and MSNBC heavily touted their 
upcoming coverage.  This onslaught of advertising was similar to how the cable stations 
publicized their upcoming coverage of the invasion of Iraq during the military buildup in 2003.  
Each station was, in essence, jockeying for position by convincing viewers that their coverage 
would be the most entertaining and compelling.   
Furthermore, the cable news stations now use the convention setting to showcase their 
talents and new technological innovations.  Each station anchored their prime-time coverage 
around their most compelling and colorful journalists.  Fox News’ Bill O’Reilly aired his 
program, “The O’Reilly Factor,” live from the convention halls, and CNN and MSNBC gave 


 
9 
viewers Larry King and Chris Matthews respectively.  Instead of anchoring their coverage of the 
convention in a traditional sense, O’Reilly, King, and Mathews turned their forum into pseudo 
talk show environments that featured pundits, other journalists, elected officials, and 
entertainment celebrities as guests.  While there was some coverage of the happenings at the 
podium, the cable news coverage would often cut off speakers for commercial breaks or for the 
journalists to interject discussion and analysis of ongoing or upcoming events.  For example, on 
the Tuesday night of the Democratic convention (when there was no broadcast network 
coverage), Bill O’Reilly continued his discussion with actor Ben Affleck rather than show 
Senator Edward Kennedy’s speech at the podium.  “The good speech is coming up,” O’Reilly 
said referring to upcoming keynote address by Barack Obama. “You’re not missing anything” 
(Manuel 2004).  The night before, O’Reilly also chose to ignore all but a few minutes of Al 
Gore’s speech as well. 
 
This new approach of Fox News, CNN, and MSNBC in covering the conventions came 
under fire.  One of the critics was the Democratic presidential nominee himself, John Kerry, who 
noted that after two days of coverage, “It’s a shame they don’t cover these things more…. The 
talking heads keep talking, and you can’t hear anything” (Memmott 2004).  Writer Peter Ames 
Carlin was much harsher in his criticism: 
Lots of airtime here (on cable news stations), but the vast majority of it was 
devoted to the usual squads of commentators, spinners and speculators, all of 
them trying to drown out the others by sheer force of tongues and stubbornness.  
Often, you could hear familiar voices echoing through the hall—isn’t that the 
patrician roar of Ted Kennedy?—but only in the background, because Tim 
Russert, Chris Matthews, Brit Hume, et al., were so busy pontificating about what 
they thought might happen later today, tomorrow or in 100 years.  Either that, or 
they were talking to Ben Afflack, Bono, or Art Alexakis, as if the most pressing 
issues in the nation needed their importance affirmed by the presence of an 
entertainer (Carlin 2004). 
 


 
10 
Fox’s style of coverage at the conventions drew even more criticism than its cable news 
competitors.  Critics pointed out that Fox’s analysts were overly critical of Democrats and too 
friendly with Republicans.  Following Teresa Heinz Kerry’s address, for example, Fox 
commentator Fred Barnes characterized the speech has “Eccentric, bordering on the bizarre… 
Extremely self-indulgent,” while fellow commentator Bill Kristol mused that, “I think she got 
this (time) slot because she demanded it” (Kurtz 2004b).  Also, on the first night of coverage of 
the Democratic convention, Fox’s O’Reilly engaged in a screaming match with documentary 
filmmaker Michael Moore that ultimately ended in a draw when Moore refused O’Reilly’s 
request that he apologize for calling President Bush a liar, and O’Reilly refused Moore’s request 
to say he would sacrifice his own child to secure the city of Fallujah (Carlin 2004). 
Beyond the tendency to ignore the podium and business on the floor, the nature of the 
dialogue that characterized the cable news coverage of the convention was troublesome as well.  
Often, the hosts and their guests engaged in rants and shouting matches that had little or nothing 
to do with the party or the convention business at hand.  One of the most infamous moments of 
2004 was Chris Matthews’ altercation with Democratic Senator Zell Miller, who was the keynote 
speaker at the Republican convention.  Miller appeared on Mathews’ show, “Hardball,” 
following his Wednesday night address.  Matthews’ infamous aggressive interviewing style 
worked Miller into such an aggravated frenzy that he barked insults and threats such as, “I don’t 
even know why I came on this program,” and “I wish I was over there, where I could get a little 
closer up in your face” (they were speaking by remote television connection), and finally, “I 
wish we lived in the day where you could challenge a person to a duel” (de Moraes 2004). 
 
When the coverage was not oriented around talk show banter, it seemed to focus heavily 
on frivolous topics and events.  In the days preceding his acceptance speech, John Kerry’s visit 


 
11 
to NASA received significant coverage because pictures of Kerry wearing a germ-free suit made 
him look strange, if not ridiculous.  There was also a great deal of coverage and subsequent 
punditry over Teresa Heinz Kerry’s altercation with a Pittsburgh newspaper reporter where she 
was caught on camera telling him to “shove it.”  During the Republican conventions, analysts 
ridiculed the twin daughters of President Bush as coming across as “ditzes” at the podium 
(Stanley 2004). 
 
The implications of cable news’ approach to covering the party conventions should not 
be understated.  National conventions are a rare opportunity for the major parties to present 
themselves and their vision of the future to the mass public.  These are historic events that define 
the modern national party organization and date back to 1831 (Shafer 1983).  Certainly, fewer 
Americans watch the conventions on television than in decades past, but the fate of parties and 
their candidates still hangs in the balance.  As Figure 1 demonstrates, 15 percent of the electorate 
made their decision on whom to vote for during one of the conventions in 2004.  This is a 
significant decline from a high of 31 percent in 1960.  Nevertheless, the 15 percent in 2004 is the 
highest since 1988 and only marginally lower than the percentages from the 1970s and early 
1980s.  Furthermore, 15 percent is more than enough to influence the outcome of most 
presidential elections, which are usually decided by much smaller margins. 
[Figure 1 here] 
 
Given that so many voters do not make their decision on whom to vote for until after the 
convention, it is little wonder that the parties wish to keep the conventions so tightly scripted.  
However, the parties’ tight control over the conventions has pushed away the major networks.  In 
a twist of irony, the parties’ desire for tighter control of information may have actually given 


 
12 
them less control over the flow of information as cable news networks have filled the vacuum 
with their brand of sensational, conflict-oriented coverage. 
While the preceding discussion has presented an array of anecdotal evidence about the 
nature of today’s cable news coverage of the national party conventions, empirical corroboration 
is necessary. Our analysis looks beyond anecdotal evidence by analyzing transcripts of cable and 
network coverage of the conventions.  Based upon the reasoning outlined above, we expect that 
cable news coverage of the conventions will contain higher degrees of conflict, sensationalism, 
and negativity than traditional broadcast coverage.  We also expect that this approach will focus 
less on issues of public policy.  Furthermore, we expect to see that the cable news coverage has 
become more journalist-centered in nature.  While overall news coverage of politics has become 
much more journalist-centered in recent years (Patterson 1994; West 2001), we expect to see that 
the wide-open environment surrounding the conventions provide cable news journalists and their 
guests free reign to spout off speculation and pontification that is grounded very much in 
subjectivity. 
 
Content Analysis Design 
To test our expectations, we conducted a content analysis of transcripts of the Democratic 
and Republican conventions obtained from Lexis-Nexis.  Through this database we conducted a 
search of all Fox News and CNN transcripts during the eight nights of coverage devoted to the 
conventions in the summer of 2004 during prime-time viewing hours (8pm-11pm, 48 hours of 
coverage total for both channels).  MSNBC was excluded from the analysis because of its 
inability to compete with CNN and Fox News in overall ratings, as well the lack of available 
transcripts in Lexis-Nexis.  In order to provide an example of traditional convention coverage for 


 
13 
comparison to cable, we also analyzed network coverage of the 1992 Democratic and Republican 
conventions on CBS.  This was the last convention before the dawn of the new cable-news media 
age.  We also analyzed the very limited coverage offered by CBS news in 2004 (only 52 
transcript pages). 
To make our search criteria as broad as possible, we obtained all Fox News and CNN 
transcripts that mentioned the nominee of that convention (Bush or Kerry) at least once.  This 
search yielded over 1,900 pages of prime-time transcripts.  Because the structure of the coverage 
is less defined than typical television news (i.e., there is no defined beginning or end to a story), 
there was no defined unit of analysis.  Thus, we employed commercial breaks as the determinant 
of a single unit.  We employed a similar approach with the transcripts provided by CBS, 
although their coverage was less likely to be interrupted by commercial breaks.  CBS did, 
however, break up the transcripts by segment, and we thus used those segment breaks as 
determinants of a single story. 
To test our hypotheses, our content analysis focused on the content and tone within the 
transcripts.  To analyze content, we searched for the frequency of several keywords and phrases 
in the transcripts.  For example, to test how much CNN, Fox, and CBS covered the Swift-boat 
Veterans for Truth controversy regarding Senator Kerry’s service during the Vietnam War, we 
counted the number of times that any variation of the term “swift-boat” was mentioned on each 
channel.  Because each news source had a different number of transcript pages (CNN=866, Fox 
News=676, and CBS=52), we mathematically adjusted the word counts accordingly. 
To analyze the tone of coverage, we coded the transcripts line-by-line.  To complete this 
task, we sampled half of the total segments from each news source by analyzing every other 
segment.  Coders read each line and made a determination of whether the line contained certain 


 
14 
characteristics, including negativity, an adversarial argument, discussion of political strategy, or 
mention of specific policy issues.  We also coded for the speaker of each line and determined if 
the speaker was a journalist, a guest, or a speaker at the convention podium.3  Statements from 
the podium (or the floor during roll call) were not coded for tone or content.  Only the comments 
made by the media were coded. 
 
Findings 
The cable news environment has indeed affected media coverage of the party 
conventions.  First and foremost, very little of the happenings at the podium are actually covered 
during prime-time cable news coverage.  Less than 7 percent of the coverage on CNN and Fox 
News actually contained material directly from the convention podium.  Additionally, a great 
deal of this coverage was not live podium coverage, but instead played as video clips that 
showed only a few dozen seconds of sound bites.  This was in stark contrast to CBS’s 2004 
coverage, which devoted 80 percent of its airtime to live coverage of what was going on at the 
podium.  While some of this difference is an artifact of CBS’s decision to air only three hours of 
coverage per convention (thus focusing primarily on times when key speakers are addressing the 
delegation), this stark difference is indicative of a larger trend in television news in which cable 
news coverage resembles a talk show format and the networks provide just skeletal coverage of 
key addresses.  While several scholars have argued that broadcast network coverage of 
presidential politics is increasingly journalist-centered and less apt to cover candidate sound bites 
(Fallows 1996; Hallin 1992; Patterson 1994), it appears that this tendency does not apply to 
                                                 
3 Reliability between coders was tested via percent agreement on 5 percent of the sample.  For each variable used in 
the analysis, the percent agreement was acceptable (above 80 percent).  In addition to these variables, coders also 
analyzed each line for positive statements about the candidate or the party.  Unfortunately, the inter-coder reliability 
on this variable was well below the minimum acceptability of 80 percent, and thus dropped from the analysis. 


 
15 
convention coverage.  Thus, there is little time for discussion and banter among the journalists 
covering the event for the networks. 
The talk show environment, however, dominated on Fox News and CNN.  Each night of 
coverage on Fox News began with Bill O’Reilly, and was then followed by Hannity & Combs 
and On the Record with Greta Van Susteren.  CNN’s coverage was primarily Andersen Cooper 
360, and Larry King Live.  It was through this lens that cable television conveyed the party to the 
voters.  And, it was this lens that distorts the image of the party and their nominees into 
something very different than the convention planners intended. 
What is the image that comes through on cable?  Compared to network coverage of past 
and present, we find several unique variations.  As we have already demonstrated, very little of 
cable’s convention coverage follows what is happening at the podium.  The individuals who 
dominated the screen were the journalists/hosts and their guests.  It is the journalists/hosts 
themselves, however, that received the majority of airtime.  Journalists/hosts spoke 53 percent of 
the lines in our entire cable news sample, while guests or interview subjects spoke 40 percent of 
the total lines.  This is in stark contrast to network coverage on CBS in 2004, where only 19 
percent of the lines came from the host and other corresponding journalists, and with much of 
that total coming from short introductions and bios for speakers at the podium.  Take, for 
example, how Rather introduced John Edwards’s daughter, Cate, before she spoke at the podium:   
DAN RATHER, host:  Now here's what's going to happen. Cate Edwards, the 
oldest of three Edwards children living; they lost a son in 1996. Cate Edwards 
will introduce her mother Elizabeth, who in turn, will then introduce Senator John 
Edwards. That's going to be the play here. The hall is absolutely packed. It has not 
been for every hour of every day of this convention. But as is the usual case in 
conventions, when the vice presidential nominee delivers his acceptance speech, 
the hall fills up.  Cate Edwards with her entrance. Recent graduate of Princeton 
University, 22 years old. 
 
Ms. CATE EDWARDS: Hi. Hi. I'm Cate Edwards… 


 
16 
Rather’s only additional comment during the Edwards speeches was to provide similar 
information on Elizabeth and John Edwards as they were introduced: 
RATHER: Elizabeth Edwards married John Edwards in 1977. This month they 
celebrated their 27th wedding anniversary. She is a graduate of the University of 
North Carolina Law School where she met her husband. She's appreciated for her 
down-to-earth, real neighborly qualities. She is 55 years old. 
 
RATHER: John Edwards was born in South Carolina, grew up in the Piedmont 
area of North Carolina, town of Robbins. High school football running back, son 
of a mill worker, proud graduate of public schools, graduate of North Carolina 
State and the University of North Carolina Chapel Hill Law School. He is a 
Protestant Christian, worships at Methodist churches. The roll-up to John 
Edwards' address is the song "Higher and Higher." Edwards' mom and dad are 
here tonight, Wallace and Bobbie. You've seen them in the shots there several 
times. 
 
This benign commentary constituted a much smaller portion of the cable news coverage.  
Instead, the journalists/hosts were more long-winded and less objective, as were their guests. 
 
Although the talk show environment dominated cable news’ coverage of the convention, 
this extended coverage did not focus much on policy issues.  In total, cable news spent less than 
4 percent of the lines discussing where the party or the candidates stand on specific issues of 
public policy.  Issues of political strategy, on the other hand, were more common.  On average, 
cable devoted 17 percent of the lines to discussion on the political strategies the parties or the 
candidates should employ to win the White House. 
Table 2 demonstrates the tendency of the cable channels to give issues of public policy 
short thrift in their coverage.  In hundreds of pages of transcripts, neither the journalists nor the 
guests on Fox News nor CNN mentioned the issues of Medicare or Social Security more than a 
handful of times.  Other issues or events, such as the standings in the polls, the Swift-Boat Vet 
controversy surrounding John Kerry’s past anti-war activities, and Teresa Hines Kerry’s 


 
17 
confrontation with a reporter (during which she told him to “shove it”), garnered much more 
attention. 
[Table 2 here] 
Beyond the topics discussed, the cable news environment took on a tone that was 
interesting as well.  Not only did the talk show environment provide for pontification and 
speculation, but it also allowed individuals on the programs to engage in discussions that 
sometimes became adversarial.  Our examination of the CBS news transcripts from the 
conventions in 2004 and 1992 uncovered no adversarial arguing/conflict between the journalists 
and/or invited guests, but more than 30 percent of the segments we sampled from cable news 
contained at least some adversarial conflict, and 15 percent of the lines contained clear negative 
statements about the party and/or candidate.  Moreover, in many instances, the conflicts were 
quite rancorous.  Consider the exchange during the Republican convention between Fox News’ 
Sean Hannity and Tad Devine, a senior advisor for the Kerry Campaign: 
HANNITY: Joining us now, senior adviser to the Kerry campaign, Tad Devine. 
Tad, I've got to tell you, I find it laughable, for all you Democrats to be so 
outraged over the truthful outlining of the record of John Kerry, when for a year, 
your leadership, Ted Kennedy and Howard Dean and the friends of John Kerry 
have accused this president of lying, misleading, of hyping, advancing theories he 
knew about 9/11 ahead of time, concocting war for political gain. You know, let's 
be real with the American people. You're not outraged over the remarks. You're 
trying to score political points, correct?  
 
TAD DEVINE: No, that's wrong Sean. Listen, last night's performance by Zell 
Miller was outrageous. And for Dick Cheney to do what he did, to question John 
Kerry's fitness to be commander in chief is an outrage. I mean, this is a guy, Dick 
Cheney, who got five deferments during the Vietnam War, questioning John 
Kerry who served heroically. 
 
HANNITY: I thought you weren't going to -- I thought we weren't allowed to 
bring that up, Tad? 
 
DEVINE: I just brought it up, Sean. Did you hear it?  You know, let me tell you, 
Dick Cheney is the last guy in America who should be questioning John Kerry, 


 
18 
OK? The last guy. 
 
HANNITY: Well, excuse me. He has a history of leading America through two 
wars, while your guy was against the Cold War. Your guy didn't want the death 
penalty for terrorists. Your guy voted against every major weapons system we 
now use. And after the first Trade Center attack, he didn't show up for intelligence 
meetings, and he wanted $6 billion in cuts.  That means he's made the wrong 
decisions throughout his career, which makes him unfit, doesn't it? 
 
DEVINE: No, it doesn't, Sean. Let me tell you about Dick Cheney's history. His 
history is that the company he led, Halliburton, is now under federal -- three 
separate federal investigations. That's Dick Cheney's history. His history is... 
 
HANNITY: Halliburton. Here we go… 
 
Often, these types of arguments became so heated and uncivil that the individuals were simply 
talking over one another.  When such incidents occurred, the voice recognition in the 
transcription computer could not accurately record what was said, and would simply denote the 
presence of “crosstalk” on the transcript.4  An analysis of the cable news transcripts found that 
“crosstalk” was noted 146 times over the eight days of coverage.  An analysis of the CBS News 
transcripts from 2004 and 1992 uncovered not a single incident of crosstalk. 
While adversarial exchanges were not commonplace, they were frequent enough to 
possibly leave a lasting negative impression with passive television viewers who may be idly 
watching just a few minutes of coverage.  This type of adversarial talk show coverage on 
television is often more entertaining than typical coverage (Forgette and Morris 2003), which 
explains why Fox News decided to place two of its most notoriously adversarial programs into 
the 8pm and 9pm time slots.  It further explains why Fox was not shy about advertising this type 
of coverage.  However, research has also shown that such hostile negativity can also influence 
                                                 
4 The Lexis-Nexis transcripts denoted such incidents with “(CROSSTALK).”  This notation was easy to identify as 
it was in capital letters and placed within parentheses on its own line of text. 


 
19 
how viewers perceive politicians, parties, and the electoral system as a whole (Forgette and 
Morris 2003; Mutz and Reeves 2005). 
While cable news was more likely than network news to focus on sensationalism, we did 
not find support for the claim that sensational events or personalities dominated coverage.  For 
instance, cable did not mention Teresa Heinz Kerry more frequency than the much less 
controversial Laura Bush.5  Another sensational topic of discussion, the Bush twins’ speaking 
role at the Republican convention, was certainly covered by cable news providers, and the twins 
were lambasted by a number of commentators.  Consider the following comments made 
regarding the twins:: 
JEFF GREEFIELD (CNN): I think charity would suggest that we pass -- quickly 
pass the Bush twins' attempt to be humorous. I think both in the hall and outside 
the hall, that was the one note that they would have an erasure. They would 
probably let them do -- have a do-over on that one, Aaron. 
 
---------  
 
KONDRACKE (Fox News):   Now, I would add that if there's a first children's 
contest, I would think that Vanessa and Alexandra Kerry whopped the two Bush 
girls by miles. I mean they came off frankly as ditzes and you wonder how, you 
know, whether they should have been on the program at all. 
 
MARA LIASSON (Fox News): Yes, I think the Bush twins were trying to poke 
some fun at themselves and at their image. They seemed to confirm it tonight, 
their image of giggling teenagers who were more interested in clothes and rock 
concerts than they are in anything serious. 
 
These are certainly critical comments, but they were relatively infrequent.  Our analysis found 
that the Bush twins were only mentioned in 13 percent of the cable transcripts we sampled.  
There were other comments on the Bush twins that were more balanced, and even positive: 
CHRIS WALLACE (Fox News): Brit, I have to say that I want to be fair and 
balanced tonight on behalf of the Bush Twins. In fact you can have 
Schwarzenegger, and you can have Mrs. Bush. If I were going to invest in a 
growth stock tonight, I would guess that it would be Jenna and Barbara Bush. I've 
                                                 
5 Teresa Heinz Kerry was mentioned 132 times on Fox and CNN, and Laura Bush was mentioned 115 times. 


 
20 
thought for sometime that they were maybe God's revenge on George W. Bush, 
that just as he created endless headaches for his parents growing up; that the Bush 
twins created endless headaches for their parents growing up. But I have to tell 
you tonight, and the way they played here to this crowd. They were bright. They 
were sassy. They were funny. They were intelligent. 
 
The only controversial figure that we found to get frequent coverage was filmmaker Michael 
Moore, whose anti-Bush documentary film, Fahrenheit 9/11, appeared in theaters that summer.  
Moore attended both conventions, but had no major role in the proceedings.  Nevertheless, he 
was mentioned 85 times on CNN and Fox News, but not at all on CBS.  Take, for instance, the 
following news clip from Aaron Brown’s coverage on CNN during the Democratic convention: 
BROWN:  John Kerry would be the first to admit it: He's not Mick Jagger or even 
Michael Moore. The first doesn't seem to be a problem. Ah, but the second. 
 
Here's CNN's Tom Foreman.  (BEGIN VIDEO CLIP) 
 
UNIDENTIFIED MALE: Michael! Michael! 
 
UNIDENTIFIED MALE: Michael! Michael! 
 
TOM FOREMAN, CNN CORRESPONDENT (voice-over): All over Boston, 
ever since the convention started, it has been Moore, Moore, Moore. 
 
MICHAEL MOORE, POLITICAL ACTIVIST: You're supposed to be able to 
believe the president. You're supposed to. 
 
FOREMAN: Michael Moore's relentless attacks on President Bush with his film 
"Fahrenheit 9/11" and now in person have earned a hero's welcome. He was even 
seated with former President Jimmy Carter who is not talking publicly about it, 
while Moore is saying plenty. 
 
MOORE: He said to me, "I can't think of anyone I would rather have to sit with 
me tonight than you," and... 
 
FOREMAN (on camera): How do you feel about that? 
 
MOORE: I was so blown away. 
 
FOREMAN (voice-over): Moore says he's an independent, not a Democrat, and 
some top Democrats don't like all the attention he's getting, but he has struck a 
chord, railing against the war, Republicans and the media. 


 
21 
 
MOORE: We need you to ask the questions! Demand the evidence. Demand the 
evidence. Don't ever send us to war without asking the questions. 
 
FOREMAN: That said, he has no plans to endorse John Kerry. 
 
MOORE: When John Kerry becomes president on January 20th next year, on 
January 21st, that camera lens of mine is going to be pointed at him, because 
that's my job done. 
 
FOREMAN: Are you going to go to the Republican convention? 
 
MOORE: I already have my credentials for the Republican convention and so do 
my 25 bodyguards. 
 
FOREMAN: But Moore dropped plans to attend the latest premiere of his film, a 
short distance from President Bush's ranch in Texas. Despite his courting of the 
media here, Moore says he does not want the story to be all about him. Tom 
Foreman, CNN, Boston. 
 
Related, there is a growing tendency for the cable stations to invite entertainment celebrities to 
appear on their programs during the convention (as Michael Moore did).  This would qualify as 
another aspect of sensationalism.  We found, however, that this tendency was not as frequent as 
some observers had argued.  Our analysis found that cable featured entertainment celebrities as 
guests on only 8 percent of the news segments.  This is certainly an increase from the number of 
celebrities featured on the networks, which was zero, but celebrities constituted a relatively small 
fraction of the talk show guests, who were mostly pundits, journalists, and party officials. 
 
Fox News versus CNN 
While our discussion focused mostly on cable news as a single entity, there has been a 
great deal of speculation regarding how Fox News and CNN approach their political coverage 
(see Collins 2004; Morris 2005; Pew Research Center 2004b).  Claims of bias are frequent, 
especially against Fox News (see Kitty 2005; Brock 2004), but also CNN (see Bozell 2004).  The 


 
22 
perception is that Fox News is friendlier to conservatives, while CNN is more favorable to 
liberals (Pew Research Center 2004b).  While there is limited empirical evidence on liberal or 
conservative biases in the media (see Niven 1999, 2003), our analysis did uncover cause for 
concern.  First, as Table 3 demonstrates, overall negative coverage of the candidates was not 
especially frequent on either Fox News or CNN.  But the overall coverage of John Kerry on Fox 
News was significantly more negative than that of Bush (p<.01).6  Fox News was also more 
negative in general.  On average, 29 percent of the lines in a segment were negative on Fox 
News compared to 6 percent of the lines on CNN (p<.06).  Additionally, Fox News offered 
significantly more coverage (p<.07) from the podium during the Republican convention (11 
percent of lines), than the Democratic convention (2 percent of lines), thus giving the Republican 
Party more of an opportunity to voice its message than the Democrats.  There was no such 
variation on CNN.  Finally, we found that Fox News was more likely to highlight high-profile 
leftward-leaning Democrats than CNN.  Even though Fox News had fewer overall transcript 
pages of total coverage, they still were much more likely to mention controversial Democratic 
figures such as Michael Moore and Ted Kennedy.  Michael Moore was mentioned 60 times on 
Fox News, but only 25 times on CNN, and Ted Kennedy was mentioned 34 times of Fox News, 
but only 8 times on CNN. 
[Table 3 here] 
Survey data collected in the week following the Republican convention also indicate the 
possibility of specific attitudinal correlates with exposure to Fox News versus CNN.  As Table 4 
demonstrates, exposure to the Republican convention was significantly higher among individuals 
who get most of their news from the Fox News channel (controlling for party identification and 
demographic factors).  No such relationship exists for the CNN audience, and the association is 
                                                 
6 One-tailed difference of means test. 


 
23 
actually negative for the network news audience, which is not too surprising given the sparse 
attention networks gave to the convention.   
But how does this exposure to the convention via Fox News or CNN relate to overall 
attitudes toward the candidate and the parties?  Unfortunately, the data do not allow us the 
opportunity to directly test how cable news coverage of the conventions influences attitudes 
toward the parties.  Table 5, however, demonstrates that, even when controlling for party 
identification and other factors, exposure to Fox News is associated with candidate attitudes 
more than CNN.  Those individuals who closely followed the 2004 Republican convention (very 
closely or fairly closely) and relyed on Fox News as their primary source of news displayed 
greater favorability toward George W. Bush and less favorability for John Kerry.  Exposure to 
CNN (or network news), however, was not significantly related to favorability of either 
candidate.  Furthermore, the Fox News watchers were more likely to agree that John Kerry 
changes his mind too much, and that the election of Kerry would put the U.S. at a greater risk of 
future terrorist attack.  Again, exposure to CNN or network news had no such association.  
Finally, it can also be seen from Table 5 that the use of Fox News was significantly associated 
with how closely an individual followed the story surrounding the Swift Boat Vets’ criticisms of 
John Kerry.  Exposure to CNN and network news, on the other hand, was negatively related to 
following the story. 
[Tables 4 and 5 here] 
Conclusion 
On Wednesday night of the Democratic convention on CNN, media critic Howard Kurtz 
observed that, “…with the lack of hard news here, any little controversy, we the 15,000 
journalists assembled here at the Fleet Center are going to jump on it.”  His colleague Jonah 


 
24 
Goldberg agreed, saying that, “…when you have everything so minutely controlled and 
micromanaged that the slightest thing that goes off script just consumes the media to a big 
degree.  But basically, what I don’t like about this convention is that it’s so fake.  It’s an 
infomercial.  They should be selling steak knives.”  Our study suggests that Kurtz and Goldberg 
certainly have a valid point.  The age of television ushered in the era of the controlled party 
convention, where all intra-party conflict and debate has been hidden from the cameras.  It is this 
environment that has prompted the broadcast networks to almost completely pull away from 
covering the conventions at all.  Cable news stations, however, have been more than willing to 
step in and provide exhaustive coverage throughout the entirety of prime-time viewing hours. 
Unfortunately for the convention planners, cable news’ coverage does not necessarily put a 
friendly face on the party.   
A talk show environment has come to dominate cable news coverage of the conventions.  
The public hears very little directly from the parties and their selected speakers, and journalist 
commentary occupies the majority of airtime.  This commentary is not oriented around policy or 
the qualifications and background of the nominee.  On the contrary, policy discussion is almost 
non-existent in comparison to banter on topics such as public opinion polls and political strategy.  
Heated arguments are as frequent as policy discussion, and overall negativity persists.  
Additionally, our survey data evidence suggests the possibility that exposure to the highest rated 
cable news channel, Fox News, is associated with a greater tendency to believe candidate 
stereotypes perpetuated in the coverage, and to rate Bush favorably and Kerry unfavorably.  
These relationships remained significant even when controlling for party identification. 
The parties have made strategic errors by turning their conventions into empty 
infomercials.  This approach was successful in keeping broadcast networks from covering intra-


 
25 
party disputes over nominees and the platform, but cable news has proven they can fill the news 
cycle without such fuel, and the parties have little-to-no influence over the topics of discussion.  
In this respect, the parties have created a situation that has put their image, and perhaps their 
electoral fate, in the hands of political talk show hosts on cable.  Outside the realm of 
conventions, the effects of ideologically-charged, conflict-ridden talk shows are mitigated by the 
fact that most viewers are watching the programs as supplements to news obtained by more 
traditional means (primarily newspapers and anchor-based television news coverage).  During 
the conventions, however, the cable news stations have decided to showcase these talk shows as 
the primary sources of news during prime-time hours.  The talk show circus is not tempered by 
traditional coverage, and thus the parties’ images among the mass public (many of whom are not 
accustom to political talk show theatrics) are at the mercy of endless spinning and arguing 
between pundits and politicos. 
It would appear that the lesser-known presidential candidates are put at a particular 
disadvantage by cable news’ convention coverage.  In 2004, for example, the Democratic Party 
went to great pains to highlight the record and accomplishments of nominee John Kerry, who 
was not nearly as familiar to the voting public as President Bush.  While the Democrats were 
persistent in selling Kerry as a distinguished Senator and war hero, the message was largely lost 
as pundits and journalists endlessly critiqued every conceivable aspect of the convention and 
Kerry himself.  In 2008, both parties may likely run up against a similar dilemma, as there will 
be no incumbent president or vice-president seeking the White House for the first time since 
1952.  With the American voting public evenly divided by party identification, the outcome of 
the general election may very well hinge on which party does a better job presenting their 
candidate to the television audience during the conventions.  The most successful party will be 


 
26 
the one that devises a message strategy that accounts for the fact that millions of swing voters 
will be watching the convention through the prism of the cable talk show melee on Fox News 
and CNN.  It would behoove both parties to devote greater resources toward sharpening their 
message on the talk shows as opposed to the stage and the podium.


 
27 
References 
Auletta, Ken.  2003.  “Vox Fox: How Roger Ailes and Fox News are Changing Cable News.” 
The New Yorker, May 26, 58. 
 
Bae, Hyung S.  1999.  “Product Differentiation in Cable Programming: The Case of Cable on 
Television News Audiences.”  Journal of Media Economics 12:265-77. 
 
Brock, David.  2004.  The Republican Noise Machine: Right Wing Media and How it Corrupts 
Democracy.  New York: Crown. 
 
Broder, David.  1996.  “Restoring the Conventions’ Vital Function.”  The Washington Post, Sept 
11, A23. 
 
Carlin, Peter A.  2004.  “Politics Aside, the Convention’s Only Losers were the Viewers.”  The 
Oregonian, July 30, C1. 
 
Carter, Bill.  2004.  “Left to Reflect on Week’s Poor Ratings.”  The New York Times, September 
3, P11. 
 
Collins, Scott.  2004.  Crazy Like a FOX: The Inside Story on how Fox News beat CNN.  New 
York: Penguin Books. 
 
Crotty, William, and John S. Jackson III.  1985.  Presidential Primaries and Nominations.  
Washington, DC: CQ Press. 
 
Davis, James W.  1983.  National Conventions in an Age of Party Reform.  Westport, CT: 
Greenwood. 
 
deMoraes, Lisa.  2004.  “Matthews and Miller: Spitballs at 10 Paces.”  The Washington Post, 
Sept 3: C7. 
 
DiClerico, Robert E., and Eric M. Uslaner.  1984.  Few Are Chosen: Problems in Presidential 
Selection.  New York: McGraw Hill. 
 
Fallows, James.  1996.  Breaking the News: How the Media Undermine American Democracy.  
New York: Vintage. 
 
Forgette, Richard, and Jonathan S. Morris.  2003.  “The State of the (Dis)Union: The Effects of 
New Media Coverage on Perceptions of Congress.” Paper presented at the annual 
meeting of the Midwest Political Science Association, Spring 2003. 
 
Geer, John G.  1989.  Nominating Presidents: An Evaluation of Voters and Primaries.  New 
York: Greenwood Press. 
 


 
28 
Hallin, Daniel C.  1992.  “Sound-Bite News: Television Coverage of Elections, 1968-1988.”  
Journal of Communication 42(1):5-24. 
 
Jarvis, Sharon.  2004.  “Television Coverage of Presidential Nominating Conventions.”  In 
Horace Newcomb (eds.), Encyclopedia of Television (Second Edition).  Chicago: Fitzroy 
and Dearborn. 
 
Karabell, Zachary.  1998. “The Rise and Fall of the Televised Political Convention.”  Discussion 
Paper D-33, The Joan Shorenstein Center at the John F. Kennedy School of Government, 
Harvard University. 
 
Kitty, Alexandra.  2005.  Outfoxed: Rupert Murdoch’s War on Journalism.  New York: 
Disinformation Limited. 
 
Kurtz, Howard.  2004a.  “Convention Oratory, Increasingly Shoved Aside.”  The Washington 
Post, August 2, C1. 
 
Kurtz, Howard.  2004b.  “Giving them what they want: In Heinz Kerry’s Speech, 
Commentations Find Plenty to Talk About.”  The Washington Post, July 29, A26. 
 
Lang, Gladys E., and Kurt Lang.  1984.  Politics and Television: Re-Viewed.  London: Sage. 
 
Lewis, Neil A., and Bill Carter.  2004.  “TV Networks see Decline in Viewers; Cable Gains.”  
The New York Times, July 27, P8. 
 
Manuel, Marlon.  2004.  “Election 2004: Democratic Convention: Network Coverage Leaves no 
Time for Juicy Details.”  The Atlanta Journal-Constitution, July 30, 3B. 
 
Memmott, Mark.  2004.  “Cable Networks Taking Flak for Show Schedules.”  USA Today, July 
29, 10A. 
 
Morris, Jonathan S.  2005.  “The Fox News Factor.” The Harvard International Journal of 
Press/Politics 10(3):56-79. 
 
Murray, Robert K.  1976.  The 103rd Ballot: Democrats and the Disaster at Madison Square 
Garden.  New York: Harper and Row. 
 
Mutz, Diana C., and Byron Reeves.  2005.  “The New Videomalaise: Effects of Televised 
Incivility on Political Trust.”  American Political Science Review 99(1):1-15.  
 
Niven, David.  1999.  “Partisan Bias in the Media? A New Test.”  Social Science Quarterly 
80(4):847-857. 
 
Niven, David.  2003.  “Objective Evidence on Media Bias: Newspaper Coverage of 
Congressional Party Switchers.” Journalism and Mass Communication Quarterly 
80(2):311-326. 


 
29 
 
Ostow, Joanne.  2004.  “TV Ratings.”  The Denver Post,  July 29, A18. 
 
Paletz, David L., and Martha Elson.  1976.  “Television Coverage of Presidential Conventions: 
Now You See It, Now You Don’t.”  Political Science Quarterly 91: 109-131. 
 
Patterson, Thomas E.  1994.  Out of Order.  New York: Vintage. 
 
Patterson, Thomas E.  2002.  The Vanishing Voter.  New York: Knoft. 
 
Patterson, Thomas E.  2004.  “Election Interest is up Sharply, But Convention Interest is Not.” A 
release from The Vanishing Voter Project, July 21, www.vanishingvoter.org 
 
Pew Research Center.  2004.  “Democratic Party Image Improvement.” Survey Research Report, 
July 21, www.people-press.org 
 
Pew Research Center. 2004b. “Online News Audiences Larger, More Diverse.” News Release, 
June 8, 2004, http://www.people-press.org 
 
Polsby, Nelson W.  1983.  Consequences of Party Reform.  New York: Oxford University Press.   
 
Reiter, Howard L.  1985.  Selecting the President: The Nominating Process in Transition.  
Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press. 
 
Rosenstiel, Tom.  1993.  Strange Bedfellows: How Television and the Presidential Candidates 
Changed American Politics.  New York: Hyperion. 
 
Schudson, Michael.  1996.  “Those No-News Conventions.”  Columbia Journalism Review  
35(4):20. 
 
Shafer, Byron E.  1988.  Bifurcated Politics: Evolution and Reform in the National Party 
Convention.  Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. 
 
Smith, Larry David, and Dan Nimmo.  1991.  Cordial Concurrence: Orchestrating National 
Party Conventions in the Telepolitical Age.  New York: Praeger. 
 
Stanley, Allessandra.  2004.  “Fast, Frisky, and Caffeinated, Fox News Looked Right at Home 
all Week.”  The New York Times, Sept 3, P11. 
 
West, Darrell M. 2001.  The Rise and Fall of the Media Establishment.  Boston: St. Martin=s 
Press. 
 
 


 
30 
Tables and Figures 
 
 
 
TABLE 1: TV Ratings for Republican Convention 
 
Average Viewers per Night (in Millions from 10pm-11pm) 
Channel 
Night 1 
8/30 
Night 2 
8/31 
Night 3 
9/1 
Night 4 
9/2 
Fox News 
3.9 
5.2 
5.9 
7.3 
CNN 
1.3 
1.5 
1.2 
2.7 
MSNBC 
0.8 
1.6 
1.2 
1.7 
ABC 
NA 
4.3 
3.3 
5.1 
CBS 
NA 
4.4 
2.6 
5.0 
NBC 
NA 
5.1 
4.5 
5.9 
Source: Nielsen Media Research. 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1: Percent of Voters who Decided During 
Conventions 1960-2004
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
1960 1964 1968 1972 1976 1980 1984 1988 1992 1996 2000 2004
 
       Source: The National Election Study and Thomas Patterson (2004) 
 
 


 
31 
Table 2 
Transcript Content 
Issue/topic 
Number of times issue/topic was mentioned in transcripts 
(excluding podium speeches) 
 
CNN 
Fox News 
“Medicare” 
4 
2 
“Social Security” 
2 
7 
“Swift-Boat” 
67 
34 
“Shove it” 
14 
9 
“Polls” 
77 
49 
 
 
 
Table 3 
Negative Overall Tone 
 
Station 
 
CNN 
Fox News 
Percent of Segments with Overall Negative Tone Toward Kerry 
13% 
32% 
Percent of Segments with Overall Negative Tone Toward Bush 
10% 
13% 
 
 
Table 4 
Exposure to the Republican National Convention 
(Ordered Probit Analysis) 
Variable 
Attention Given to Republican Conventiona 
CNN Primary Source of News 
   .053 (.090) 
Fox News Primary Source of News 
       .492 (.087)** 
Network Primary Source of News 
     -.197 (.066)** 
Party ID (7 point)b 
     -.196 (.013)** 
Income 
   .022 (.013) 
Education 
   .072 (.019) 
White 
     -.209 (.081)** 
Male 
      .144 (.056)** 
Age 
      .006 (.001)** 
Constant 1 
-.707 
Constant 2 
-.076 
Constant 3 
.709 
LR Chi-Squared (9) 
387.72** 
N 
1607 
*p<.05, **p<.01 (one-tailed test).  Standard errors in parentheses. 
a 1=followed not closely at all; 2=followed not too closely; 3=followed fairly closely; 4=followed very closely. 
b 1= strong Republican… 7=strong Democrat. 
 


 
Table 5 
Candidate Attitudes among Registered Voters Who Watched the Republican Convention Closelya 
(Ordered Probit Analysis) 
Variable 
Overall 
favorability 
toward Bushb 
Overall 
favorability 
toward Kerryb 
Believe Kerry 
changes his mind 
too muchc 
Believe Kerry 
would make the 
US more 
vulnerable to a 
terrorist attackc 
Followed the 
story about the 
Swift Boat Vets’ 
criticisms of 
Kerryd 
Believe Bush is 
too partisan and 
divisivec 
Believe Bush is 
more like a real 
person than a 
politicianc 
CNN Primary 
Source of News 
.049 (.180) 
.031 (.168) 
.203 (.211) 
 .157 (.242) 
   -.334 (.136)** 
-.201 (.243) 
.326 (.224) 
Fox News 
Primary Source 
    .413 (.144)** 
   -.374 (.134)** 
    .757 (.192)** 
   .287 (.167)* 
 .221 (.108)* 
  -.346 (.167)* 
  .303 (.171)* 
Networks 
Primary Source 
.083 (.133) 
.098 (.128) 
.144 (.168) 
-.069 (.162) 
   -.276 (.101)** 
-.162 (.161) 
-.176 (.162) 
Party ID (7-pt) 
    -.462 (.023)** 
     .393 (.022)** 
    -.335 (.034)** 
    -.273 (.034)** 
.010 (.109) 
     .283 (.034)** 
    -.291 (.034)** 
Income 
-.021 (.021) 
 .034 (.021) 
-.012 (.033) 
-.040 (.035) 
.005 (.020) 
-.040 (.034) 
 .018 (.035) 
Education 
-.022 (.030) 
 -.013 (.029) 
 .020 (.050) 
-.071 (.046) 
.014 (.028) 
 .001 (.047) 
    -.143 (.047)** 
White 
 .027 (.124) 
 -.189 (.123) 
 .009 (.214) 
-.053 (.219) 
-.127 (.126) 
-.033 (.215) 
 .169 (.211) 
Male 
    -.200 (.085)** 
  .090 (.082) 
 .125 (.134) 
 .034 (.130) 
   .161 (.080)* 
-.018 (.128) 
-.024 (.130) 
Age 
 .002 (.002) 
  .000 (.002) 
 .004 (.004) 
 .003 (.004) 
    .012 (.002)** 
-.003 (.004) 
   .008 (.004)* 
Constant 1 
-3.043 
.505 
-2.220 
-2.004 
-.470 
-.531 
-2.265 
Constant 2 
-2.252 
1.590 
-1.270 
-1.195 
.123 
.575 
-1.552 
Constant 3 
-1.128 
2.930 
-.313 
-.336 
.983 
1.651 
-.398 
LR Chi-Squared 
(9) 
524.18** 
426.52** 
153.39** 
97.41** 
53.10** 
108.28** 
130.33** 
N 
768 
750 
328 
305 
779 
306 
320 
*p<.05, **p<.01 (one-tailed test).  Standard errors in parentheses. 
a Those registered voters who reported following the Republican convention “very closely” or “fairly closely” were retained for this analysis.  Those who 
reported watching the convention “not too closely” or “not at all closely” were excluded. 
b 1=very unfavorable; 2=mostly unfavorable; 3= mostly favorable; 4= very favorable. 
c 1=completely disagree; 2=mostly disagree; 3=mostly agree; 4=completely agree. 
d 1=not at all closely; 2=not too closely; 3=fairly closely; 4=very closely. 
View publication stats