Contents
Summary
1
CHAPTER 1 
Sovereign Wealth Funds and Ongoing Corruption,  
Illicit Finance, and Governance Risks	
17 
Lakshmi Kumar
CHAPTER 2 
Corruption Risks Within Sovereign Wealth Funds	
35 
David Szakonyi
CHAPTER 3 
Sovereign Wealth Funds as Vehicles  
for Money Laundering: The Case of 1MDB	
45 
Clare Rewcastle Brown and Caleb Diamond
CHAPTER 4 
Angola’s FSDEA—Corruption Scandal and Reform	
59 
Jodi Vittori
CHAPTER 5 
Equatorial Guinea—The Invisible Sovereign Wealth Fund	
65 
Jodi Vittori
CHAPTER 6 
The Public Investment Fund and  
Saudi Arabia’s Engagement in Global Sport	
69 
Kristian Coates Ulrichsen
CHAPTER 7 
Sputnik V and the Russian Direct  
Investment Fund: Profiting From Coronavirus	
77 
Jodi Vittori


CHAPTER 8 
Sovereign Wealth Funds When There  
Is No Sovereign Wealth: The Case of Turkey	
85 
Aykan Erdemir
CHAPTER 9 
Sovereign Wealth Funds and Infrastructure:  
China’s Belt and Road Initiative	
95 
Nate Sibley
CHAPTER 10 
Golden Passports and Visas: The Case of Malta’s SWF	
109 
Lakshmi Kumar
CHAPTER 11 
Sovereign Wealth Funds and Arms Exports:  
The Case of UAE’s Mubadala and Tawazun	
121 
Jodi Vittori
CHAPTER 12 
What’s Next? A Road Map to Address SWF  
Illicit Finance, Corruption, and Governance Gaps	
135 
Lakshmi Kumar
About the Authors	
147
Appendix A: Sovereign Wealth Fund Definitions	
149
Appendix B: Defining Corruption	
151
Notes	
153
Carnegie Endowment for International Peace	
207


1
﻿Summary
1
Sovereign wealth funds (SWFs) have existed for more than a century, typically as state-
sponsored financial institutions to manage a country’s budgetary surplus, accrue profit, and 
protect a country’s wealth for future generations. Yet, for economies of the Organisation 
of Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD), SWFs only burst into public 
consciousness in the mid-2000s, when widespread concerns arose that SWFs with large 
amounts of capital could control strategically important assets and threaten the national 
security of countries where they deployed their investments. 
In the 1990s, SWFs held $500 billion in assets, but by 2020, they had more than $7.5 
trillion in assets under management (AUM), equal to about 7 percent of the global AUM of 
$111.2 trillion. Globally, prior to 2010, there were only fifty-eight SWFs. Today, however, 
SWFs have become an increasingly fashionable type of state-owned entity to set up, and 
there are currently 118 operating or prospective SWFs. In the African continent alone, prior 
to 2000, there were only two SWFs. Since 2000, sixteen new SWFs have been set up. 
What is particularly concerning about this dramatic growth is that SWFs have been 
established not just in countries with strong rule of law and civil liberty protections but also 
in countries marked by high corruption risks, insecurity, violence, and weak or absent rule 
of law. The chapters that follow include case studies of SWFs from Africa, Asia, Europe, and 
the Middle East to demonstrate that there are systemic governance issues and regulatory 
gaps that can enable SWFs to act as conduits of corruption, money laundering, and other 
illicit activities. This compilation also provides a compelling narrative that highlights the 
need for clear policies on the management of SWFs, lending weight to the recommendations 
included in the closing chapter. For SWFs to achieve their full potential, this compilation 
urges reform not only at the institutional level of the SWF but also across the variety of 
entities and jurisdictions that make up the supply chain of SWF activity. 


2   |   Sovereign Wealth Funds: Corruption and Other Governance Risks
The Secret Lives of Sovereign Wealth Funds
As explained in chapter 2, the current SWF data landscape offers only selective, fragmented 
visibility into SWFs, and little is known about the investments, operations, or internal 
management of the vast majority of funds around the world.  This gap creates opportunities 
for bad actors to abuse funds for their own interests.  
As state-owned entities, SWFs in some ways are set apart from the private investment fund 
industry, which includes hedge funds, venture capital, and private equity. Notably, an SWF’s 
mission can go beyond maximizing investment returns to include achieving macroeconomic 
stability or realizing economic development initiatives domestically. Since they do not 
have fiduciary duties to private investors and clients, SWFs are completely beholden to the 
governments that endow them.  
Yet even though their home governments can exert influence over their operations, SWFs in 
practice behave very similarly to certain types of private investment funds. SWFs are often 
set up identically to private equity funds, with capital committed to the fund managed 
by an external general partner. In contrast to popular perception, many SWF investments 
do not end up in publicly traded companies that have strictly regulated transparency 
obligations and fiduciary responsibilities. Just like their counterparts in the venture capital, 
private equity, and hedge fund industries, SWFs often purchase minority stakes in unlisted, 
privately held companies. And because most countries require little if any transparency 
about fund transactions made outside of public markets, records of SWF investments in 
unlisted assets, whether in a private company or a real estate project, are rarely made publicly 
available. In the wake of the 2007–2008 global financial crisis, SWFs have even begun 
accruing substantial debt and using leverage to fund some investments, another trademark 
strategy of the private equity industry. SWFs also often act as co-investors with massive 
private equity funds. Furthermore, many have adopted their own arcane corporate structures 
called sub-funds to coordinate sectoral investments.  
There are also large segments of some SWF portfolios that are almost completely absent 
from public view, whether it be full lists of nongovernmental investors (foreign and 
domestic), management fees paid to private investment funds, executive compensation, key 
relationships with intermediary brokers, or corporate structures facilitating investments 
(especially through offshore companies). Leaked documents provide perhaps the only 
window on these attributes. Worse, private, third-party SWF data aggregators are 
significantly dependent on SWFs sharing their underlying data, and access to this data is 
often prohibitively expensive for most researchers.  
As a result, regulators, journalists, civil society activists, academics, and investors alike are 
left with regrettably little information about how many SWFs operate. Without detailed 
financial and operational information, the door is left wide open for rapacious managers and 
political elites to misappropriate investment earnings. Not only can this lack of transparency 
make SWFs susceptible to corrupt uses, but at the macroeconomic level, it also raises the 


Carnegie Endowment for International Peace   |   3
specter of real destabilization risks if funds were to fail, be mismanaged, or rapidly withdraw 
funding from target markets. The lack of oversight into SWFs’ substantial investments could 
also inflate dangerous equity price bubbles. 
Surprisingly, the enormous rise of cross-border SWF investments has not sparked the 
creation of a centralized international regulatory body to oversee the industry. The closest 
global institution is the International Forum of Sovereign Wealth Funds (IFSWF), which 
set forth twenty-four voluntary principles known as the Santiago Principles. These principles 
aim to improve transparency and governance, but the IFSWF has no power to enforce its 
own standards, and naming and shaming efforts by other nongovernmental organizations 
have been mostly absent. As a result, only a select number of SWFs fully adhere to these 
basic good governance standards, while others are free to invest trillions abroad but disclose 
little, if any, comprehensive information on their activities to the public. 
The Model Nexus of SWFs and Corruption: 1MDB
Corruption in Malaysia’s 1MDB sovereign fund led to what the July 2016 original U.S. 
Department of Justice (DOJ) indictment called the “largest kleptocracy case to date.”1 That 
indictment noted, “As alleged in the complaints, the members of the conspiracy—which 
included officials at 1MDB, their relatives and other associates—allegedly diverted more 
than $3.5 billion in 1MDB funds. Using fraudulent documents and representations, the 
co-conspirators allegedly laundered the funds through a series of complex transactions 
and fraudulent shell companies with bank accounts located in Singapore, Switzerland, 
Luxembourg and the United States.”2  
The final tally of diverted funds ultimately came to $4.5 billion. Per the same DOJ 
indictment, the laundered assets of 1MDB “included high-end real estate and hotel 
properties in New York and Los Angeles, a $35 million jet aircraft, works of art by Vincent 
Van Gogh and Claude Monet, an interest in the music publishing rights of EMI Music and 
the production of the 2013 film The Wolf of Wall Street.”3 Over $1 billion went into then 
Malaysian prime minister Najib Razak’s personal bank accounts alone.  
Chapter 3 provides a comprehensive look at what happened to the Malaysian 1MDB fund 
between 2009 and 2015 to provide the reader a better understanding of how sovereign 
wealth funds can be used for gross corruption. It examines how Najib Razak, his proxy 
Jho Low, advisers from Goldman Sachs bank, and other willing professionals exploited 
overcentralized power, weak governance, and poor accountability over Malaysian public 
funds to steal billions for themselves and their collaborators. It also describes how, to 
increase its influence in Malaysia, the Chinese government was able to use Najib Razak’s 
need to resolve the scandal and fund his reelection bid. The corruption was likewise 
exploited by other foreign actors, including royal figures and businessmen in the Persian 
Gulf to siphon billions for themselves in return for providing cover. The 1MDB case thus 
provides a useful foundation for making sense of the other cases in this compilation, and it 
underlines the transparency and accountability reforms required to minimize similar future 
abuse of citizens’ financial security by their elites. 


4   |   Sovereign Wealth Funds: Corruption and Other Governance Risks
Oil, Sports, and COVID-19 Vaccines: Corruption Risks  
and Natural Resource–Based Sovereign Wealth Funds
Chapters 4 and 5 examine the mechanisms for elite capture and pathways for reform by 
examining evidence from two of Africa’s sovereign wealth funds: Angola’s Fundo Soberano 
de Angola (FSDEA) and Equatorial Guinea’s Fund for Future Generations (FFG).
As described in chapter 4, Angola’s FSDEA sovereign wealth fund—the African continent’s 
second-largest SWF—was established in 2012 under former president Eduardo dos Santos, 
with an initial allocation of $5 billion. The fund was created with the country’s oil revenues 
with a dual mandate: to invest oil revenues back into the domestic economy and to act as a 
savings fund to preserve Angola’s oil wealth for future generations.  
Conflict of interest concerns were raised when the president appointed his son, José 
Filomeno dos Santos (also known as Zenu), as chairman of the board, but concerns were 
assuaged when the fund made a remarkable forty-two-point jump (out of one hundred 
possible points) in the Peterson Institute’s SWF Scorecard on good governance in a mere 
three years, plus a good score on another key SWF index.  The FSDEA soon became 
embroiled in reports of a scandal following allegations of questionable corporate governance 
and investment practices, however. Media reports beginning in 2017, followed by a 2019 
report by the International Monetary Fund (IMF), found that billions of dollars were 
illegally withdrawn from the FSDEA by an asset manager (and business partner of Zenu) 
using sophisticated financial transactions that were channeled through offshore financial 
centers and invested in projects and sectors of personal interest. That the fund gave an 
outward appearance of good SWF governance despite significant corruption highlights 
the flawed nature of the current SWF assessment tools, especially those based primarily on 
self-assessments.
The case in Angola can also exemplify that reform of SWFs is possible, even in fragile 
states.  Following a change in the presidency and as a result of the scandal, the FSDEA 
has rolled out a number of corporate governance and regulatory reforms that better reflect 
international best practices to try to reposition the fund as a credible state-owned investor.  
Another oil-rich African country with an SWF and a regime that international reports have 
found to be mired in elite capture and corruption is Equatorial Guinea. As described in 
chapter 5, the country had one of Africa’s highest GDPs per capita at $14,600, but its level of 
poverty remains one of the highest in the continent, estimated at 67 percent as of 2020. 
Equatorial Guinea’s FFG was established in 2002 with a government commitment to 
deposit 0.5 percent of annual oil revenue into the fund, but it is considered to be one of the 
least transparent SWFs in Africa with very limited (and in most cases nonexistent) publicly 
available information. The FFG has no public disclosure of its objectives or mandate, no 
website, no publicly disclosed governance and institutional framework, no published annual 
reports, no publicly available information on its board of directors and management, and no 


Carnegie Endowment for International Peace   |   5
publicly disclosed information on asset allocation, investment policy, or fiscal withdrawal 
rules. Moreover, the leadership of the country exhibits a very high degree of nepotism, 
and some of the country’s most senior leaders have been convicted of grand corruption. 
Additionally, oil production long ago peaked there, and the IMF predicts the oil could run 
out as soon as 2030, making transparency and good governance of the fund an especially 
time-sensitive priority. 
Sovereign wealth funds have especially entered the public consciousness lately due to their 
nexus with sports, and few countries and their SWFs are so intertwined with sport as Saudi 
Arabia’s Public Investment Fund (PIF). As described in chapter 6, the emphasis placed on 
soccer by the PIF since 2016, coupled with the ecstatic local reception of its purchase of the 
English Premier League’s (EPL) Newcastle United soccer team and subsequent welcome 
in the city, shine a spotlight on the unconventional returns on investment from such 
approaches, especially for autocracies like Saudi Arabia. The recent pact between the PIF’s 
LIV Golf Invitational Series, the European (DP World) Tour sponsored by the United Arab 
Emirates (UAE), and the Professional Golf Association (PGA) tour has only heightened 
“sports-washing” concerns. 
 “Sports-washing” is a nebulous term that emerged in the 2010s as authoritarian regimes 
began to actively engage more in the infrastructure and ecosystem of global sports.  Regimes 
engaged in sports-washing may be able to enhance their popularity through their association 
with ownership of sports teams or sponsoring major sporting events while de-emphasizing 
in the minds of the public their involvement in authoritarianism, human rights abuses, 
organized crime, and corruption.
SWFs are supposed to help generate economic investment at home, but owning sports clubs 
overseas does little to generate job creation or technology transfer in the investing country. 
Indeed, many sports institutions, such as the EPL, rarely post any profit, and hosting sports 
events is often a net financial loss. This reality suggests that financial rates of return were not 
necessarily uppermost in PIF considerations for its substantial sports investments. Hence, 
the PIF’s acquisition presents a study of how an SWF may be used for purposes other than 
economic diversification and national development. 
Emergency situations like the COVID-19 pandemic can also lead to activities by SWFs 
and their intermediaries that raise red flags for conflicts of interest or corruption. Chapter 
7 describes the Russian Direct Investment Fund (RDIF) and its role in the creation, 
production, and marketing of the Sputnik V vaccine. The RDIF has been sanctioned by the 
U.S. Treasury Department and the European Union; the U.S. Treasury labeled the RDIF 
“a symbol of Russian kleptocracy” and states that it is widely considered a “slush fund for 
President Vladimir Putin.”4 It was established in 2011 by order of the then president of 
Russia, Dmitry Medvedev, and Putin, who was serving as prime minister. It is an unusual 
form of SWF: rather than investing the proceeds from domestic oil or other natural resources 
outside of Russia to help diversify the economy, as SWFs normally do, the RDIF focuses on 
establishing joint ventures with foreign firms and funds for investments within Russia.


6   |   Sovereign Wealth Funds: Corruption and Other Governance Risks
The supply chain for countries to purchase the Sputnik V vaccine ran through the RDIF 
and a company the fund had established called Human Vaccine. Some countries, such 
as European Union members Slovakia and Hungary, were able to make direct deals with 
the RDIF’s Human Vaccine subsidiary to buy Sputnik V doses for $20 for the two-dose 
regimen. Other countries, however, such as Ghana, Guyana, Lebanon, and Pakistan, had to 
go through another step in the supply chain because Human Vaccine had appointed Dubai-
based Aurugulf Health Investments as the exclusive seller and distributor of Sputnik V for 
countries in Africa and Asia. Aurugulf was registered in October 2020, just two months 
after Sputnik V was authorized in Russia, and per the company’s website, Sputnik V appears 
to be its only product. Aurugulf sold the two-shot regime at $38 per two-dose regimen, or 
almost double the factory price.
The transparency and accountability of funds associated with Sputnik V vaccine-related 
expenditures decreased when the expenditures were moved off-budget to the RDIF. This 
move is especially concerning given the kleptocracy associated with the inner circle of the 
Putin regime. The backgrounds of intermediaries involved in vaccine distribution only 
heighten concerns about the risks of corruption. The COVID-19 pandemic has revealed 
an urgent need to improve governance associated with public health—especially during 
emergency situations and when governance is outsourced to sovereign wealth funds.
Loans, Lottery, Shares, Passports, and Arms: Unique SWF Funding
SWFs are most commonly used as a means to invest excess funds from the proceeds of 
natural resource exports, as evidenced by the SWFs in Angola, Equatorial Guinea, Saudi 
Arabia, and Russia. But for the Türkiye Wealth Fund (TWF), the term “sovereign wealth 
fund” may be a misnomer: the country is chronically short of sovereign wealth because it 
holds no significant hydrocarbon or mineral deposits and suffers from persistent budget and 
current account deficits. Instead, TWF acts more like a state-owned holding fund that holds 
shares in state-owned enterprises (as explained in chapter 8). 
When TWF started its operations in 2016 with a founding capital of merely $17 million, 
critics claimed that the fund would function as a “parallel budget” that the Turkish 
government could exploit to carry out economic and financial transactions outside of 
parliamentary oversight and public audits.5 Seven years on, Turkish President Recep Tayyip 
Erdoğan has used it to reward individual and institutional clients, settle political scores, 
consolidate economic and political power, and shield his economic and financial policies 
from parliamentary oversight and public audits. This misuse has further deepened the 
country’s acute governance deficit and contributed to the economy’s underperformance. 
In the absence of any viable revenue stream, the Turkish government transferred state-owned 
enterprises and assets to TWF, but the fund has failed to demonstrate any value-added 
through these asset transfers. In January 2017, the government issued a state-of-emergency 
decree to hand over the national lottery and betting rights to the fund. The Turkish 


Carnegie Endowment for International Peace   |   7
Treasury’s stakes in the country’s two largest public lenders, Ziraat Bank and Halkbank; 
the state oil company Turkish Petroleum Corporation; the flagship carrier Turkish Airlines; 
and the former state telecommunications monopoly Turk Telekom were also transferred to 
TWF shortly thereafter with another state of emergency decree. In 2020, TWF acquired 
a majority stake in the country’s largest mobile phone operator, Turkcell, through a deal 
involving questionable offshore deals, conflicts of interest, and irregular transactions. As a 
result, according to the Sovereign Wealth Fund Institute, the fund’s assets exceeded $279 
billion as of 2023.
Meanwhile, the Turkish government turned TWF into a collateral instrument to take out 
additional loans in an economy with an already sizable debt burden of around $450 billion; 
there was a need to refinance $170 billion in mainly dollar-denominated loans in 2022 
alone. In seeking loans, the fund competes not only with the Turkish Treasury but also with 
private corporations to access local and international capital markets. 
Chapter 9 describes the role that China’s SWFs play in underwriting China’s Belt and Road 
Initiative (BRI), which has not only supercharged infrastructure investment worldwide but 
also brought long-standing questions about corruption and political influence to the fore. 
One key investment sector for SWFs is infrastructure. Infrastructure investment is expected 
to reach $79 trillion globally by 2040, but alongside extractive industries such as oil and gas, 
it is the economic sector that remains most strongly associated with corruption risks given 
that an estimated 20–30 percent of infrastructure project value is lost through corruption. 
While China’s policy banks and state-owned commercial banks are the front-end lenders in 
BRI financing of infrastructure projects, China’s State Administration for Foreign Exchange 
(SAFE) and its associated China Investment Corporation (CIC) sovereign wealth fund have 
provided much of the capital, as well as the financial intermediation tools and financial 
management to move funds from China’s foreign exchange reserves to the BRI’s projects and 
to help oversee use of the funds.
China’s SWFs have raised some corruption concerns in their own right. A 2016 probe 
by the Communist Party’s powerful anti-graft body, the Central Commission for 
Discipline Inspection, reported of CIC that “there were wrongdoings in policymaking and 
severe problems in the tunneling of interests” and that problems of discipline “occurred 
frequently.”6 Both SAFE and CIC were reexamined by the commission in early 2022 as part 
of a broader crackdown on financial sector excess. However, these pronouncements should 
be treated cautiously given the politicized nature of the anti-corruption campaign.
Instead, the opacity associated with the BRI overall and the way that its financing is 
disbursed can both be at risk for corruption and conflicts of interest.  There is no formal 
BRI national membership process or structure, with participation in the BRI most often 
signified through non–legally binding memorandums of understanding (MOUs) or other, 
less formal cooperation agreements between China and recipient governments. There is no 
official list of all BRI projects, nor are there consistent standards, certification schemes, or 


8   |   Sovereign Wealth Funds: Corruption and Other Governance Risks
even branding efforts that signify individual Chinese-backed overseas infrastructure projects 
as being formally part of the BRI (unless they are explicitly mentioned in MOUs). Estimates 
of the value of BRI total investment and contract costs range from roughly $965 billion by 
the American Enterprise Institute as of mid-2023 to $8 trillion by the Center for Global 
Development as of 2018. 
A major BRI corruption concern is that associated with infrastructure projects in BRI 
recipient countries and so-called debt-trap diplomacy. AidData found that 69 percent of 
official lending by China between 2000 and 2017 went to countries whose credit ratings 
scored below the global median and that fully 90 percent of BRI-era official lending went to 
countries that scored beneath the median of the World Bank’s Control of Corruption index. 
This problem arises because, in an extension of China’s stated policy of noninterference in 
other countries’ internal affairs, it generally provides BRI loans with few or no preconditions 
pertaining to transparency, rule of law, or other factors that shape the wider investment climate. 
Moreover, a Peterson Institute study of one hundred bilateral Chinese loans found that all 
loans since 2014 have included “unusual” and “far-reaching” confidentiality clauses that do 
not permit borrowers to disclose any of the contract terms or related information.7 This is 
because, while China’s pre-BRI lending was mostly provided directly to governments, nearly 
70 percent is now directed to state-owned companies and banks, special purpose investment 
vehicles, joint ventures, and private sector firms. These debts, though often substantial, do 
not appear on the public books—though government liability assurances mean that the 
public will still be on the hook should something go awry.
One of the more unique SWF mechanisms is Malta’s National Social and Development 
Fund (NSDF), which has been funded largely through the country’s Citizenship by 
Investment (CBI) programs, better known as “golden passport” schemes. As evidenced in 
chapter 10, CBI programs have long enabled the ultra-wealthy, including the very corrupt, 
to evade scrutiny for misdeeds, to hide assets, and to acquire international mobility by 
purchasing citizenship in other countries. An SWF that runs a very high risk of being 
funded using corrupt, laundered, or ill-gotten wealth strikes at the very heart of what the 
SWF represents by creating a dependency on potentially ill-gotten gains to fund domestic 
development. Furthermore, for the Maltese government to use an SWF to invest such 
proceeds is to benefit from the misdeeds of the corrupt and the criminal. It also allows 
money that may be ill-gotten to move easily through the financial system under the 
protection that being part of an SWF entails. 
Malta is a small island in the Mediterranean Sea that, despite its European Union (EU) 
member state status since 2004, one analyst has described as a “corrupting island in a 
corrupting sea.”8 It has had a “disproportionate role as a hub for transnational illicit flows 
and criminal activities.”9 Malta has had a variety of CBIs; the 2014 iteration was called the 
Individual Investment Program (IIP), whereby after payments and investments totalling 
1.15 million euros ($1.52 million at the average exchange rate for 2014), an individual 
could become a full-fledged EU citizen with a passport and all the citizenship and travel 


Carnegie Endowment for International Peace   |   9
opportunities this entails.10  Partially in response to public criticism, in 2020, Malta 
launched a new CBI program with a higher minimum investment cost and more stringent 
real estate investment requirements.
CBI applicants are supposed to be fully vetted for security risks. These due diligence checks 
are vitally important given the fact that Malta is a member of the EU and its Schengen 
Agreement, affording visa-free travel to up to 182 countries. This travel can allow these new 
citizens to conduct banking and business under looser standards than would be required 
under their original passports. They also receive all of the rights to privacy and rule of law 
and protections against any expropriation that are accorded EU citizens. Moreover, the 
scheme also provides the potential for golden passport holders to do all of this under a new 
name, enabling them to bypass security checks or flags on their previous identities.
Despite a four-tier due diligence process established to vet applicants, information leaks 
revealed that several high-profile Russian individuals obtained citizenship through the IIP 
between 2016 and 2018. These names are just a few of over 700 Russians who by 2018 were 
able to purchase Maltese citizenship. The same leaks revealed that citizenship applicants 
tended to come from countries with a higher risk of money laundering.  A plurality of 
applicants—37 percent—came from Russia, followed by China with 12 percent and Saudi 
Arabia with 10 percent.  
In addition to concerns about who was receiving the passports, there were also concerns 
about potential conflicts of interest in administering the fund: the chairman of NDSF had 
individual interests in several companies that the fund also had stakes in. 
The sale of passports was profitable for Malta’s SWF, and the country’s budget deficit shrank 
dramatically following the introduction of its CBI scheme. But funding a state’s SWF 
through potentially illicit proceeds undermines a country’s rule of law and its citizen trust 
in democratic institutions. The development associated with such funding mechanisms can 
also give ruling parties an edge in elections, helping solidify their state capture. Additionally, 
it can also create perverse incentives whereby states come to rely on illicit funding to stay 
afloat. These schemes have the potential to facilitate strategic corruption in Western states 
by making it easy for authoritarians to seed their crony facilitators abroad under the cover of 
Western residency or citizenship. In turn, these authoritarians can better help their cronies 
to avoid sanctions and facilitate the laundering of kleptocratic assets that help keep their 
regimes in power. Their money can then be used to influence Western politicians and other 
powerbrokers in ways that may undermine larger national security considerations.
The final case study in this report examines the UAE’s use of side contracts associated with 
arms sales to fund one of its main SWFs, Mubadala, and SWFs associated with Tawazun—a 
practice that not only increases corruption risks but also risks larger efforts at peace and 
security worldwide, as described in chapter 11. 


10   |   Sovereign Wealth Funds: Corruption and Other Governance Risks
The defense sector has long been recognized for its association with corruption. Around 
the world, the shielding of large amounts of money and equipment under a veil of national 
security secrecy creates conditions ripe for bribes, kickbacks, and patronage. Especially 
worrisome to good governance and arms control advocates is a special kind of arms 
trade contract known as a defense offset agreement, sometimes referred to as “industrial 
participation” or “countertrade.”  These are provisions in arms contracts that promise specific 
benefits to the contracting country as a condition of that country purchasing defense articles 
or services from a nondomestic supplier. Offset contracts are a major means for defense 
companies to improve an arms contract proposal’s standing vis-à-vis other bidders, but 
they can also be a pathway for kickbacks and patronage, whereby senior officials can direct 
offsets to their own companies or to underlings in return for loyalty. Based on an analysis 
of 134 defense companies worldwide by Transparency International, 90 percent of surveyed 
companies exhibited “limited” to “very low” commitment to combating corruption in 
defense offset contracts.
Countries can require offset deals to be public and transparent, but a high degree of secrecy 
is more often the norm. Some countries, including the UAE, declare these contracts to 
be secret. Others, like the United States, provide only the bare minimum of information. 
Because so many of these offset deals are extremely complex, even when publicized, tracking 
the various flows of funds and potential conflicts of interest can be a challenge.  
The UAE wraps an additional layer of complexity and opacity around defense procurement 
arrangements by funneling much of the funds and contracts through Emirati sovereign 
wealth funds. The UAE is unique in that two of its major SWFs were initially established 
to funnel proceeds from defense offsets to Emirati companies and citizens, and they remain 
intimately tied to the Emirati defense industry.
Mubadala, founded in 2002 by the UAE Offsets Group, was created as a civilian adjunct 
to the overall defense offset program of the Emirate of Abu Dhabi’s military-procurement-
focused, high-tech industrial development program. A series of mergers brought its assets 
to $284 billion in 2018, and it is now the third-largest SWF in the UAE and the thirteenth 
largest in the world.
Tawazun Council (commonly referred to as Tawazun) was established in 1992 as the 
Offset Program Bureau. Tawazun oversees the military component of various defense offset 
agreements. It boasts of creating numerous companies and investment vehicles, including 
the EDGE Group, which is now the UAE’s main state-owned defense industry conglomerate 
with more than twenty companies. In 2019, Tawazun’s associated SWF—Tawazun 
Holding—was absorbed into the Mubadala SWF, and a new $680 million SWF was created 
under Tawazun called the Defense and Security Development Fund (also called the Strategic 
Development Fund). 
Defense offset funds for Persian Gulf countries are supposed to be used to increase 
employment opportunities for their nationals, attract new technologies and foreign 
investment, and reduce their economies’ reliance on oil and gas exports through 


Carnegie Endowment for International Peace   |   11
diversification strategies. In reality, the defense offsets themselves have generally not created 
many actual jobs, especially compared to the large burden offsets place on state budgets. 
Moreover, because the purchasing countries front much of the cost of offsets through tax 
credits and other investment incentives, these programs can be an especially economically 
inefficient means of generating job growth and facilitating technology transfer. 
In the UAE, the defense procurement that feeds into these offset contracts and their 
associated SWFs is especially susceptible to possible corruption risks. According to 
Transparency International’s Government Defence Integrity (GDI) Index, which assesses the 
comprehensiveness of anti-corruption measures in national defense institutions, the UAE is 
considered a “very high risk” country for defense sector corruption: procurement processes 
are opaque, underregulated, and lack public oversight. Based on research conducted in 2019, 
the GDI found no laws or regulations that address the UAE’s defense procurement process. 
Instead, acquisitions are guided by a secret strategy derived by a small team of Emirati 
officials and foreign consultants. The UAE has no official reporting mechanisms regarding 
defense acquisitions except for occasional disclosures to defense industry journalists and 
experts. While some basic internal auditing practices are in place, there are no external 
oversight bodies that can monitor the administration of the UAE’s defense purchases. 
Moreover, while Mubadala has signed onto the IFSWF and its Santiago Principles and has 
received good overall ratings by the Peterson Institute’s SWF Scorecard, Tawazun’s SWF has 
not been rated by the Peterson Institute and is not a member of the IFSWF or a signatory to 
its Santiago Principles. 
In addition to corruption concerns, there can be an especially troubling nexus with conflict 
and state fragility.  For example, the UAE’s Horizon Flight Training Academy was founded 
via defense offset contracts and is under the EDGE Group umbrella. The majority of its 
pilots go to the Emirati military, where they have flown in highly controversial military 
operations in Yemen. This arrangement points to how the funding of SWFs associated with 
the arms trade can also undermine other global security goals.
Three Parallel Paths to SWF Reform
The cases in this compilation highlight the need for substantial reform in global SWF 
governance.  For reform to be effective, it must follow along three simultaneous, parallel paths.
Policy Reform for Countries Where SWFs Invest and Private Sector 
Intermediaries Interact With SWFs
When used appropriately, SWFs can help diversify economies, save resources for future 
generations, help smooth potential swings in the budgets of natural-resource-based 
economies, and help address budget deficits, especially in hard times. The case studies in this 


12   |   Sovereign Wealth Funds: Corruption and Other Governance Risks
compilation have documented, however, that there can be significant gaps in how SWFs are 
governed, in both the states that create the SWFs and the countries where SWFs are invested.
One significant problem is the lack of laws and regulations that mandate oversight of 
SWF investments. What oversight exists is almost exclusively focused on national security 
concerns in the countries where the investments occur, and little attention is paid to assessing 
and addressing corruption, money laundering, and other associated governance risks.
In the United States, for instance, federal laws do not specifically restrict SWF investments 
but rather look to scrutinize or restrict foreign investments that pose a national security 
risk. These laws operate in conjunction with sector-specific restrictions in areas like 
telecommunications, energy, and other specific laws that restrict foreign investment. But 
outside of these generalized restrictions, there appears to be no publicly available guidance 
on how to address or conduct anti–money laundering due diligence on SWFs. 
Other countries, such as the United Kingdom, have partial, directed guidance on how to 
address anti–money laundering and counter threat finance (AML/CFT) risks in SWFs. To 
address SWF corruption, money laundering, and other associated governance risks, national 
governments and private sector actors must first recognize the enabling role they have in 
facilitating red flag behavior and then address the governance and regulatory gaps that allow 
this behavior. 
The following policy recommendations could help address these gaps:
•	
National governments should establish a regulatory rubric that examines SWFs for 
both national security risks and significant corruption and money laundering risks. 
This rubric would automatically make verifiable information on particularly high-
risk SWFs more readily available.
•	
Because SWFs often invest through private equity funds, hedge funds, and venture 
capital funds, jurisdictions should ensure that the private investment fund sector 
has requisite AML/CFT obligations such as full customer due diligence. And these 
obligations should be appropriately enforced.
•	
Jurisdictions should prioritize the creation of strong beneficial ownership registries 
that require a business, trust, charity, or other entity to declare who actually owns or 
controls it. If the beneficial owner includes an SWF, this should have to be declared 
as part of the registry process. This act is critical for continued information sharing 
and to track the movement of ill-gotten gains of political elites, gains that can move 
more easily via these funds. 
•	
Financial institutions and entities obliged to implement AML/CFT frameworks 
should be provided detailed guidance on how to assess SWFs for AML/CFT and 
corruption risks. The “sovereign” nature of a fund should not provide automatic 


Carnegie Endowment for International Peace   |   13
legitimacy to an SWF’s financial transactions. The language in the UK’s Joint 
Money Laundering Steering Group (JMLSG) offers a good starting point.
•	
Jurisdictions should implement more stringent penalties, including the loss of 
a license and criminal prosecution, for individuals that enable corrupt activity. 
Despite record fines, financial institutions, law firms, accounting firms, and other 
intermediaries continue to engage in bad behavior, as laid out in numerous examples 
throughout this report.
•	
Governing bodies for international sporting events should ensure that any SWFs 
involved are subject to the independent audit or disclosure requirements of contracts 
awarded, including full financial reporting to address associated corruption and 
money laundering risks. 
•	
Capital market regulators, such as the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission, 
should create more detailed SWF investment forms that include the name and 
location of all sub-funds, co-investments, and direct and indirect investments.
Policy Reform in Countries Where SWFs Are Created
Fortunately, substantive work has already been done to identify the key reforms needed 
to ensure that states create robust accountability mechanisms. But the absence of global 
assessments or enforcement mechanisms, such as through civil society or investigative 
journalist mechanisms, has limited the broad-based uptake of these suggested reforms. 
Leading experts in the field have identified four internal reform efforts that are critical to 
addressing SWF-related governance, corruption, and money laundering challenges. Every 
SWF should: 
1.	 Establish a well-defined institutional structure for the SWF, including by setting 
clear fund objectives. For instance, plainly state whether the fund seeks to stabilize 
the budget, save for future generations, or dedicate its resources to development 
goals; disallow the use of vague, undefined terms that can make it hard to assess the 
SWF’s objectives. 
2.	 Set a rules-based investment mandate that spells out what percentage can be made 
in equities versus real estate versus development projects. Restricting domestic 
expenditure through the SWF and mandating that domestic investments follow 
a budgetary process are additional ways to mitigate fund losses and risks around 
patronage networks and crony capitalism.
3.	 Develop and operationalize well-defined, rational fiscal rules. The rules would 
dictate when and how money could be withdrawn and deposited into the fund. 


14   |   Sovereign Wealth Funds: Corruption and Other Governance Risks
For instance, Russia and Abu Dhabi do not have withdrawal and deposit rules. 
By contrast, Alaska and Texas in the United States, as well as Chile, Norway, and 
Timor-Leste, have clear rules on withdrawals and deposits and require disclosures 
on fund activities, transactions, and fund managers.
4.	 Establish independent oversight of the fund. This would ensure that there is a 
clear division of responsibilities between the fund manager, who has overarching 
authority over the SWF, and those running the day-to-day operations; it would also 
help create a clear mapping of the ethical and conflict of interest considerations. 
Additionally, it would ensure that the fund provides an exhaustive disclosure of its 
investments, fund managers, and audited financial statements. Independent over-
sight authorities within the country should monitor fund behavior and raise queries 
about management and performance. Alberta in Canada, North Dakota and Texas 
in the United States, and Norway have funds with strong independent oversight 
mechanisms. SWFs must also be accountable politically to a parliament or congress, 
accountable legally to the judiciary, and accountable operationally to the auditor 
general or some other supervisory body that is both formal and independent. There 
should also be sufficient information available for civil society, journalists, and 
international organizations like the IMF so that they can also serve as effective 
oversight mechanisms.
Revisiting and Reframing International Standards on SWFs
Since their creation, the Santiago Principles have remained entirely voluntary and have not 
been reviewed or updated. The fact that they are voluntary helps make the case that SWFs 
are ill-equipped to address and enforce the governance challenges of SWFs and the security 
concerns of the countries where they invest. 
While the Santiago Principles have long provided clear context for studying and regulating 
SWFs’ impact, nowhere in the drafting language is there explicit reference to the potential 
for abuse. Because the principles have remained static, they do not account for changes in 
how SWFs are used and operated. 
Critics of the Santiago Principles also note that there is no explicit acknowledgment of the 
significant increase in “novel forms of partnership and collaboration” in “sovereign-private 
arrangements.”11 Explicitly recognizing this increase and enhancing disclosure requirements 
of these arrangements would alleviate concerns around both national security and 
corruption risks. 
Additionally, there is no requirement to publish audited statements or send them to an 
international organization that can act as an independent third-party verifier of information. 
Other international mechanisms such as the Extractive Industry Transparency Initiative—
which sets best practices for oil, gas, and mining governance—include this requirement. 


Carnegie Endowment for International Peace   |   15
The IFSWF also lacks any legal authority to enforce its standards, and unlike with money 
laundering and tax evasion, international organizations and civil society have shied away 
from naming and shaming as a way of ensuring compliance. 
Self-regulation is ineffective because it is simply not in the interest of the SWFs to critically 
examine their frameworks. Therefore, the overhaul of international standards must involve 
greater dialogue and guidance from both the OECD and IMF; SWF reform will not trickle 
down at the country level unless there are measurable international standards against which 
SWFs are compared. 
The following policy recommendations may help address these gaps: 
•	
The Santiago Principles should be revised to reflect current SWF practices and risks. 
Any such revision effort should seek input from a wide variety of stakeholders and 
specifically include civil society organizations. 
•	
The Santiago Principles should be revised to serve as both guiding principles and 
effective standards against which international organizations like the IMF can 
conduct assessments. There is precedent for this: countries allow their AML/CFT 
standards to be assessed by the Financial Action Task Force (FATF) or its regional 
bodies, and the assessment is not perceived as impinging on states’ sovereignty.
•	
The OECD should move its focus beyond the narrow prism of security threats to 
investment jurisdictions and publish a comprehensive international best practices 
paper that addresses both the internal and external aspects of SWF corruption risk.
•	
SWFs that are at high risk for corruption and money laundering should be red 
flagged.12
The intention of this compilation is not to undermine the tremendous value that a well-
governed SWF can provide for a country and its citizens for generations to come. Valuable 
lessons abound from the experience of countries that have successfully transitioned from 
natural-resource-dependent economies to economic diversification.  At the same time, this 
compilation and the reforms suggested serve to highlight the need for more critical study 
around the governance risks of SWFs. Failure to understand these risks will lead to SWFs 
failing to deliver on their promise of economic security and generational citizen wealth.
Note: Citations are used only for direct quotes in this summary; all material used in this summary 
is fully sourced throughout the compilation.




17
CHAPTER 1 
﻿Sovereign Wealth Funds and  
Ongoing Corruption, Illicit Finance,  
and Governance Risks
Lakshmi Kumar
Sovereign wealth funds (SWFs) have existed for more than a century, typically as state-
sponsored financial institutions that manage a country’s budgetary surplus, accrue profit, 
and protect a country’s wealth for future generations.13 Yet, for the economies in the 
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD), SWFs only burst 
into public consciousness in the mid-2000s, when widespread concerns arose that SWFs 
with large amounts of capital could control strategically important assets and threaten the 
national security of countries where they deployed their investments.14 
The term SWF itself refers to money that is invested by a country in order to protect it 
from economic shocks or to save it for future generations. The institutions featured in this 
paper have been included and classified as SWFs if they are members of the International 
Forum of Sovereign Wealth Funds (IFSWF), if leading investor subscription services like the 
Sovereign Wealth Fund Institute have categorized them as SWFs, or if cases or investigations 
have referenced them as SWFs. Only vehicles owned by a country’s national government 
have been included.
Early SWFs were set up in countries whose economies were reliant on exporting natural 
resources like oil, phosphate, and copper (for example, Chile, Kiribati, Kuwait, and 
Norway). Governments wanted to create a mechanism by which excess revenues generated 
when commodity prices were high could act as a buffer when there was an economic 
downturn. SWF investments also helped smooth out budgets, as the prices of those exports 
could rise and fall on international markets. SWF funding sources have expanded to include 
any surplus from foreign reserves, budgets, a country’s central bank reserves, public-private 
partnerships, or citizenship-by-investment schemes.   


18   |   Sovereign Wealth Funds: Corruption and Other Governance Risks
In the 1990s, SWFs held merely $500 billion in assets,15 but by 2020, they had more than 
$7.5 trillion in assets under management (AUM), equal to about 7 percent of the global 
AUM of $111.2 trillion.16 This exponential growth in SWF investments has seemingly 
ignored many potential systemic corruption and other governance challenges. As outlined 
in this chapter and those that follow, SWFs are often found in countries with high risks of 
corruption and significant governance challenges including poor rule of law. And because 
SWFs are usually completely under the control of governments, they can be used to pursue 
purely political goals. Moreover, SWFs often have no fiduciary responsibilities or minimal 
reporting obligations, making it difficult to understand where a country’s money is invested. 
Despite SWFs being publicly financed entities, they are not subject to rigorous international 
financial disclosure and accountability mechanisms that would check for issues such as 
corruption. There is also a substantial network of intermediaries (financial experts and 
professionals) that help SWFs invest, which, as this paper documents, can raise the risk of 
corruption and other governance challenges, if there is poor oversight and accountability. 
Basically, SWFs are only subject to voluntary self-regulation, and so far, as of 2021 twenty-
nine SWFs—which account for roughly 80 percent of all SWF assets—are only in partial 
compliance with the self-assessment standards set out by IFSWF.17 
Public consciousness of SWFs, their roles in economies, and their potential political impact 
grew during the 2007–2008 global financial crisis. Some SWFs played a “white knight” role 
to several Western financial institutions, providing large capital infusions to banks facing 
bankruptcy.18 In the first six months of 2008, SWFs injected more than $80 billion into 
Barclays, Merrill Lynch, Morgan Stanley, and UBS, stabilizing the global credit market.19 At 
the same time, however, these large investments drew much more public scrutiny to SWFs. 
Yet, most of the international, government, and academic discourse since then has centered 
around the impact of SWFs on corporate governance, financial market stability, and 
national security risks—with corruption risks rarely being discussed.
The potential for SWFs to be used for grand corruption and kleptocracy first gained 
widespread attention in the early 2010s due to a scandal involving a Malaysian SWF called 
1Malaysia Development Berhad (1MDB), which is described in detail in chapter 3. Under 
former Malaysian prime minister Najib Razak and a financier named Jho Low, a series of 
con artists, bankers, Malaysian elites, and even Hollywood movie stars benefited from the 
diversion of more than $4 billion in funds from Malaysia’s 1MDB SWF.20 As media reports 
began to highlight troubling issues with the fund and as the U.S. Department of Justice 
launched an investigation, 1MDB found it difficult to use the international banking system. 
However, elites from Saudi Arabia and the United Arab Emirates came to the rescue, using 
their personal reputations and their own SWFs to help 1MDB continue to launder funds.   
In the wake of that headline-grabbing corruption scandal, the question that remains 
unanswered is whether current research, government regulation, and international standards 
can adequately deal with the corruption and other governance risks that SWFs present. 
Using case studies of SWFs from Africa, Asia, Europe, and the Middle East, the chapters 
in this compilation demonstrate that enduring systemic governance issues and regulatory 


Carnegie Endowment for International Peace   |   19
gaps have enabled SWFs to act as conduits of corruption, money laundering, and other 
illicit activities. For SWFs to achieve their full potential, reform is needed not only at the 
institutional level of the SWF but also across the variety of actors and jurisdictions that 
make up the supply chain of SWF activity.
This introductory chapter is intended to help set the scene for what is a complex topic. The 
chapter presents an overview of SWFs, the potential risks of corruption and rent-seeking 
activities, and the impact these behaviors can have on a country’s citizens. The chapter also 
demonstrates how SWFs have evolved, how they are funded, where and how they invest, 
and the current international and domestic regulatory landscape. Finally, it summarizes the 
different SWFs examined and the recommendations for helping them reach their potential.
What’s in a Name: Challenges With Defining a SWF
Any discussion of SWFs is incomplete without addressing an ever-present definitional 
conundrum. Though recognized SWFs like the Kuwait Investment Authority (KIA) have 
been around since the 1950s,21 the term “sovereign wealth fund” emerged only in 2005,22 
when it was coined by financial analyst Andrew Rozanov as a way to differentiate SWFs 
from other institutional investors.23 Since then, however, international organizations, 
governments, and academics have all created and employed slightly different definitions of 
the term SWF.24 The lack of a clear, single definition makes monitoring SWFs for money 
laundering, corruption, and other rent-seeking especially challenging because there is no 
uniform way to provide guidance on potential risks and to identify what financial behavior 
should be monitored and assessed. The differences in SWF definitions have also prevented 
states from maximizing their combined efforts in countering illicit acts. 
Perhaps the best-recognized definition is the one contained in the Generally Accepted 
Principles and Practices (GAPP) that govern SWFs, otherwise known as the Santiago 
Principles. Drafted by the International Working Group on SWFs, the Santiago Principles 
define SWFs as “special-purpose investment funds or arrangements that are owned by 
the general government.”25 Created for macroeconomic purposes, SWFs hold, manage, or 
administer assets to achieve financial objectives and employ a set of investment strategies 
that include investing in foreign financial assets. SWFs are commonly established out 
of balance-of-payments surpluses, official foreign currency operations, the proceeds of 
privatizations, fiscal surpluses, and/or receipts resulting from commodity exports.
The Santiago Principles are considered global foundational standards under which SWFs 
have committed themselves to operate. A key element of the SWF definition is that the fund 
must be owned by a national or subregional government. For example, a fund owned by the 
state of Alaska would qualify as an SWF because it was owned by a state government within 
the United States. The next criterion is that the vehicle’s investments must include foreign 
investments. Therefore, any fund with a mandate to invest all its money domestically would 
not be considered an SWF. By that measure, the Türkiye Wealth Fund (discussed in chapter 


20   |   Sovereign Wealth Funds: Corruption and Other Governance Risks
8 of this compilation) would not usually be considered a SWF, as it has a purely domestic 
mandate. But to ensure consistency across the cases presented here, entities treated as 
SWFs in practice, such as the Turkish fund, are also included. Appendix A provides a more 
detailed discussion of various SWF definitions.
The Growth and Evolution of SWFs 
Charting the story of SWF growth provides important evidence for why so many SWFs 
appear to have serious corruption, money laundering, and other governance risks. Globally, 
prior to 2010, there were only fifty-eight SWFs.26 Today, however, SWFs have become an 
increasingly “fashionable” type of state-owned entity (see figure 1), and there are currently 
118 operating or prospective SWFs.27 In the African continent alone, prior to 2000, there 
were only two SWFs. Since 2000, sixteen new SWFs have been set up (see figure 2). This 
increase in the number of SWFs has also meant a dramatic increase in the value of the assets 
that they own or control.   
 
Figure 1. Percentage of SWFs Launched Across Time Periods
Source: Adapted from the graphic found in “The UK as a Leading Centre for International Wealth Funds,” The CityUK, June 8, 2021, 11, 
https://www.thecityuk.com/our-work/the-uk-as-a-leading-centre-for-international-sovereign-wealth-funds.


Carnegie Endowment for International Peace   |   21
Figure 2. SWFs in the African Continent, By Year Established
Source: Author’s analysis 
This dramatic growth in SWFs is concerning because they have been established not just in 
countries with strong rule of law and civil liberty protections but also in countries marked 
by high corruption risks, insecurity, violence, and weak or absent rule of law. For example, 
in 1999, the State Oil Fund of the Republic of Azerbaijan was set up, and as of April 2023, 
it reportedly had $53.4 billion in AUM.28 Meanwhile, in 2022, Transparency International’s 
(TI) Corruption Perceptions Index (CPI) gave Azerbaijan a failing score of 23 out of 100, 
ranking the country 157 out of 180 countries; in 2021, the World Bank’s Rule of Law 
Index (ROLI) ranked the country 131 out of 192 countries.29 In another example, in 2002, 
Equatorial Guinea’s Fund for Future Generations was set up (see chapter 4), and now it 
reportedly has $165 million in AUM.30 Yet the CPI gave Equatorial Guinea a failing score of 
17 out of 100, ranking the country 171 out of 180 countries; the ROLI ranked the country 
175 out of 192 countries.31 Figures 3 and 4 demonstrate the CPI and ROLI index scores of 
African countries where SWFs have been established.32 With few exceptions, like Botswana 
and Namibia, the vast majority of countries on the continent that have or plan to set up 
SWFs have significant corruption risks and weak rule of law systems. Can SWFs that are 
meant to safeguard wealth for future generations successfully operate in a corruption-rich 
environment? The evidence that unfolds in the following chapters raises serious concerns 
about the state of play of existing governance norms and enforcement efforts. It also provides 
a compelling narrative on the need for clear policies related to the management of SWFs and 
lends weight to the recommendations included at the end of this compilation. 


22   |   Sovereign Wealth Funds: Corruption and Other Governance Risks
Figure 3. Corruption Perception Index Scores of African Countries with SWFs African countries, 2022  
Note: Transparency International assesses that a CPI score below 50 indicates that the country has a serious corruption problem.  
Source: Transparency International Corruption Perception Index, https://www.transparency.org/en/cpi/2022. 
Figure 4. Cumulative Rule of Law Index Ranks of African Countries with SWFs (1996–2021 ) 
Source: World Bank Rule of Law Index, https://databank.worldbank.org/databases/rule-of-law; and The Global Economy.com, https://
www.theglobaleconomy.com/rankings/wb_ruleoflaw/.


Carnegie Endowment for International Peace   |   23
This dramatic growth in SWFs is also concerning because the sources of funding, objectives, 
mandates, investment portfolios, and the legal mechanisms through which SWFs have 
been set up vary significantly, making it more difficult to monitor and assess SWF behavior. 
Early SWFs could be broadly divided into three categories based on their unique objectives: 
(1) stabilization funds established to insulate a country’s economy from both internal and 
external shocks; (2) capital maximization funds established to transform natural resource 
revenues into longer-term wealth for future generations;  and (3) strategic development funds 
established to help create jobs, improve infrastructure and development within the country, 
and ultimately help diversify the economy by moving it away from reliance on a particular 
sector or natural resource. Today, SWFs often have multiple objectives and mandates, and 
governments can alter the objectives based on changing priorities. 
For instance, the KIA was set up in 1953 with the objective to invest the Kuwait’s excess 
oil revenues and preserve the country’s oil wealth for future generations, and its mission 
has not changed.33 Similar to the KIA, the Revenue Equalization Reserve Fund of Kiribati 
was created in 1956 to act as a store of wealth for the country’s earnings from phosphate 
mining.34 Early funds of this type were conservative in their investment strategies, primarily 
focused on investing in a mix of money market instruments.35 
However, later SWFs—such as Bpifrance, Singapore’s GIC, the Türkiye Wealth Fund, 
and the Maltese National Development and Social Fund—were set up as noncommodity 
funds financed through the respective country’s foreign reserves or as existing public equity 
interests or assets financed through the sale of state-owned assets (or in Malta’s case, through 
the sale of the country’s passports).36 As the sources of funding have changed, so have the 
investments, objectives, and mandates of the funds. 
According to the case studies in this compilation, SWFs have been used to amass large art 
collections (see chapter 3); acquire global sports teams and sponsor international sporting 
events (chapter 4); fund the development of, and manage the profits from, a national 
COVID-19 vaccine program (chapter 7);  and route payments for defense contracts 
(chapter 11). All these investments are supposed to further the SWF’s stated goals of capital 
maximization, macroeconomic stability, or economic development. However, in reality, they 
are commonly linked to an array of potentially unlawful activities. And as each of the case 
studies in this compilation highlight, one need not probe far to reveal a pattern of troubling 
behavior. But, as this compilation will also lay out, domestic and international standards 
lack the language necessary to identify risks that lead to this behavior. Additionally, the 
discussion around SWF risks is seemingly divorced from the wider discourse on anti-
corruption, anti–money laundering, and other norms associated with other types of state-
owned entities.
Figure 5 illustrates that SWFs exist across a range of categories. Coupled with the 
aforementioned definitional issue, these variations in type make identifying atypical SWF 
behavior or SWFs at risk for corruption and money laundering all the more challenging.


24   |   Sovereign Wealth Funds: Corruption and Other Governance Risks
Figu 
re 5. Characteristics of SWFs With Examples
*Liquid assets includes equities, fixed income, cash, and money markets. Non-liquid assets includes alternative private equity, 
 
infrastructure, real estate, and hedge funds. 
Source: “Sovereign Investors 2020: A Growing Force,” PwC, 2020, 5, https://www.pwc.com/gx/en/sovereign-wealth-investment-funds/
publications/assets/sovereign-investors-2020.pdf.


Carnegie Endowment for International Peace   |   25
In addition to the aforementioned factors, how an SWF’s objectives are fulfilled can 
contribute to governance and illicit finance risks.  The mechanics of these investments and 
the network of actors and jurisdictions that facilitate these investments provide additional 
context on why corruption and broader governance risks of SWFs are allowed to thrive. 
As complex investment vehicles, SWFs and their investment strategies can be mapped in 
myriad ways; however, because the intention of this compilation is to address the corruption 
and money laundering pathways of SWFs, this paper will focus on answering three 
questions: How do SWFs invest? Who helps SWFs invest? And where do SWFs invest?
How Do SWFs Invest? 
The purpose and objective of a fund determine how its investments are directed. For 
instance, capital maximization funds like the KIA—which tend to be the most “risk-
seeking”—invest in hedge funds, real estate, private equity, and infrastructure (known 
collectively as “alternatives”) and other so-called yield-generating assets to meet their 
objectives. These assets aim to bring an investor short-to-medium-term returns by paying out 
dividends, providing an interest, or generating similar financial income.  
Stabilization funds like the Mexico Oil Revenues Stabilization Fund have short investment 
time horizons and tend to be very liquid. As a result, they are looking for investment 
opportunities, such as bonds, treasury bills, and guaranteed investment certificates, 
otherwise known as long-term fixed income securities.37 Finally, sitting in the middle, 
economic development funds like Mubadala in the United Arab Emirates (UAE) invest in 
alternatives and other safer assets—such as short-term fixed income securities—to ensure 
a stable stream of lower-risk financing and to provide the SWF with consistent returns (see 
figure 5).38 
These neat demarcations are useful in categorizing the overall mode of operations of SWFs, 
but they do not reflect all the ways in which a country uses an SWF or how the SWF’s 
priorities can shift over time.39 Stabilization funds, which tend to be the most risk averse, 
invest their money in cash, shares listed on a stock exchange, or investments that will 
provide a fixed income to the SWF through the life cycle of the investment. 
For instance, the Malaysian 1MDB fund was set up as an economic development fund, and 
its investments were apparently intended to further the country’s development goals. But 
as chapter 3 discusses, these investments were merely a front to divert $4.5 billion with the 
assistance of numerous individuals, including government officials from Malaysia, Saudi 
Arabia, and the UAE. The investment mechanism was seemingly legitimate—involving 
financial institutions with world-class reputations, such as Goldman Sachs—but, in reality, 
it was laundering stolen money to fund the individuals’ lavish lifestyles. 
Saudi Arabia’s Public Investment Fund (PIF) has a similar global footprint and now 
supposedly has about $700 billion in AUM (see chapter 6 and figure 6).40 However, 
officials within the PIF have reportedly voiced concerns about the riskiness of PIF’s $2 


26   |   Sovereign Wealth Funds: Corruption and Other Governance Risks
billion investment into Affinity Partners, a private equity fund owned and operated by 
Jared Kushner.41 Investments like this and the recent pact between Saudi Arabia’s LIV 
golf tournament with the Professional Golf Association (PGA) Tour blur the line between 
pursuing economic development and purchasing economic or political influence, thus 
making assessments around corruption and other governance risks more challenging.
The way these SWF investments are carried out presents another difficulty in tracking them. 
SWF investment methods broadly fall into three types: 
Indirect SWF investment (the most traditional method), in which the SWF provides 
capital to another investment fund and allows that fund to manage the SWF’s money.42 
This method accounted for the bulk of SWF activity in 2020 and 33 percent of all SWF 
allocations.43 
Direct SWF investment, such as the Qatar Investment Authority’s (QIA) purchase of the 
French soccer club Paris Saint-Germain in 2011–2012.44 
SWF and partner co-investment, such as the complicated 2016 deal between QIA and the 
commodity trading firm Glencore to invest in Russian oil giant Rosneft.45 
Each investment method has an impact on profitability and its own corruption, money 
laundering, and governance risks. On the face of it, direct SWF investment may appear 
the easiest to track and therefore the easiest for public oversight and for authorities to check 
Figure 6. Investment Fund Map of Saudi Arabia’s PIF
Source: “PIF Investments: The Fund’s Investments Map,” https://www.pif.gov.sa/en/Pages/OurInvestments-Map.aspx.


Carnegie Endowment for International Peace   |   27
for money laundering or corruption risks. However, financial institutions and government 
agencies still need to explicitly evaluate and differentiate these risks based on the SWF’s 
location and the governance and transparency levels within the fund. With much of the 
discourse focused on the national security risks of SWFs, there appears to be little scrutiny 
of a variety of other types of risks. For instance, a lawsuit filed in Massachusetts alleges that 
$3.5 billion was stolen from the Saudi PIF and some of it was used to purchase eight condos 
in Boston.46 Yet prior to the lawsuit filed by the Saudi government, the transaction did not 
raise any red flags from financial institutions within the United States. 
Still, indirect SWF investment may be more challenging to track and monitor. SWFs can 
often invest in a private equity fund and then use the private equity fund to make further 
purchases. This obscures the SWF’s identity and creates corruption, money laundering, and 
national security risks. For instance, a 2018 report from the U.S. Department of Defense 
stated that through such investment strategies, the Chinese government has been able to 
gain access to numerous cutting-edge, sensitive technologies from U.S. companies, which 
the department called “the crown jewels of U.S. innovation.”47 Similarly, another report 
from leading anti-corruption and financial transparency advocacy groups highlighted how 
municipal governments in China funded numerous Chinese venture capital firms that were 
then able to invest in sensitive U.S. technology sectors without drawing attention to their 
government connections.48 
Finally, SWF and partner co-investment may present even more of a challenge. The deal 
in 2016 between the QIA and Glencore helped the two institutions together secure a 19.5 
percent stake in Russian oil giant Rosneft for $11.3 billion.49 This investment was designed 
to give Russia a much-needed cash infusion in response to U.S. and European sanctions on 
Russia following its 2014 invasion of Crimea, which left the Russian economy and national 
budget struggling.50 The deal explicitly allowed Rosneft to repurchase the shares and 
allowed Glencore to purchase 220,000 barrels of oil a day from Rosneft; furthermore, the 
deal was primarily financed through Russian banks due to the ongoing U.S. and European 
sanctions.51 In 2017, Glencore and Rosneft sold 14.16 percent of the shares to China’s CEFC 
energy conglomerate. At the time, the Jamestown Foundation, a leading defense policy think 
tank, posited that this complex structuring would give China the opportunity to extend its 
influence over Rosneft, obtain a reliable oil supply that could not be “interdicted by foreign 
maritime powers,” and strengthen the credibility of the Belt and Road Initiative (BRI).52 
The foundation also argued that the deal would give China “a functional (and opaque) way 
to essentially ‘bribe’ high-level Russian officials with cash that Moscow desperately needs.” 
Regarding Russia, it further stated that the deal would allow Rosneft, which has close 
to ties to Putin, to create “shady privatization schemes and what essentially amounts to a 
sophisticated version of money laundering via VTB.”53 Additionally, it said that the deal 
would allow Russia and President Vladimir Putin to create close relationships with “opaque 
business entities that enjoy state support in the Gulf and China.”


28   |   Sovereign Wealth Funds: Corruption and Other Governance Risks
Who Helps SWFs Invest? 
SWFs require an army of people to help guide and inform their investment strategies. For 
example, Norway’s Government Pension Fund–Global, one of the world’s largest SWFs, has 
a direct staff of more than 500 people from thirty-five countries and operates out of offices 
in Oslo, London, New York, Singapore, and Shanghai.54 Other smaller or less experienced 
SWFs may appoint an external investment manager. The chain of actors that help SWFs 
make investment decisions include the staff of the SWF, financial institutions, various 
private equity funds, consultants that provide expertise on sector-specific investments, 
external fund managers, and various other intermediaries vying for a lucrative piece of the 
SWF pie. 
Many worrying patterns of behavior that repeatedly emerge when examining instances of 
SWF malfeasance and corruption come from weak governance norms that surround these 
external relationships, such as when private sector entities are either looking to gain the 
SWF as a client or are responsible for managing the SWF’s investment portfolio. In reading 
this compilation, the problematic nature of these relationships quickly becomes evident. In 
the case of the Angolan SWF (see chapter 4), the fund’s asset manager, Jean-Claude Bastos 
de Morais, advised the SWF to invest in at least four different opportunities where Bastos 
himself held an interest.55 In another case, the French bank Société Générale agreed to a 
settlement of 963 million euros ($1.05 billion) with the Libyan Investment Authority (LIA) 
for allegedly bribing Libyan officials for the chance to manage the LIA’s investments.56 
The case studies in this compilation demonstrate that a troubling relationship can exist 
between corrupt political regimes and private sector institutions that seek to maximize profit 
or personal gain but may give little consideration to what happens to citizens if the SWF’s 
resources are lost. However, all of this is not to suggest that external advisers should be 
disallowed; rather, stronger governance rules both within SWFs and private sector entities 
are necessary for SWFs to actually benefit from robust, external financial sector expertise. 
Where Do They Invest?
The illicit finance and governance risks within SWFs do not exist in a silo. Almost always, 
SWFs invest outside their home country. Therefore, understanding where SWFs invest 
can be valuable in determining how best to address potential governance risks, including 
risks of corruption and money laundering. A 2021 analysis of a sample of SWF investment 
patterns found that in 2020–2021, the United States, India, China, the United Kingdom, 
Singapore, Russia, and Brazil collectively represented the destination for 73 percent of all 
direct investments. The United States accounted for the largest direct SWF investment at 
28.8 percent, followed by India at 14.7 percent and China at 10.5 percent.57 
This pattern of investment, however, is only true of direct SWF investments. When 
including indirect investments, the amount invested in the United States, while significant, 


Carnegie Endowment for International Peace   |   29
is not as large as the investment in the geographic region where the SWF is based. For 
instance, SWFs based in North America make 72 percent of their investments there, while 
SWFs in Asia make 50 percent of their investments in Asia and only 14 percent of their 
investments in North America (see figure 7). 
These patterns of investment mean that countries serious about preventing their economies 
from being used as a conduit or safe haven for the proceeds of corruption and money 
laundering are in a prime position to scrutinize SWF investments for such risks.
Yet the case studies in this compilation show that despite the corruption, money laundering, 
and other governance risks associated with this significant pool of capital, SWFs or the legal 
structures through which SWFs invest appear to face minimal oversight when traversing the 
international financial system. For instance, as described in chapter 9, there appears to be 
little scrutiny of the Maltese SWF’s equity and bond investments in the United States as well 
as in emerging markets, even though that SWF is funded primarily through a controversial 
citizenship-by-investment program. Likewise, the 1MDB fund discussed in chapter 3 was 
able to invest in real estate, art, and movies in the United States with minimal scrutiny.
Figure 7. Geographic Focus of SWF Investments Based on Origin of SWFs, 2020
Source: “Sovereign Wealth Funds in Motion,” Preqin, May 26, 2021, 20, https://www.preqin.com/insights/research/reports/sovereign-
wealth-funds-in-motion.


30   |   Sovereign Wealth Funds: Corruption and Other Governance Risks
Sovereign Wealth Fund Regulation
Understanding the nature of existing international standards applicable to SWFs provides 
much-needed context on how corruption, illicit finance, and other governance risks within 
SWFs have emerged. The International Working Group of SWFs established the Santiago 
Principles in 2008 as a result of the tension between maintaining open investment policies 
in developed economies and protecting against the national security risks that SWF 
investments bring. The goal was to ensure the “domestic and international legitimacy” 
of SWFs.58 Today, the group’s successor, the International Forum of SWFs (IFSWF), 
champions the principles that specifically require SWFs to be transparent, accountable, 
independent, and commercially oriented.59 While laudable, the principles are not binding 
and only serve as guiding norms for SWF governance. Moreover, they do not acknowledge 
that many SWFs operate in environments with high corruption risks and weak rule of law, 
and they therefore fail to provide any guidance on how best to operate an SWF in  
such environments.60 
The OECD has also provided several guidance documents on SWFs.61 However, to date, 
all of the documents have been designed to help countries where SWFs invest their funds 
address the national security concerns that first brought SWFs to prominence.62 These 
documents and those written by other international organizations such as the World Bank 
conspicuously shy away from using the term “corruption” in matters relating to SWFs. 
This is in sharp contrast to their guidance documents on state-owned enterprises—which 
explicitly address the issue of corruption.63 
This fixation with national security has trickled down into domestic legislation. Across 
both the United States and Europe, numerous laws limit or scrutinize SWF investments for 
potential national or economic security risks but not for corruption and money laundering 
risks. A 2009 report from the U.S. Government Accountability Office laid out the various 
national security restrictions in place across sectors, including transportation, technology, 
communications, national security, and energy (including nuclear energy). However, 
neither the report nor any subsequent public U.S. government agency report has dealt with 
the danger that SWFs could use the United States as a money laundering conduit or a 
destination for corrupt funds.64 
In the absence of binding international standards, greater transparency through public 
information disclosure would help ensure accountability and reduce the risks of corruption 
and other types of illicit finance. This is a model particularly favored by the extractives sector 
to reduce corruption and associated money laundering risks. In many countries, foreign 
aid and investment into the extractives sector is contingent on meeting standards set forth 
by the Extractives Industries Transparency Initiative, the Open Contracting Partnership, 
and other similar efforts.65 However, SWFs have thus far largely succeeded in keeping their 
operations and investments shrouded in secrecy. Exceptions like Norway’s Government 
Pension Fund, which has robust transparency and disclosure practices, have not shifted the 


Carnegie Endowment for International Peace   |   31
overall SWF culture toward transparency. Gaps in transparency and data limit the ability of 
researchers and governments to better capture and track corruption and money laundering 
in SWFs (see chapters 2 and 12).
Finally, in the absence of clear regulations, industries often set up self-regulatory bodies to 
ensure standards and good governance. The IFSWF is the closest organization that exists to 
fulfilling that role for sovereign wealth funds. The organization was incorporated in 2014 
to strengthen the SWF “community through dialogue, research and self-assessment.”66 The 
IFSWF model permits members to self-assess the robustness of their governance standards. 
Needless to say, this has not created the necessary incentives for SWFs to critically examine 
their operations. Several funds mentioned in this report are IFSWF members and have given 
themselves strong self-assessment scores despite the publication of news stories that raise 
legitimate concerns about the operations of these funds. An analysis of IFSWF members’ 
and associate members’ CPI scores reveals that a significant number of SWFs operate in 
corruption-rich environments (see figure 8). It thus remains an open question whether 
IFSWF membership provides some of these funds, whose behavior may raise red flags, a 
reputational benefit and added credibility.
Figure 8. CPI Scores of Countries With SWFs That Are Members of IFSWF, 2022
Note: Palestine is a member of the IFSWF. However, there are no data available on its CPI score, and hence it was omitted from this chart. 
Sources: IFSWF, https://www.ifswf.org/our-members; and Transparency International Corruption Perception Index, https://www.trans-
parency.org/en/cpi/2022.  


32   |   Sovereign Wealth Funds: Corruption and Other Governance Risks
Compilation Overview
Against this backdrop, the eleven chapters in this compilation examine specific cases that 
demonstrate SWFs’ susceptibility to corruption, money laundering, and other governance 
issues and the enabling environment that stymies efforts at detection and public oversight. 
Chapter 2 further describes the potential corruption risks associated with SWFs, including 
how the current voluntary standards fall short. It also documents how the lack of free, publicly 
available data on SWFs prevents oversight and accountability by governments, civil society, 
and the media. It notes that the opacity of SWFs can lead to fears that funds are being used 
for political goals or being co-opted, rather than being used for their stated purpose.
Chapter 3 describes one of the most famous and egregious examples of corruption associated 
with SWFs: the so-called 1MDB scandal. 1MDB was a sovereign development fund 
intended to improve the infrastructure and investment environment of Malaysia. Instead, 
$4.5 billion was siphoned off by senior Malaysian elites, politically connected individuals, 
and bankers to purchase everything from yachts to art to real estate. This case thus provides 
a model for how SWF-associated corruption and money laundering schemes can work and 
how their financial complexity can enable corruption and other malfeasance to continue for 
years largely undetected.
As noted in this introduction chapter, states have traditionally used SWFs to diversify 
the proceeds from natural resources and ensure that the proceeds can be saved for future 
generations.  Chapters 4 and 5 highlight potential governance risks associated with natural-
resource-based funds. In the case of Angola in chapter 4, a highly autocratic regime used 
its control over the government to divert oil funds to relatives and friends of the president, 
even though at the time it was ranked as having relatively good SWF governance by various 
indices. The Angola case also highlights how reforms can create cleaner and more resilient SWFs. 
 
The case of Equatorial Guinea in chapter 5 then describes how an extreme lack of available 
information about SWF activity increases the risks that money will be illegally diverted.  
The well-documented grand corruption associated with the country and the fact that the 
oil—upon which the country’s export revenue depends—is due to begin to run out within a 
decade heighten the need for the highest levels of transparency and good governance of the 
SWF to be instituted in a most timely manner.
Chapter 6 further describes Saudi Arabia’s PIF, one of the world’s largest SWFs. The PIF, 
and especially its associated Vision 2030 fund, has been used to acquire world-famous sports 
teams and even establish an entirely new golf franchise through its pact with the PGA, 
giving Saudi Arabia significant control over the elite-level tournaments associated with 
an entire sport. Such investments provide a means for authoritarian leaders such as Saudi 
Crown Prince Mohammed bin Salman to launder their reputations through sports using the 
proceeds of their country’s natural resources.


Carnegie Endowment for International Peace   |   33
Even SWF funds disbursed to help in an emergency like the coronavirus pandemic are not 
immune from allegations of diversion and corruption. Chapter 7 describes how Russia’s 
leadership gave the funding for and marketing of Russia’s Sputnik V COVID-19 vaccines 
to the Russian Direct Investment Fund (RDIF), an unusual form of SWF. The chapter 
describes how the RDIF forced some countries to purchase Sputnik V vaccines through a 
series of shell companies that eventually raised the price to double what it should have been.67
SWFs are usually established to invest and diversify a country’s natural resource wealth, 
but some countries establish their SWF via loans or taxpayer funds from the state budget 
instead. This means that such funds can become a parallel budget that is out of reach of 
oversight by parliaments and citizens, as illustrated by the case of Türkiye’s SWF in chapter 8.
Scholars and policymakers have long worried that China’s BRI is a mechanism for opaque 
deals designed to help China further its global ambitions, especially through so-called debt-
trap diplomacy. Chapter 9 describes how Chinese SWFs undergird the BRI, providing funds 
to help enable the BRI’s overseas investments.
One of the more unusual means of funding a state’s SWF is covered in chapter 10 and 
features  Malta’s SWF. The country uses the proceeds from the sale of Maltese visas and 
citizenship—so-called golden visas and golden passports—to fund its SWF. Numerous 
investigations by the European Union (EU) and investigative journalists have documented 
that this has enabled some corrupt and criminal actors to receive EU residency and/or 
citizenship and the benefits that go with it. Such funding can create a conflict of interest for 
Malta because tightening its residency and citizenship requirements could undermine its SWF.  
A few countries use the international arms trade to help fund their SWFs, most notably 
the UAE. One of its most famous SWFs, Mubadala, was founded with money from side 
contracts for arms purchases from Western defense firms. The arms sector is notoriously 
fraught with corruption, and the extreme opacity of defense procurement contracts carried 
out through the veil of sovereign wealth funds makes accountability even more difficult. 
Because these SWFs are associated with the arms trade, their activities can also have larger 
ramifications for peace and security, as chapter 11 describes.
Finally, chapter 12 looks at what concrete measures are needed to address the systemic 
challenges in identifying and responding to corruption, illicit finance, and associated 
governance risks associated with SWFs. The chapter examines in greater detail the ongoing 
accountability mechanisms designed to improve SWF governance in their countries of 
origin, the current legal framework in investment destinations, and what more can be done 
to make these legal environments meaningful and robust. It also documents what greater 
transparency among SWFs could mean for both internal and external accountability and, 
finally, explores whether SWFs should be subject to international evaluations on anti–money 
laundering, similar to how many other aspects of the financial system are.




35
CHAPTER 2
﻿Corruption Risks Within  
Sovereign Wealth Funds
David Szakonyi
As sources of long-term, patient capital, sovereign wealth funds (SWFs) offer immense 
potential for countries to achieve their national development goals. Yet as the extensive list 
of examples in this compilation will document, SWFs are at grave risk of embezzlement, 
fraud, political manipulation, and other corrupt uses. At the center of the problem is a lack 
of transparency and accountability, which limits access to comprehensive, accurate data. 
Available data on SWFs is extremely limited, which creates opportunities for bad actors to 
abuse funds for their own interests. Little is known about the investments, operations, or 
internal management of the vast majority of funds around the world, which collectively 
manage over $11.5 trillion in assets.68 Without this detailed financial and operational 
information, the door is being left wide open for rapacious managers and political elites to 
misappropriate investment earnings. Their actions deprive citizens and other stakeholders of 
the opportunity to equally and justly benefit from fund proceeds. 
This chapter highlights the many types of corruption and political risks inherent to the SWF 
industry and demonstrates that recent efforts to improve transparency have fallen woefully 
short. SWFs should be required to disclose far more extensive and detailed information 
about the way they develop strategies, manage assets, compensate executives, engage 
financial intermediaries, and report to political overseers. Only by expanding the availability 
of this critical data can SWFs become truly accountable to their public constituents. 
The Secret Lives of SWFs
Operating as government-owned or government-controlled investment vehicles, SWFs 
acquire assets in private and public financial markets both in their home countries and 
abroad. Having state ownership in some ways sets the SWF industry apart from the private 
investment fund industry, which includes hedge funds, venture capital, and private equity. 


36   |   Sovereign Wealth Funds: Corruption and Other Governance Risks
First, the stated missions of SWFs can go beyond maximizing investment returns; for 
example, they can aim to achieve macroeconomic stability or realize economic development 
initiatives domestically. Rather than pursuing speedy exits, SWFs often have long-term 
horizons and operate as passive investors that take minority rather than controlling stakes 
in target companies. Finally, there is an explicit political layer that distinguishes SWFs from 
private investment funds. Without having fiduciary duties to private investors and clients, 
SWFs are completely beholden to the governments that endow them. Politicians have 
considerable power to shape SWF investment strategies to pursue explicit political goals.
Yet even though their home governments can exert influence over their operations, SWFs 
in practice behave very similarly to certain types of private investment funds. Structurally, 
SWFs are often set up identically to private equity funds, with capital committed to the 
fund managed by an external general partner. This investment model endows the general 
partner with greater autonomy to apply expertise and develop portfolio strategies, but it 
also can result in bloated financial fees and crony relationships that undermine the fund’s 
financial performance. In contrast to popular perceptions, many SWF investments do not 
end up in publicly traded companies that have strictly regulated transparency obligations 
and fiduciary responsibilities. Just like their counterparts in the venture capital, private 
equity, and hedge funds industries, SWFs often purchase minority stakes in unlisted, 
privately held companies.69 
This shared investment preference results in clear similarities in how both SWFs and 
investment funds are regulated. Most countries require little, if any, transparency from 
investment funds (including SWFs) about transactions made outside of public markets. In 
the United States, for example, SWFs are held to the exact same regulatory requirements as 
private pools of capital.70 SWFs are only required to publicly disclose equity stakes equal or 
greater to 5 percent of publicly traded companies. Any remaining investments in privately 
held companies need not be disclosed to shareholders, the general public, or regulatory 
authorities; for these investments, SWFs are on their own to decide what information to 
disclose. SWFs have adopted a number of rationales to justify preserving this opacity around 
their investments, including the threat of domestic political short-term pressures that could 
undermine their long-term investment strategies. The end result is that with few exceptions, 
records of SWF investments in unlisted assets—whether a private company or a real estate 
project—are not publicly available. 
The overlap between SWFs and private investment funds is even more pronounced by the 
fact that many SWFs have become increasingly large investors in private equity, a sector 
notorious for its opacity.71 From 1984 to 2007, twenty-nine SWFs made more than 2,500 
direct private equity investments worth a total of $198 billion.72 Indeed, SWFs comprise 
nineteen of the top forty institutional investors in private equity worldwide.73 In the wake of 
the 2007–2008 global financial crisis, SWFs have even begun accruing substantial debt and 
using leverage to fund some investments—another trademark strategy of the private equity 
industry. SWFs also often act as coinvestors with massive private equity funds. Furthermore, 
SWFs have adopted their own arcane corporate structures called subfunds to coordinate 


Carnegie Endowment for International Peace   |   37
sectoral investments. For example, Egypt’s SWF includes four subfunds, each with its own 
governance, legal structure, investment process, and independent board.74 These vehicles add 
a layer of opacity and complicate outside analysts’ ability to understand the true extent of 
their holdings. 
Instead of enforcing transparency, regulators work to limit the “control” SWFs can exert 
over the companies they acquire stakes in. The majority of SWF investments, whether 
through private equity or other direct investments, are made in international markets 
rather than domestic markets. The extensive use of government-owned assets to buy foreign 
companies has given rise to suspicions about the political motives behind SWF decisions, 
which could disrupt markets in support of government interests.75 Countries such as 
France, Germany, and the United States are putting in place increasingly strict protocols for 
evaluating whether SWF investments are being made in sensitive sectors and therefore could 
generate national security or corporate espionage concerns. Yet many of these protectionist 
procedures are classified, and it can be difficult for investors to learn when government 
scrutiny of SWFs investments is ongoing. SWFs operate in a climate of secrecy, with few if 
any windows into their operating behavior.
Voluntary Self-Regulation Has Made Only Minimal Progress
Surprisingly, the enormous rise of cross-border SWF investments has not sparked the 
creation of a centralized international regulatory body to oversee the industry. Instead, 
growing nervousness among countries hosting SWF investments compelled representatives 
from twenty-three leading funds to found the International Working Group of SWFs in 
2008. The group worked together to develop a set of twenty-four voluntary principles, 
known as the Santiago Principles, to improve transparency and governance. These voluntary 
standards ask SWFs to define their policy purposes, government arrangements, roles and 
responsibilities, and ownership rights, among other issues.76 Widespread adoption of such 
principles was intended to discipline SWF behavior and reassure host countries and the 
general public about the intentions behind these investments, as well as potentially forestall 
protectionist actions.77 However, voluntary participants’ compliance with the Santiago 
Principles still leaves much to be desired. The International Forum of Sovereign Wealth 
Funds (IFSWF) has no power to enforce its own standards, and naming and shaming efforts 
by other nongovernmental organizations have been mostly absent. This means that only a 
few SWFs fully adhere with these basic good governance standards.
Moreover, even those SWFs adhering to the Santiago Principles still fall short of ensuring 
needed transparency. According to the principles, publicly declaring fund objectives does 
not entail the release of annual reports that provide in-depth information on how the SWF 
plans to achieve its objectives. Moreover, there is no clause requiring SWFs to disclose 
essential information on their financial positions, such as audited statements, that could 
shed light on the volume of assets under management or on the use of debt instruments and 
leverage. Although most SWFs report that information to their host-country governments, 


38   |   Sovereign Wealth Funds: Corruption and Other Governance Risks
it is not sent to any international body, such as the International Monetary Fund, that 
could impartially validate and share the data with third parties. What is left is a highly 
decentralized system, where SWFs are free to invest trillions abroad but are not required to 
disclose any comprehensive information on their activities to the public.
The uneven progress toward full transparency is best illustrated through an analysis of the 
SWF Scoreboard. Developed and run by Edwin M. Truman and colleagues for more than 
a decade, the SWF Scoreboard aggregates publicly available information (“fund websites, 
annual reports, and ministries of finance, and other public sources such as IMF reports”) 
and ranks SWFs on thirty-three elements that cover structure, governance, transparency, 
and accountability. A higher score indicates that a SWF is implementing more robust 
governance reforms and disclosing more about its investment activities. Table 1 lists the top 
ten and the bottom ten SWFs according to the 2019 scores, which range from 11 to 100.  
Table 1. 2019 SWF Scoreboard Rankings
Top Ten
Bottom Ten
Country
Fund
Score
Country
Fund
Score
Norway
Government Pension  
Fund Global
100
Qatar
Qatar Investment Authority
46
New Zealand
New Zealand  
Superannuation Fund
94
Saudi Arabia
Public Investment Fund
39
United States
Permanent Wyoming  
Mineral Trust Fund
93
Russia
Russian Direct  
Investment Fund
37
Chile
Economic and Social  
Stabilization Fund
92
United Arab 
Emirates
Emirates Investment Authority
36
Azerbaijan
State Oil Fund of the  
Republic of Azerbaijan
92
Kiribati
Revenue Equalization  
Reserve Fund
35
Canada
Alberta Heritage Savings  
Trust Fund
91
Brunei
Brunei Investment Agency
30
Timor-Leste
Petroleum Fund of Timor-Leste
91
Algeria
Revenue Regulation Fund
26
Chile
Pension Reserve Fund
89
United Arab 
Emirates
Dubai World
24
United States
Alaska Permanent Fund 
Corporation
88
Libya
Libyan Investment Authority
23
Australia
Future Fund
87
Equatorial 
Guinea
Fund for Future Generations
11
Source: Julien Maire, Adnan Mazarei, and Edwin M. Truman, “Sovereign Wealth Funds Are Growing More Slowly, and Governance Issues 
Remain,” Peterson Institute for International Economics, February 2021, https://www.piie.com/publications/policy-briefs/sovereign-
wealth-funds-are-growing-more-slowly-and-governance-issues.


Carnegie Endowment for International Peace   |   39
At the top of the list is Norway’s Government Pension Fund Global, which has consistently 
demonstrated a world-leading commitment to transparency. The fund’s portfolio value 
is updated in real time on its website, and it publishes a lengthy annual report detailing 
board votes, shareholder resolutions, and engagement with target companies, especially 
on environmental, social, and corporate governance.78 Other SWFs have instituted best 
practices that hold them accountable to elected officials. Both Australia and New Zealand 
require managers of their respective SWFs to submit reports regularly to their ministers of 
finance and, in turn, members of their national parliaments.79 The funds themselves are still 
completely separate from political institutions and intended solely to pursue profit, but they 
do not operate in a black hole and are accountable to regulators and monitors. 
It is the more advanced democracies that enact stronger arrangements to ensure that SWFs 
release necessary information. Several funds based in the Middle East, such as the Qatar 
Investment Authority, have been reducing the amount of information available on their 
websites and in their annual reports. Singapore’s SWF, Temasek, prioritizes private deals 
across Asia, either through private equity funds or direct investments in fast-growing sectors 
such as real estate. Both investment strategies thrive on opacity.80
One of the most important predictors of strong transparency scores on the SWF Scoreboard 
is a country’s rank on other indexes of good governance. For example, research into SWFs 
has found a strong correlation between a country’s scoreboard results and the World  
Bank’s Worldwide Governance Indicator of Voice and Accountability; Transparency 
International’s Corruption Perceptions Index; and the Polity IV indicator of democracy.81 
SWF management may often be a reflection of other wider institutional reforms: where 
democracy and good governance are weak, SWFs will likely fail to disclose the necessary 
information to track their operations.82 
Parsing the Data Crumbs
The end result is that regulators, journalists, civil society activists, academics, and investors 
alike are left with regrettably little information about how a large number of SWFs 
from around the world operate. The little data that are available remain incomplete and 
prohibitively expensive for most researchers. The first stop for most analysts is third-party 
aggregators, such as PitchBook, Preqin, and FactSet. These services pull together both 
publicly available data and insider information to construct a detailed profile of each SWF, 
including estimated size, investment behavior, performance, intermediary relationship, 
and governance structure. Because SWFs are government-connected entities, much of 
the data concern what might be considered public finances, thereby requiring openness 
and transparency. The global Sovereign Wealth Fund Institute offers similar coverage of 
self-reported investment patterns through its pricey subscription service. Yet third-party 
aggregators impose pricey subscriptions on accessing the data, limiting the ability of law 
enforcement authorities around the world to track how money flows in and out of SWFs. 


40   |   Sovereign Wealth Funds: Corruption and Other Governance Risks
In the United States, the Securities and Exchange Commission collects and makes publicly 
available basic information about the private investment fund industry (which includes a 
small number of SWFs), including manager information and fund size. Funds must fill out 
somewhat detailed forms about their makeup, but they do not have to reveal their actual 
investments or performance. Regulators, including those tasked with monitoring foreign 
investments, are often completely reliant on the private, third-party aggregators mentioned 
above to gain visibility into SWF activities, increasing the financial and logistical obstacles 
to undertaking proper due diligence. Only in rare cases are data freely available about 
how SWFs are managing their assets. For example, the Sovereign Investment Lab based at 
Bocconi University in Italy has built a database on the investments of twenty-nine SWFs, 
but this includes those equity stakes in publicly traded companies since they appear in public 
disclosures released in various jurisdictions. 
Moreover, private, third-party aggregators are significantly dependent on SWFs sharing 
their underlying data. If an SWF, particularly one operating in a nondemocratic country, 
chooses not to disclose an equity investment, it is unlikely that any of the aggregators will 
be able to pick up, much less monitor, that activity. In addition, there are large segments of 
SWF portfolios that are almost completely absent. Bond markets remain mostly opaque, as 
are investments in domestic asset classes, which for some funds comprise the bulk of assets 
under management (such as in Russia).83 There are finally few mechanisms for verifying 
whether the self-reported data are accurate.
Home country regulators presumably collect these data on investments, but only in rare 
instances (such as in Norway) is any of that information made public. Instead, analysts 
often glean information on fund objectives and governance from some SWF annual 
reports and websites. For example, a recent study demonstrates the evolution of declared 
investment strategies over time as well as innovation and collaboration between SWFs.84 
However, annual reports do not contain audited financial statements, nor do they outline 
in any detail the breadth of investments pursued by funds. Learning about more sensitive 
topics from these reports is next to impossible, whether it be full lists of nongovernmental 
investors (foreign and domestic), management fees paid to private investment funds, 
executive compensation, key relationships with intermediary brokers, or corporate structures 
facilitating investments (especially through offshore companies).
Leaked documents provide perhaps the only window into some SWFs. In 2018, the 
global Paradise Papers leak revealed rampant cronyism and corruption within Angola’s 
SWF, Fundo Soberano de Angola (see chapter 4). The fund paid millions of dollars in 
management fees through uncompetitive tenders to investment managers closely linked to 
the country’s ruling elites.85 Even supposedly better-governed funds have been implicated 
in serious scandals following documents being leaked into the public sphere. A trove of tens 
of thousands of internal documents from Australia’s Future Fund led to accusations of tax 
avoidance and exorbitant fees paid out to external fund managers.86 However, such leaks rely 
on whistleblowers sharing the truth about SWF activities with the wider public—thus, leaks 
are welcome but highly imperfect mechanisms for ensuring transparency.  


Carnegie Endowment for International Peace   |   41
The Risks of Opacity
The risks of this opacity persisting within the SWF industry are immediate and serious. 
Collectively, SWFs invest trillions of dollars across a host of developing and developed 
countries. At the macroeconomic level, a lack of transparency raises the specter of real 
destabilization risks if funds were to fail, be mismanaged, or rapidly withdraw funding from 
target markets. Lack of oversight into SWFs’ substantial investments could inflate dangerous 
equity price bubbles.87
Opacity also carries political consequences. Over the past two decades, much of the push to 
better regulate the SWF industry has been spurred by concerns about political motivations 
driving investment behavior. To what degree are SWFs independent from the governments 
that create them? Without transparency, it becomes significantly more difficult to 
differentiate whether investment decisions are being made on a purely financial basis or with 
political aims in mind, such as the transfer of corporate intellectual property to domestic 
companies. In the aftermath of the 2007–2008 financial crisis, an array of SWFs began 
sweeping up highly discounted assets in troubled developed economies and were credited 
with partially bailing out the U.S. and European banking systems to the tune of $63 
billion.88 Although protectionist sentiments globally have led to more restrictive regulations 
around SWF investments, a growing body of evidence is revealing that the motivations 
behind these investments are sometimes geared toward the pursuit of other political goals. 
U.S. policymakers, for example, have passed much stricter protocols for assessing foreign 
investments in sensitive sectors in part because of fears that SWFs could be exploiting 
opacity to acquire information and technology critical to national security.
Some of those fears have not gone unfounded. In examining a dataset of equity stakes taken 
in U.S. publicly traded firms, research has shown that SWFs have become increasingly 
attracted to investing in politically active companies.89 Their investments help provide a type 
of “foreign state insurance,” shielding their home government from possible potential risk 
but also opening up lobbying opportunities within the U.S. political process. 
SWFs that fail to disclose proper information to regulators and the general public are 
uniquely vulnerable to political co-optation, mismanagement, and outright corruption. 
The vast sums of money tied up in these funds offer an array of personal and political 
dividends to the government elites that create them. As the assets of SWFs surged in 2011, 
nearly three-quarters of all assets under SWF management were held by nondemocratic 
governments.90 These financial assets can be used to keep incumbent governments in power, 
for example, by buying citizens’ loyalty and co-opting or neutralizing domestic competitors.91 
Therefore, the shield of opacity can hide the use of SWFs as a strategic financial tool 
designed to aid ruling elites.
A good example of this is Libya’s SWF. Established in 2006, the Libyan Investment 
Authority’s (LIA) mandate was to invest substantial Libyan financial assets earned from its 
oil industry into a more diversified portfolio that could function as a reserve fund.92 Even 


42   |   Sovereign Wealth Funds: Corruption and Other Governance Risks
though the fund was carefully managed in near complete secrecy by Muammar al-Qaddafi 
and his family, it received an influx of foreign capital and took numerous positions in 
Western companies, such as General Electric, AT&T, and Juventus Football Club.93  
It was not until internal fund documents were leaked to the British nongovernmental 
organization Global Witness that the world began to learn about of the full extent of the 
LIA’s investment behavior, including the $64 billion amassed.94 A later audit by Deloitte 
suggested that upward of 20 percent of the fund’s value had disappeared into a black hole, 
presumably lining the pockets of the ruling elite.95 Accusations were also leveled at Goldman 
Sachs, whose investment managers allegedly paid prostitutes and bought private jets and 
stays in five-star hotels in an attempt to woo business from the LIA.96 Ultimately, the fund 
became one of the first targets of sanctions imposed by the UN Security Council amid 
rampant accusations from insiders of corruption and misappropriation by the Qaddafi 
government and its external partners.97 
Recent work on African states has drawn attention to a new category of unofficial SWFs that 
behave almost identically to their official counterparts but disclose even less information to 
the general public.98 Known as extra-budgetary resource funds, these vehicles operate in near 
complete secrecy; they do not appear in annual budgets or comply with even basic reporting 
or audit standards. These funds provide nondemocratic governments with the ability to invest in 
projects that can pad the pockets of loyal elites and help the regime stay in power longer.
In sum, the corruption risks inherent to SWFs are enormous, as several of the chapters in 
this compilation attest. At least $4.5 billion was stolen from Malaysia’s SWF (see chapter 
3), in what became the “world’s biggest financial scandal.”99 The scandal wound up snaring 
individuals from over ten countries, including the then Malaysian prime minister. In 2020, 
the prime minister was sentenced to twelve years in prison for engaging in corruption 
and abuse of power. A recent investigation of Uzbekistan’s SWF implicates the country’s 
leadership in directing tens of millions of dollars to a corporation run by a relative of 
President Shavkat Mirziyoyev.100 As more and more countries begin the process of creating 
their own funds, there is a real threat of continued corruption unless good governance 
standards are put in place.
Strengthening Transparency Will Improve Accountability 
Given the macroeconomic, political, and corruption risks associated with SWFs, there must 
be greater transparency across the industry as a whole. What types of information should 
SWFs disclose? First, fundamental information on SWF finances needs to be disclosed: 
the value of assets under management; the short- and long-term performance indicators; 
the allocations across markets and investments; the benchmarks; and the environmental, 
social, and corporate governance metrics.  Ideally, these data points would be validated 
through external audits. This type of information should be required from the entire pooled 
investment industry, which thrives on the same opacity that SWFs do and is vulnerable to 
many of the same problems.


Carnegie Endowment for International Peace   |   43
Organizationally, SWFs should also better identify their key policy objectives as well as 
their governance structures, including board selection and responsibilities and the fund’s 
relationships with policymakers and regulators. Alongside releasing more information 
about SWF internal operations, countries need to carve out a greater role for popularly 
elected legislatures and independent agencies to supervise those activities and ensure that 
investments are being made in the national interest. Improving reporting mechanisms is a 
key step along that path, but those in charge of public oversight must also be empowered 
to hold SWF managers accountable. Transparency fosters accountability only when 
stakeholders and other observers can act on the disclosed information and prevent the co-
optation of SWFs for political motivations.
Voluntary disclosure is not enough. Although the Santiago Principles provide a template for 
cooperation between funds, until a major international organization steps in to publish true 
third-party evaluations, compliance and disclosure practices will likely remain incomplete. 
So far, fragmented efforts to name and shame SWFs for neglecting good governance 
principles have not led to real and durable change. Given the importance of cross-border 
investments within SWF portfolios, the international community must take a stronger 
stance and empower a body to monitor SWF governance. 
SWFs have much to gain by being more transparent about their operations and investment 
decisions. Companies targeted by more transparent SWFs typically generate higher 
investment returns, suggesting that transparency can be a strong signal of quality due 
diligence and monitoring on the part of SWFs.101 Transparency also allows for more 
objective evaluations on whether SWFs are actually meeting their policy and performance 
objectives, which should improve funds’ abilities to raise and borrow capital. Conversely, 
SWFs that are vulnerable to political interference see lower returns on their investments and 
more negative deterioration of long-term performance in targeted companies.102 Investors 
have expressed frustration with a lack of access to timely statistics from SWFs based in 
Middle East, particularly when large withdrawals occurred shortly after oil prices fell.103 
In that regard, transparency is a win-win for the vast majority of SWF stakeholders. 
If entrenched elites are allowed to monopolize management and disclosure decisions, 
corruption will thrive.




45
CHAPTER 3
﻿Sovereign Wealth Funds as 
Vehicles for Money Laundering: 
The Case of 1MDB 
Clare Rewcastle Brown and Caleb Diamond
The infamous 1Malaysia Development Berhad (1MDB) scandal is an exemplary case of how 
sovereign wealth funds can be used to facilitate corruption and money laundering. The U.S. 
Department of Justice (DOJ), in a July 2016 indictment, called it the “largest kleptocracy 
case to date.”104 The 1MDB, a sovereign investment and development fund, was supposedly 
designed to use money borrowed by the Malaysian Ministry of Finance to raise funds for 
development through global investments. Instead, as noted in the DOJ indictment and 
“as alleged in the complaints, the members of the conspiracy—which included officials 
at 1MDB, their relatives and other associates—allegedly diverted more than $3.5 billion 
in 1MDB funds. Using fraudulent documents and representations, the co-conspirators 
allegedly laundered the funds through a series of complex transactions and fraudulent shell 
companies with bank accounts located in Singapore, Switzerland, Luxembourg and the 
United States.”105  
The final tally of diverted funds ultimately came to $4.5 billion.106 Per the same DOJ 
indictment, the laundered assets of 1MDB “allegedly included high-end real estate and hotel 
properties in New York and Los Angeles, a $35 million jet aircraft, works of art by Vincent 
Van Gogh and Claude Monet, an interest in the music publishing rights of EMI Music and 
the production of the 2013 film The Wolf of Wall Street.”107 Over $1 billion reportedly went 
into then Malaysian prime minister Najib Razak’s personal bank accounts alone.108  
The perpetrators seemingly got away with the heist by leveraging the permissive, secretive 
nature of offshore companies and the immense wealth of the Gulf states and their 
sovereign wealth funds. These funds, which oversee vast cash resources, are on the surface 


46   |   Sovereign Wealth Funds: Corruption and Other Governance Risks
professionally administered for the purposes of investment in the global marketplace. 
However, in the 1MDB case, they were ultimately at the whim of a handful of members 
from autocratic ruling families and some of their key enablers. 
1MDB was purportedly “based on the Mubadala (Sovereign Wealth Fund) concept” in 
Abu Dhabi.109 (The Mubadala fund is examined more closely in chapter 11.) The money 
was obtained not from accumulated public funds, however, but through a series of bond 
offerings ultimately guaranteed by Malaysian taxpayers. As a result, a 2020 Malaysian 
government report assessed that the fund was still in arrears after several repayments, $7.8 
billion in debt from a height of over $11 billion when the scandal exploded in 2015.110 
This chapter provides a comprehensive look at what happened to the 1MDB fund between 
2009 and 2015 to illustrate how sovereign wealth funds can be used for gross corruption. It 
examines how Najib Razak, a Malaysian kleptocrat, and his proxy, Jho Low, with advisers 
from Goldman Sachs bank and other willing professionals, exploited overly centralized 
power structures, weak governance, and feeble accountability mechanisms to steal billions 
for themselves and their collaborators. It also describes how the Chinese government 
exploited Najib Razak’s need to resolve the scandal and fund his reelection bid to bolster 
China’s influence in Malaysia. The corruption was likewise exploited by other foreign 
actors, including royal figures and businessmen in the Gulf, to siphon billions in return for 
providing cover. 
Much of the 1MDB deception was made possible due to high-level collaborators at the 
International Petroleum Investment Fund (IPIC) in the United Arab Emirates (UAE) and 
at funds in Saudi Arabia and Kuwait. The 1MDB case provides a useful foundation for 
making sense of the other cases in this compilation, and it underscores the transparency 
and accountability reforms required to minimize similar, future abuse of citizens’ financial 
security by political elites. 
The Roots of Corruption
The 1MDB heists occurred from 2009 to 2014, during Najib Razak’s first term. Malaysia 
is a resource-rich nation, where high-level corruption has flourished for decades. The prime 
minister’s ruling United Malays National Organisation (UMNO) party had enjoyed an 
uninterrupted grip on power since independence in 1957, largely through an extensive 
patronage system. But toward the end of the prime minister’s first term, he—and the 
UMNO more broadly—faced credible opposition for the first time. 
The UMNO playbook under such circumstances was to amass an invincible election war 
chest. Najib Razak appointed himself as finance minister to ensure complete control over 
the country’s highly centralized economy. This context alone should have raised red flags for 
financial institutions involved with 1MDB. 


Carnegie Endowment for International Peace   |   47
Malaysian politicians have often used local, long-established Chinese business proxies to 
facilitate corruption. In this case, Najib Razak worked with a young, Chinese Malaysian 
financier named Jho Low. Low’s family members were well established in the business 
community in Penang Province. By the time his ambitious parents sent him to the elite 
Harrow School outside of London and the University of Pennsylvania’s prestigious Wharton 
School, Low was well versed in offshore accounts and shell companies—as well as Malaysia’s 
pervasive culture of cronyism. His first introduction to the future prime minister came 
during a business deal with one of the prime minister’s brothers, Nizam Razak.111 His later 
narrative would be that he had connected with Najib Razak’s influential wife Rosmah 
Mansor through her son Riza Aziz, whom he claimed to have befriended in the United Kingdom.112 
Low operated during a period of major investment by sovereign wealth funds in the Gulf, 
from which Malaysian leaders were eager to benefit. What set Low apart was his contacts—
though often exaggerated—with sons of Middle Eastern power brokers formed during his 
schooling. Through lavish parties, Low skillfully introduced “titled” friends from the Gulf 
to impress his connections in Kuala Lumpur. Some of these introductions were bogus. For 
example, one Wharton School contact, Hamad al-Wazzan, found himself invited as a star 
guest to a dinner held for Najib Razak on the false pretense of being the son of a Kuwaiti 
construction magnate with a similar name. 
In 2005, Low’s Wynton Group, a private equity firm, established an office in Kuala Lumpur 
in partnership with Nizam Razak and embarked on its first major project, the development 
of a major condominium, the Oval Residences.113 Funding for the project came from the 
Kuwaiti Investment House, which was connected to Low through al-Wazzan, who would 
become close to Sheikh Sabah, a grandson of the emir of Kuwait. Low would later tout the 
sheikh as one of the Middle Eastern investors behind his shadowy British Virgin Islands–
based vehicle, the Abu Dhabi-Kuwait-Malaysia Investment Corporation (ADKMIC). This 
corporation later embarked on major projects in Malaysia under the banner of having 
investments from the Middle East.114 
Listed as ADKMIC’s key shareholders were ADIA Investment Corp and KIA Investment 
Corp, which appeared to be subsidiaries of the Abu Dhabi Investment Authority and the 
Kuwait Investment Authority, two major Gulf sovereign wealth funds. However, as the 
anonymous bearer shareholdings made clear, they were not actually linked to those Gulf 
funds. Instead, they were entities Low had created and registered in the Seychelles. He 
employed this ruse repeatedly, exploiting the secrecy of offshore havens and plagiarizing 
major names to disguise shell companies as legitimate subsidiaries to more easily transfer 
huge sums of money through the banking system.115
In 2007, the main opportunities for state investment in Malaysia were connected to the 
government-backed Iskandar Development Project in the south of the country. Thanks to 
his political connections, Low attained special access and was empowered to secure a “master 
developer” for the project.116 Touting this access, the young Malaysian reached out to a 
major player in Abu Dhabi, Sheikh Yousef al-Otaiba. Otaiba, who would later be appointed 


48   |   Sovereign Wealth Funds: Corruption and Other Governance Risks
ambassador to the United States, was supremely well connected as the son of the former 
president of the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries. Name-dropping him 
as a “friend” (to Otaiba’s evident annoyance) cemented Low’s reputation as someone with 
access to Gulf money.117 
While Malaysia’s sovereign wealth fund, Khazanah, ostensibly oversaw the Iskandar project, 
a leaked email from Low to Otaiba confirmed that Malaysian politicians really pulled the 
strings. As the email noted, “Khazanah is a separately managed investment arm of the 
Government of Malaysia. Having said that, the key target partners are cleared at our board 
level, which is chaired by the Prime Minister of Malaysia.”118 
On his end, Otaiba mobilized his connection to Khaldoon al-Mubarak, the chief 
executive officer of Abu Dhabi’s Mubadala sovereign wealth fund, to engage with Low’s 
project. Mubadala invested in Iskandar as part of a government-to-government enterprise, 
illustrating the importance of political connections in determining investment decisions.119
Leaked details reveal that Low paid Otaiba handsomely, including a 10 percent stake in 
ADKMIC.120 Despite Otaiba’s alarm at the Malaysians’ garrulous use of his name and 
ostentatious spending at nightclubs and casinos, the two men developed several future joint 
ventures from which Otaiba allegedly received at least $66 million, according to Wall Street 
Journal estimates.121
In 2008, Low also took credit for an investment made by Abu Dhabi Commercial Bank 
in Malaysia’s RHB Bank at double the stock price.122 Once again, Otaiba’s influence likely 
helped finalize the deal. The agreement led Low, Nizam Razak, and ADKMIC to enter 
into business directly with Abdul Taib Mahmud, Nizam’s in-law and chief minister of 
the Malaysian province of Sarawak. The RHB holding originally belonged to Taib’s UBG 
consortium, providing him with major profits. Low then persuaded the chief minister to 
invest the windfall into various assets he had himself acquired in Iskandar. This enabled Low 
to earn large fees by flipping Iskandar assets at inflated prices while also steering contracts to 
support his construction investments.123 But when some of these investments subsequently 
failed, the Sarawak chief minister pressured Low to bail out the project. As a result, as 
executive director of the merged company, Low steered UBG to direct more cash into the 
purchase of two local construction companies to purportedly work on the development.124 
Low did so via a secretive injection of stolen cash from 1MDB in 2010.125 
Connections in High Places
It was through these engagements in Sarawak that Low connected with another set of actors 
who became key to the evolution of the 1MDB heists: Goldman Sachs banker Roger Ng 
and his boss, Tim Leissner. At Ng’s later trial in New York, it emerged that upon meeting 
Ng in Sarawak, Low boasted of his contacts in the Middle East and the Razak government. 
Goldman Sachs was looking to make government connections, so in January 2009, Ng 


Carnegie Endowment for International Peace   |   49
introduced his boss to Low. The partnership between Leissner and Low transformed Low’s 
ventures into a global enterprise by linking them to the credibility and clout of a major bank.126
Other partners in Low’s ventures in Sarawak were members of the royal house of the 
Malaysian state of Terengganu, whose sultan was serving as the rotating federal head of 
state at the time. Low had placed the sultan’s sister onto the board of one of his construction 
subsidiaries, and he worked closely with her husband, Abdul Aziz Mohd Akhir.127 The 
sultan, in his role as chairman of the newly formed Terengganu Investment Authority 
(TIA), touted TIA as a sovereign wealth fund to be based on oil royalties owed to the state, 
appointing Aziz and Low as advisers.128 
At an initial meeting with the sultan, however, Low explained that his strategy was primarily 
to raise funds by issuing bonds. As an adviser who attended that meeting explained, “What 
I understood . . . was that TIA would create a fund through issuance of bonds for overseas 
investment. It was expected to reap profits for the company, which would be channelled 
back to the people through government community service programmes.”129 This excuse 
of raising money for foreign investment to fund development would be repeated several 
times after the fund was rebranded as 1MDB under Najib Razak’s direct control. Instead, 
money went straight into the pockets of the prime minister and his family, Low, and their 
collaborators.
Low used his influence to ensure that Goldman Sachs was selected to advise on raising an 
initial bond issue worth $1.4 billion for TIA.130 The reputational advantages of partnering 
with a major U.S. bank were significant. With Najib Razak’s backing (but against the 
wishes of the Terengganu sultan and his chief minister, who felt increasingly sidelined), the 
Goldman Sachs team worked with Low and TIA’s chief executive officer, Shahrol Halmi, to 
swiftly raise the funds through the local AmBank.131 On this occasion, Goldman Sachs did 
not handle the offer directly. AmBank (which has since been fined), via highly questionable 
practices, initially discounted the bonds through two companies that Low controlled, 
earning him and his associate Eric Tan some $125 million before the bonds reached the 
open market in May 2009.132 
For various reasons, including the clash over the controversial bonds, Terengganu’s 
leadership then withdrew from the fund. Najib Razak, by now prime minister as well as 
finance minister, swiftly remodeled the fund under his government’s control. Goldman 
Sachs would describe the resulting structure in future bond offers as “professionally managed 
and governed by global best practices” with a board of directors “independent from undue 
political influence” and a senior international advisory board.133 But the entire arrangement 
contained a secret amendment that established the minister of finance (Najib Razak) as 
the sole signatory and shareholder of the company with veto power over appointments 
and expenditures. Most of the key management appointments in senior legal and finance 
positions were connected to Low, in particular the general counsel Jasmine Loo, business 
development director Casey Tang, chief investment officer Nik Faisal Ariff Kamil and 
executive director of finance Terence Geh.134 


50   |   Sovereign Wealth Funds: Corruption and Other Governance Risks
Directors soon found that management acted on the orders of Low in his capacity as proxy 
to the finance minister, in contravention of their own directives.135 The first chairman almost 
immediately resigned, protesting that the board’s objections had been overruled after the 
entire equity of the fund was invested in an obscure offshore entity named PetroSaudi 
International. An ally of Najib Razak replaced the chairman.136 By the time the fund was 
rebranded as 1MDB in July 2009, three months into Najib Razak’s premiership, it was 
structured as a perfect vehicle for the kleptocratic plunder that would soon take place.
Laundering the TIA Bond Through PetroSaudi
Leissner testified that Goldman Sachs had hoped to advise on possible investments around 
a planned 1MDB joint venture with a Saudi state petroleum fund. Low, however, had a 
different ploy in mind. 
He had connected with a young, party-going Saudi named Tarek Obaid, who was in 
business with Prince Turki bin Abdullah Al Saud, the seventh son of the then ruler of Saudi 
Arabia, King Abdullah. Prince Turki had little personal wealth, but his proximity to power 
proved ideal for Low’s schemes. In August 2009, aboard a yacht off the coast of Monaco, 
Najib Razak signed 1MDB’s first investment deal, plunging the entire $1 billion sitting in 
1MDB’s account into one of Obaid and Turki’s jointly held shell companies, PetroSaudi 
International.137 As with so many of Low’s offshore vehicles, the name had a grandiose 
official ring; however, the company held no connection to the Saudi state and had few assets 
and little human capital.138
Returning to New York in early September 2009, Low sought to finalize the deal by the 
last day of the month—in a haste that should have raised red flags. Nonetheless, White & 
Case, a major London law firm, and several banks, including JP Morgan Suisse, RBS Coutts 
Zurich, and Deutsche Bank Kuala Lumpur, signed off on it, providing a facade of legitimacy 
that got the deal past regulators. In addition, an investment adviser friendly with Obaid 
named Patrick Mahony assisted PetroSaudi in “acting as a front” on deals for 1MDB. The 
“ask” from Low was to help siphon out $700 million from the billion-dollar joint venture in 
return for $300 million that would be invested in the fledgling PetroSaudi’s various ventures.139 
Mahony requested that White & Case manage the entire process in coordination with Low’s 
team in New York within the now-three-week deadline. The legal teams outlined a plan 
to transfer the assets of an offshore holding company in the Cayman Islands, PetroSaudi 
International Holdings, into a new subsidiary, 1MDB PetroSaudi Ltd, registered in the 
British Virgin Islands—and in the process, advance the subsidiary what was now described 
as a “loan” as opposed to a fee.140 1MDB was due to buy a 40 percent share of 1MDB 
PetroSaudi Ltd under a joint venture agreement that stipulated in veiled language that it 
would immediately repay any debts owed by the company in hard cash.141 


Carnegie Endowment for International Peace   |   51
The justification later given by Najib Razak was that the payment was made in recognition 
of the value of the injected $1.5 billion in fictional assets, a Turkmenistan oil field that 
PetroSaudi did not really own. According to the U.S. Department of Justice, White & Case 
issued the loan agreement that purportedly paid the $700 million into 1MDB PetroSaudi 
Ltd before the new subsidiary had even established a bank account.142 (The Carnegie 
Endowment for International Peace approached White & Case for comment on this 
purported payment, but they failed to respond.)
The deal was pushed through under immense political pressure in early October 2009. The 
payments were nonetheless delayed as anxious banks, and the 1MDB’s own law firm, Wong 
& Partners, requested information as to why the immediate $700 million “loan” repayment 
was scheduled to be transferred not to the 1MDB PetroSaudi Ltd account just set up at JP 
Morgan Suisse but to a mysterious Good Star Limited account at Coutts bank in Zurich. 
The White & Case team confirmed to 1MDB’s own lawyers that Good Star Limited was a 
PetroSaudi subsidiary, despite the fact that it appeared nowhere in the structures they had 
drawn up for the deal.143 It was in fact an account owned by Low.144 
1MDB management made plain to its Deutsche Bank bankers that the finance minister/
prime minister was becoming impatient and that delays would bring consequences. So, the 
transfers were agreed. The beneficial ownership for Good Star was merely provided in the 
form of a PO Box address in the Seychelles.145 
Following the successful transfer of funds to Good Star, Low and Mahony, again with the 
assistance of White & Case, constructed a second $500 million “Islamic loan” from 1MDB 
to PetroSaudi Ltd and then made a further $330 million in foreign “investments” that 
were likewise misused for the benefit of the conspirators. Obaid received a payment of $85 
million for his services, from which he paid Mahony $35 million and Turki $77 million.146 
Much of the rest funded PetroSaudi Ltd’s new venture, the purchase of drill ships off the 
coast of Venezuela through a highly lucrative contract achieved by bribing officials from 
the state oil company PDVSA. 1MDB was not included in the profits from this enterprise 
(totalling $340 million) despite the “joint venture investment” it had made.147 In April 2023, 
Turki and Mahoney were indicted by Swiss officials for their role in the 1MDB  
corruption scandal.148
Low then ploughed around $360 million from the Islamic loan into what was presented 
as a separate buyout of UBG (one of Low’s companies) by PetroSaudi Ltd. But in reality, 
he set up an entity named PetroSaudi International in the Seychelles, ostensibly owned by 
Obaid but secretly controlled by Low through an “investment management” agreement 
with a Panama shell company.149 Malaysia’s controlled media obediently relayed the official 
version of events, but it also reported on the growing opposition clamor over such blatantly 
suspicious activities.150


52   |   Sovereign Wealth Funds: Corruption and Other Governance Risks
Post-Petro Saudi 2011
Within days of the Good Star heist, Low embarked on a stunningly excessive spending 
spree in several U.S. cities—splashing hundreds of thousands of dollars at nightclubs in 
Los Angeles; hiring supermodels to attend his parties; purchasing mansions in Hollywood 
and New York City, along with a jet, sports cars, and a yacht; and gambling huge sums in 
high-end casinos in Las Vegas.151 He spent $85 million between October 2009 and June 
2010 alone, sparking comments about the ostentatious “Nightclub Whale” and “Malaysian 
Man of Mystery” in the New York press.152 Goldman Sachs’ Business Intelligence Group, 
in tandem with other reputation-wary finance divisions, began to flag Low as a person of 
unexplained means to watch and avoid doing open business with.153 Leissner’s Southeast Asia 
team, however, with the knowing approval of his immediate senior partners at the bank, 
continued to court business with Low as Najib Razak’s proxy.154 Shortly after Low’s publicity 
provoked suspicions within Goldman Sachs’ compliance divisions, the bank’s chief executive 
officer, Lloyd Blankfein, sat down with Najib Razak and Low in New York in a meeting that 
Leissner had arranged.155 
During this period, Low developed a key connection with a fellow extravagant spender, 
Khadem al-Qubaisi, the right-hand man to Abu Dhabi’s Sheikh Mansour bin Zayed Al 
Nahyan, whose brother was then crown prince and deputy prime minister of the UAE. Al-
Qubaisi was the chief executive officer of IPIC, one of the Emirate of Abu Dhabi’s sovereign 
wealth funds. Sheikh Mansour was its chairman, as well as the chairman of a new IPIC 
subsidiary, Aabar.156
Both Low and al-Qubaisi exploited their position as trusted proxies at sovereign wealth 
funds to benefit themselves and the politically connected officials who employed them. It 
has been reported that al-Qubaisi steered the funds he controlled to projects he privately 
had money in.157 By early 2011, Low had embarked on a number of deals with al-Qubaisi, 
including a failed bid to take over London’s Maybourne hotel group, although Low had 
claimed he had severed all connections with the fund.158 The two even hatched a plot to buy 
the same share of Malaysia’s RHB Bank that the Abu Dhabi Commercial Bank had bought 
back in 2008, based on inside knowledge of a projected takeover bid that Najib Razak, in his 
second role as finance minister, would have been aware of. Low suggested that Aabar could 
flip the shares and make half a billion dollars on the resale within six months. Aabar bought 
the shares from its own national bank. The entourage that swept into Kuala Lumpur in 
April 2011 to sign the deal included the then crown prince (now Emirati president) himself, 
Mohammed bin Zayed Al Nahyan. In the end, the gambit failed, as Aabar’s outrageous 
sell-on price meant to maximize its illegal profits caused the merger to collapse.159


Carnegie Endowment for International Peace   |   53
The Goldman Sachs Bonds
Two years after the Good Star deal, critics of 1MDB increasingly honed in on the fund’s 
burgeoning debt, audit delays, inactivity, and a series of highly suspicious restructurings. 
Nonetheless, in June 2012, 1MDB reinvested proceeds from its relationship with PetroSaudi 
International into a Cayman Islands–registered investment vehicle.160 The accounting firm 
KPMG refused to sign off on the audit without proof of the profits, however. Najib Razak 
sacked the firm in retaliation.161 Despite these concerns, Goldman Sachs continued its 
relationship with the fund. In January 2012, Low contacted his connections at the bank for 
investment ideas to justify a new bond issue for 1MDB. Low was able to offer this business 
to Goldman Sachs without requiring a public tender. Leissner suggested purchasing an aging 
power plant that another of his Malaysian clients wished to sell, and Low invited Leissner 
and Ng to meet in London to discuss the deal.
Goldman Sachs agreed to launch a bond offering of $1.75 billion to purchase the plant 
for $650 million and to cover “other operating expenses.” The bank would raise the entire 
amount and then sell on the bonds to its private customers, thereby keeping the process 
“below radar” in terms of market scrutiny. In return, Goldman Sachs demanded massive 
fees of just over 9 percent, over 100 times the market rate.162 
Why the high fees and secretive process? As Leissner would later testify to U.S. authorities 
following his arrest in 2017 and then in court, Low had confided at the 2012 London 
meeting that he planned to steal the bulk of the money. Low told the bankers they would 
be bribed over and above any bonuses they could expect. The biggest bribes would need 
to be paid to Najib Razak and his wife and to Abu Dhabi’s Sheikh Mansour.163 Likewise, 
al-Qubaisi and his deputy at Aabar, Mohammed al-Husseiny, would need bribes, as would 
Otaiba for his role in making sure matters were handled smoothly in the UAE.164 The 
recipients of these payments were reaffirmed in court papers for a Swiss trial of a senior 
official of the Lombard Odier bank in June 2023. The official had been charged with 
laundering a total of $50 million from one of Low’s offshore companies into newly opened 
accounts at the bank (said to belong to Otaiba and his Emirati business partner  
Shaher Awartani).165
Leissner and Ng confirmed that they would bring Goldman Sachs into the deal, but to 
maneuver around compliance officials, they kept their communications with Low off the 
bank’s official email channels. Leissner testified that his immediate superiors were aware 
of this deceit. However, the bank’s position is that “none of the past or current members 
of senior management were involved in or aware” of illicit activity.166 The bank’s position, 
however, fails to address the anomalies over the $6.5 billion in bonds that would eventually 
be issued by the bank for very little identifiable purpose and the very high fees they received 
for it. More than half of the money raised would ultimately be stolen.167


54   |   Sovereign Wealth Funds: Corruption and Other Governance Risks
In February 2012, the bankers and Low flew to Abu Dhabi, bearing a formal proposal from 
Najib Razak to Sheikh Mansour. One month later, the same team reconvened in the United 
States to finalize the terms. A final piece of the plan was put in place in Singapore at an 
April meeting between the two Goldman Sachs bankers and Low’s local personal wealth 
management team from the Swiss bank BSI. (Low, officially absent, communicated from a 
nearby room.)168 
IPIC would “co-guarantee” the bonds. Describing a “strategic alliance between 1MDB 
Guarantor and IPIC group,” the offer document referred to an options agreement in return 
for IPIC’s collaboration in underwriting the venture. In fact, the ultimate guarantor of the 
project was still the government of Malaysia.169
Meanwhile, however, BSI had opened an account for a new offshore British Virgin Islands 
subsidiary of Aabar Investments PJS for 1MDB to make a payment for the guarantee. There 
was no mention of such a payment in the formal offer document that would be provided 
to Goldman Sachs’ clients, but a bogus contract signed between the same executives (Al 
Husseiny for Aabar and the management of 1MDB) was presented to the BSI bankers and 
said that the agreed terms between the two sovereign wealth funds for the service was $577 
million.170 At the meeting, the BSI team queried the Goldman Sachs bankers as to why the 
Abu Dhabi sovereign fund would employ an offshore vehicle for such a purpose or use a 
tiny bank like theirs. They claim Leissner responded by directing the BSI team to conduct 
its own due diligence and then abruptly left the meeting.171 The bank, which had already 
performed a series of dubious transactions for Low related to the Good Star scheme, agreed 
to open the account.172 (BSI later collapsed over its role in the 1MDB scandal.173) 
But Aabar Investments PJS in the British Virgin Islands was not owned by 1MDB,  
although its shareholders were al-Qubaisi and al-Husseiny. As a secret signatory, Low 
controlled it.174 Thus, by planned agreement, straight after the bond (code-named Project 
Magnolia) was issued in May 2012, a major chunk of the cash was siphoned off and used to 
pay the conspirators.


Carnegie Endowment for International Peace   |   55
Figure 1. Distribution of the 2013 “Structural Joint Venture” Bond
Source: Authors’ illustration.
The Swiss bank BSI held the account of a new subsidiary—1MDB Global—into which, 
after subtracting a $280 million fee for itself, Goldman Sachs passed the remaining 
$2.721 billion (see figure 1). Within twenty-four hours, BSI had transferred $1.6 billion 
to Enterprise Emerging Markets, Cistenique, and another “investment fund” called 
Devonshire. These funds then forwarded the cash to two newly opened offshore company 
accounts with Falcon Bank—Tanore Finance Corporation and Granton Property Holdings 
Limited—that were under Eric Tan’s name but controlled by Low.175 
Tanore and Granton received $835 million and $430 million, respectively. A total of $1.26 
billion was therefore removed from the bond issue. Shoddy paperwork and the weak cover 
story alerted the Swiss hierarchy at Falcon Bank, which was being asked to forward $681 


56   |   Sovereign Wealth Funds: Corruption and Other Governance Risks
million of that money into one of Najib Razak’s personal bank accounts. Falcon chief 
executive officer Eduardo Leeman, himself formerly of Goldman Sachs, would have been 
aware that Najib Razak had signed off on the 1MDB bond issued just forty-eight hours earlier.176
The U.S. Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) obtained recordings of Leeman’s panicked 
calls to Falcon’s chairman, al-Husseiny. Leeman told him, “This is . . . gonna get everybody 
in trouble. This is done not professionally, unprepared, amateurish at best,” and would later 
admonish Low directly.177 However, al-Husseiny overruled his concerns and the transfer 
went through.178 A month later, Falcon signed off on an additional $27 million from the 
same Tanore account, which paid for a Lorraine Schwarz pink diamond necklace that Low 
arranged to be personally fitted and gifted to Najib Razak’s wife Rosmah.179 While a Swiss 
court in 2021 acquitted Leeman of money laundering charges, he was fined $3.8 million for 
his role in the scandal.180
The End Game
Najib Razak, with Low’s aid, would engage in numerous subsequent scandals, primarily to 
cover up the original looting from 1MDB as debt payments loomed but also for personal 
gain. In 2014, 1MDB raised two syndicated loans totaling $1.2 billion from a consortium 
led by Deutsche Bank in Singapore, allegedly to buy back the options offered to Aabar in 
return for the guarantee.181 These options purportedly needed to be liquidated in advance 
of a planned flotation that Goldman Sachs would manage. In fact, the prime minister 
hoped to sell the worthless stock to state-controlled entities to write off a debt that now 
exceeded $11 billion.182 As collateral, 1MDB misrepresented the value of the Cayman 
Islands “special purpose vehicle” to Deutsche Bank, claiming it had $2.3 billion realized 
from the PetroSaudi joint venture under the management of a bogus fund, Bridge Partners 
Investment Management, including $1 billion held at BSI under a company named Brazen 
Sky. Najib Razak provided a letter of support for the loan.183 
Deustche Bank was directed to send the money to the fake Aabar British Virgin Islands 
account on the understanding that 1MDB was paying the Abu Dhabi sovereign wealth fund 
to release rights retained under the bond offer document. To reinforce that narrative, Low 
procured a bogus “agreement related to option agreements” signed by al-Husseiny.184 Money 
was then sent to more of Low’s offshore shell companies that appeared to be linked to major 
funds. Low used this money not to pay off debts but to buy luxury goods, including a 
superyacht, private jet, and artwork. Meanwhile, 1MDB officials carried out complex money 
transfers with the loaned money to give the impression there was money at Brazen Sky being 
redeemed from the Cayman Island fund.185 However, the schemers were getting increasingly 
desperate. When Deutsche Bank asked for copies of the statements of the Brazen Sky 
account, 1MDB officers first claimed the BSI servers had crashed and then sent an allegedly 
forged bank statement.186


Carnegie Endowment for International Peace   |   57
The entire scheme collapsed on February 28, 2015, when leaked documents from PetroSaudi 
International were made public by the website Sarawak Report and the Sunday Times, 
followed by another report in March detailing payments to al-Qubaisi’s Vasco trust fund set 
up at a bank in Luxembourg from Blackstone Asia Real Estate Partners Limited, a company 
Low owned.187 Sarawak Report would later reveal information about Good Star and 
other questionable accounts at BSI Singapore.188 Law enforcement agencies soon launched 
investigations, spearheaded by the FBI and U.S. Department of Justice’s kleptocracy unit. 
With a global enquiry underway, law enforcement in Malaysia and Abu Dhabi could no 
longer turn a blind eye to the abuses of their sovereign wealth funds. 
In July 2015, Sarawak Report obtained documentation revealing the $681 million transfer 
from Falcon Bank into Najib Razak’s personal account. Despite increasing global outrage 
and multiple investigations, Najib did not back down, denying everything through a 
controlled domestic media and cracking down on opponents with new “fake news” laws.189
After the United States announced it was seeking to recover stolen assets, Najib Razak 
turned to then Abu Dhabi Crown Prince (now Emirati President) Mohammed bin Zayed, 
whom he reminded in a private call that Zayed’s brother, Sheikh Mansour, was implicated 
in the scandal.190 Abu Dhabi agreed to honor the bogus guarantee as a temporary cover-up 
to meet 1MDB’s escalating $11 billion in debts. After 1MDB failed to meet the repayment 
deadline the following year, Abu Dhabi and Malaysia agreed to a secret arbitration 
agreement in which the emirate continued to shoulder the debt but in return punished 
Malaysia with a penalty of $8 billion, which Najib Razak promised to pay after the election.191
The prime minister also turned to China, using Low as an intermediary to plug the debt 
gap. He renegotiated the major East Coast Rail Link infrastructure project with China 
Communications Construction Company (CCCC), doubling the budget in return for 
Chinese assistance in repaying 1MDB’s debts.192 Although the agreement immediately 
leaked, Najib Razak signed the deal in Beijing in November 2015.
The prime minister next engaged another Chinese state-owned enterprise for a gas pipeline 
project, agreeing to pay 88 percent up front.193 The cash immediately passed through 
a CCCC subsidiary to a bogus Cayman Island company called Silk Road Real Estate 
Investment Limited (SRREIL), owned by the Kuwaiti royal Sheikh Jaber al-Mubarak 
al-Sabah. He covered Low’s legal expenses and other bills while Low was on the run, in 
return for a money transfer of $1 billion.194 SRREIL returned the bulk of the pipeline money 
to Malaysia to buy a chunk of land from 1MDB at an inflated cost (land originally gifted 
by Najib Razak’s Ministry of Finance). That payment was immediately forwarded to Abu 
Dhabi to meet payments owed under the arbitration agreement. The relationship was later 
leaked, leading to several arrests and an ongoing money laundering case in Kuwait.195
Thanks in part to the relentless publicity and international investigations, Najib Razak’s 
UMNO party lost an election for the first time in 2018.196 The incoming government filed 
several cases against Najib over 1MDB’s schemes, and the following year, a Malaysian court 


58   |   Sovereign Wealth Funds: Corruption and Other Governance Risks
found him guilty on several initial counts and sentenced him to twelve years in prison. That 
judgement was upheld on August 23, 2022, when he was sent to jail; further cases  
are ongoing.197 
Najib Razak reaped $756 million from the Goldman Sachs bond offerings alone, per an 
FBI forensic accountant’s court testimony.198 His stepson received $238 million, and over 
half a billion dollars’ worth of jewelry was purchased for Najib’s wife. Low fled into hiding 
in China, having stolen $1.42 billion from the fund, according to the same FBI testimony. 
He remains a fugitive, although some of his key collaborators who fled with him have since 
surrendered to Malaysian authorities.199 He traveled on a passport issued by Grenada and 
by way of Dubai.200 Al-Qubaisi received $472.8 million in all.201 Ng received $35.1 million 
from two of the three bonds that had been issued.202 Leissner received $73.4 million, 
of which he forfeited $43.7 million as part of his deal with the U.S. government.203 Al-
Qubaisi and al-Husseiny were arrested and imprisoned in 2015, and al-Quabaisi received a 
fifteen-year sentence in 2019 in the UAE.204 However, no actions have been undertaken to 
investigate Sheikh Mansour’s involvement or the $160 million in payments for his yacht. 
Goldman Sachs’ Malaysia branch plead guilty and agreed to pay $5 billion in fines to the 
U.S. government; the DOJ fined its parent bank an additional  $2.9 billion.205
This complex case involving multiple sovereign wealth funds highlights some of the 
structural issues that enabled gross corruption. These issues included poor overall governance 
of the fund, with its management ultimately resting with the prime minister. Moreover, 
1MDB and its subsidiaries used a variety of financial secrecy jurisdictions and tax havens, 
undermining transparency. There was also a significant failure of oversight by banks, as well 
as extensive complicity across a wide range of institutions. Similar themes will emerge in 
the subsequent chapters of this compilation, underlining the need for substantial reforms to 
many sovereign wealth funds.
The opinions and research expressed are those of the authors alone and do not reflect that of their 
current employers.


59
CHAPTER 4
﻿Angola’s FSDEA— 
Corruption Scandal and Reform
Jodi Vittori
In 2014, Angola’s sovereign wealth fund (SWF), the Fundo Soberano de Angola (FSDEA), 
was considered largely in compliance with the Santiago Principles—the gold standard for 
SWF governance as laid out in chapters 1 and 2. The fund had achieved a forty-two-point 
jump in three years on the Peterson Institute’s SWF Scorecard and received a remarkable 8 
out of 10 on the Sovereign Wealth Fund Institute’s Linaburg-Maduell Transparency Index. 
But it was later revealed that while the FSDEA was receiving such positive ratings, it was 
also involved in corrupt activities. The head of the FSDEA, who was also the president’s son, 
had contracted management of the fund’s investments to a business partner. In turn, the 
business partner invested the funds in companies where the partner himself had an interest.206
The case of the FSDEA highlights the inadequacy of current standards for evaluating 
transparency and overall good governance of SWFs, as described in chapters 1, 2, and 12. It 
also sheds light on the need for independent, third-party auditing and reporting of SWFs.
This case also illustrates how funds with reputations for corruption can be reformed. 
After the FSDEA scandal broke and the perpetrators were brought to trial, the Angolan 
government implemented several reforms, which put the FSDEA on a more solid footing. 
While there is a long way to go for the fund to fully comply with the highest standards 
of good governance, the current reforms should be applauded. At the same time, the 
implementation of more credible external evaluation standards could highlight Angola’s 
reform shortcomings. It could also improve public transparency, which could help push even 
greater reforms throughout the SWF industry.


60   |   Sovereign Wealth Funds: Corruption and Other Governance Risks
What Went Wrong With the FSDEA
Angola established the FSDEA in 2012 with an initial investment from a prior Angolan 
SWF of $5 billion,207 the only cash infusion it has ever received.208 The fund’s goal was 
“to promote growth, prosperity, and social and economic development.”209 That year, 
Angola’s president, José Eduardo dos Santos, appointed his son, José Filomeno dos Santos 
(also known as Zenu), as the chairman of the board of the FSDEA.210 Zenu contracted a 
firm called Quantum Capital that belonged to his friend Jean-Claude Bastos de Morais to 
manage the FSDEA’s capital.211
Files leaked from the Appleby law firm as part of the so-called Paradise Papers in 2017 
revealed that Bastos invested hundreds of millions of dollars in his own companies, in 
addition to his firm Quantum Global receiving $90 million over a twenty-month period 
in 2014 and 2015 to manage the FSDEA.212 The company, which also managed funds for 
the Angolan central bank, received the FSDEA contract without a competitive tender.213 
Separately, when he was appointed chairman of the FSDEA, Zenu resigned from his role as a 
director at an investment bank owned by Bastos, Banco Kwanza Invest, and sold his shares, 
which itself is not corrupt but could be a red flag for conflict of interest.214 
Media stories based on the Paradise Papers alleged that Appleby set up seven offshore entities 
in Mauritius that were used by Quantum Global to invest Angolan funds. In four of those 
entities, Bastos was a major shareholder. In one case, as part of an investment in a five-star 
hotel in Angola, Quantum Global assumed debt and made cash payments worth $157 
million to two firms, but the beneficial owner of both firms was Bastos.215 In another case, 
the FSDEA invested in a deepwater port in Angola that was being built by  
Bastos’s company.216 
This was hardly the first corruption scandal associated with Angola and the dos Santos 
government. A complex series of swaps of promissory notes for Angolan debts to Russia 
handled by Swiss bank UBS in the late 1990s and early 2000s allegedly netted then 
president dos Santos $36 million and a former Angolan ambassador $17.5 million, while the 
Angolan treasury paid $1.78 billion on a debt of $1.5 billion.217 As part of scandals in 2010 
and 2011, the state-owned oil company, Sonangol, required firms to subcontract with local 
entities linked to the government’s inner circle to receive oil-related contracts.218 In 2020, 
a leak of documents accused the Angolan president’s daughter, Isabel dos Santos (whom 
the president appointed to take over Sonangol in 2016), of looting the oil company and 
corruptly creating a business empire in diamonds, telecoms, banks, and the country’s biggest 
cement maker. Despite an INTERPOL red notice being issued for her arrest in November 
2022, she continued to live in Dubai as of February 2023 and has claimed the investigations 
are a “witch hunt.”219


Carnegie Endowment for International Peace   |   61
Initiation of Reforms
In early 2018, the new president of Angola, João Lourenço (who had previously been 
dos Santos’s defense minister before becoming president in 2017),220 fired Zenu from the 
FSDEA’s board.221 In July 2019, the government issued a new legal framework for the fund 
via presidential decrees to establish “an organizational model of sound governance, with 
clear and effective division of functions and responsibilities, compatible with the nature of 
[its] activities.”222 The decrees stated that the FSDEA would maintain its role as a savings and 
development fund, but a new fund would be established for stabilizing the economy.223 The 
decrees also strengthened the criteria for selecting board members and members of other 
FSDEA governing bodies, better specified the responsibilities of the fund’s various governing 
bodies,224 and boosted the required qualifications for asset managers. In addition, the decrees 
improved risk management of investments and changed the allocations of the fund’s assets.225 
As the FSDEA management was being overhauled and new governance measures instituted, 
Angolan prosecutors charged Zenu in 2018 in a separate incident of attempting to steal $500 
million (though the Angolan Ministry of Finance later determined that those involved in 
the scheme had planned to eventually transfer $1.5 billion) by creating a fake $35 billion 
investment fund and fake paperwork to justify the large transfer of funds from the Angolan 
treasury.226 Both Zenu and Bastos were arrested later that year.227 The Angolan government 
alleged that as Zenu’s father was stepping down as president in 2017, Zenu and collaborators 
created a fake $35 billion investment fund. Using that fake fund, they allegedly arranged 
to send $500 million from a government account to a shell company’s private bank account 
held by a collaborator at HSBC in London.228 Forged documents, including some claiming 
to be from Credit Suisse, were also reportedly used.229 Though the transfer to the bank went 
through, a teller filed a suspicious activity report and the Angolan government began to 
investigate.230 After this scandal, Swiss and British authorities also raided associated offices, 
froze bank accounts, and opened their own investigations into Bastos’s companies associated 
with the FSDEA.231 
In 2019, there was a confidential agreement between the FSDEA and Bastos’s firm whereby 
the Angolan government claimed it had recovered from Bastos’s firm $3 billion associated 
with the FSDEA investments. At that time, Swiss and British authorities dropped their 
cases and the Angolan government dropped the charges against Zenu related to the fund.232 
In 2020, Zenu was convicted of fraud in Angola (but was acquitted of money laundering 
charges) for the $500 million fraudulent transfer and sentenced to five years in prison, 
though he remains free on bail and maintains his innocence.233
The Context of the FSDEA Scandals
Dos Santos served as head of state for decades and, though Angola calls itself a democracy, 
ruled as an authoritarian. Freedom House rated Angola “not free” in its Freedom in the 
World 2023 report.234 Per Angolan law, the president is not directly elected; they are the 


62   |   Sovereign Wealth Funds: Corruption and Other Governance Risks
candidate of the party or coalition that wins an election. Human Rights Watch notes that 
while voting has largely been peaceful in Angola, there are severe restrictions on voting and 
freedom of assembly and significant state censorship, with ruling party officials controlling 
private media outlets.235 The state controls all nationwide media.236 
Since independence, Angola has appeared to have rapid economic growth on paper, but 
in reality there existed a tiny, very wealthy elite amid a sea of poverty. When dos Santos 
took over as Angola’s second president in 1979, the country produced 146,000 barrels of 
oil per day.237 The end of the country’s civil war in 2002, in conjunction with new offshore 
discoveries in the 1990s, allowed oil production to more than double.238 By 2008, Angola 
was producing 1.9 million barrels per day.239 Today, the country’s real gross domestic 
product (GDP) per capita is $5,900240 and its Gini coefficient (which measures income 
inequality) is 51.3, making it the ninth-most unequal country in the world.241 A third of 
the population lives below the poverty line, youth unemployment is almost 20 percent, 70 
percent of the population is literate, and the country has almost no economic growth.242 Life 
expectancy is only sixty-two years.243 Only half the population has electricity and a third 
has internet access.244
One of the ironies of the scandals associated with the FSDEA is that they occurred while the 
fund was undergoing significant reforms in governance and transparency, at least on paper. 
In 2012, Angola scored 15 out of 100 on the SWF Scorecard (the first year the FSDEA was 
scored), making it the third-worst-scoring fund on the index that year.245 But by 2015, it had 
achieved a score of 67, putting it in the middle of the SWFs that were ranked.246 Moreover, 
in 2014, the fund was rated for the first time by the Sovereign Wealth Fund Institute and 
earned an 8 out of 10 on its Linaburg-Maduell Transparency Index.247 This rating put 
Angola in the top thirty of eighty rated SWFs and behind only Nigeria for African funds.248 
The media leaks and associated investigations and trials that emerged three years after 
Angola received these high scores would demonstrate that these scores likely had not  
been warranted.
Yet even at that time, there were warning signs that something was amiss. First, the 
Linaburg-Maduell Transparency Index is based primarily on self-reporting by the funds 
rather than information from an independent third party.249 The Economist Intelligence 
Unit (EIU), the risk analysis and research arm of the Economist Group, pointed out a 
number of concerns in 2015, including that Bastos was a close business associate of Zenu 
and that he had previously held part ownership of Angola’s first investment bank, Banco 
Kwanza Invest.250 Regarding the FSDEA’s public transparency, the EIU noted, “The fund’s 
website, although better than most linked to Angolan government institutions, is not 
particularly detailed, and while the FSDEA announced in 2014 that its accounts had been 
audited, it has to date only published basic details of the fund’s transactions and not shared 
a photocopy of the accounts signed by its auditor, Deloitte.”251 In response to a 2014 report 
by the International Monetary Fund (IMF) that stated that the FSDEA was falling short 
on transparency, Zenu noted that the fund was submitting detailed quarterly reports to 
Parliament and that the fund was independently audited.252 


Carnegie Endowment for International Peace   |   63
Some Signs of Improvement
Nonetheless, there have been some signs of improvement for Angola overall and for the 
governance of its SWF. The Rule of Law Index noted that Angola moved from a score of 
0.41 in 2019 to 0.43 in 2022 (on a scale of 0 to 1, where a 1 indicates perfect levels of rule of 
law).253 Its Corruption Perceptions Index score rose fourteen points to 33 (out of a possible 
100) between 2018 and 2022.254 As the U.S. State Department noted in its most recent 
investment climate assessment of Angola, “Despite its reputation as a challenging place to 
do business, Angola is seeking to improve its investment climate and improve in the areas of 
anti-corruption, democracy, governance, and human rights.”255 Angola joined the Extractive 
Industry Transparency Initiative in June 2022, which should help to increase transparency 
in its oil, gas, and mining sectors.256 
Moreover, though Lourenço won a second term in 2022, his party won with only 51.4 
percent of the vote.257 A stronger opposition party and the loss of the ruling party’s 
supermajority may lead to additional governmental accountability in Parliament, though 
the election process itself was described as “dodgy” by the Economist, with speculation that 
Lourenço’s party may have actually lost to the opposition.258
The SWF reforms started in 2019 also seem to be taking root. For instance, the FSDEA’s 
SWF Scorecard score from the Peterson Institute rose another ten points since 2015 and is 
now at 77 out of 100, tying it with Australia’s NSW Generations Fund, Spain’s COFIDES, 
and the state of Texas’ Permanent University Fund.259 
These are all positive starts, though Angola has a way to go to improve governance overall. 
While a 2019 report by the IMF lauded the SWF reforms, it also made a significant number 
of recommendations to align the FSDEA with international good SWF practices. These 
included more clearly defining the FSDEA’s development function and further clarifying 
its investment guidelines.260 The IMF also recommended that Chile and Norway may be 
good examples of a well-designed fiscal framework for the fund.261 Given that Angola is a 
highly indebted commodity exporter, the IMF suggested that the fund be used to reduce the 
country’s expensive external debt before it transfers funds to a short-term stabilization fund; 
once funds are transferred to the stabilization fund, these transfers should be according to 
predetermined rules.262 
Although the new FSDEA governance rules provide for a more varied series of governing 
boards, more diverse and independent management and advisory committees that include 
participation by independent and nongovernmental experts would help it meet the Santiago 
Principles requirements on the independence of SWF operational management and public 
disclosure of the governance framework.263 The IMF further noted that FSDEA’s investment 
policy would be improved if there were clearer guidelines for investments or perhaps even 
a prohibition on domestic investments. And while the IMF said that the FSDEA publishes 
its audited annual reports online and provides more robust regular reports to the Ministry 
of Finance, the IMF asserted that these more robust reports should also be available to 


64   |   Sovereign Wealth Funds: Corruption and Other Governance Risks
the public, along with the laws and regulations associated with the fund’s governance, 
investment, and risk management strategies. Independent advisory or oversight bodies 
should also publish public opinions on the FSDEA’s operations and performance.264
Angola has made some commendable progress on SWF governance. This case demonstrates 
that even highly authoritarian and fragile states can make meaningful reforms. It highlights 
both the need for reforms in the standards by which SWF governance is judged and 
how important the implementation of those reforms can be to the citizens of the SWF 
originating state.


65
CHAPTER 5
﻿Equatorial Guinea—The Invisible 
Sovereign Wealth Fund
Jodi Vittori
Equatorial Guinea’s opportunity to profit from its hydrocarbon revenues is running out.265 
The International Monetary Fund (IMF) reported in 2018 that by 2030 Equatorial Guinea’s 
oil fields—which make up the bulk of its export earnings—will be exhausted, though its 
gas revenues will remain until 2075.266 A well-managed sovereign wealth fund (SWF) could 
thus be an important institution for ensuring that the country’s natural resource wealth 
benefits future generations and is not squandered.
However, the country’s Fund for Future Generations (FFG) is considered one of the least 
transparent SWFs in the world. The U.S. State Department’s 2023 assessment of Equatorial 
Guinea’s investment climate noted that “there is no publicly available information on [the 
FFG’s] allocations or the regulations directing its maintenance and management.”267 The 
extraordinary lack of transparency associated with the FFG, combined with the country’s 
well-documented lack of good governance and high levels of corruption, could mean that 
average citizens may see few benefits from those natural resources in the future.
Natural gas in Equatorial Guinea was discovered in 1983 and production began in 1992; oil 
production started in 1996.268 The FFG, established in 2002, has an estimated $165 million 
in assets under management,269 and at inception the fund promised to deposit 0.5 percent 
of annual oil revenues into a special account at the central bank, the Banques des États de 
l’Afrique Centrale (BEAC).270 In 2008, the World Bank confirmed that the government had 
been putting money into the account, but as early as 2005 the IMF voiced concerns that the 
fiscal rules of the FFG were unclear and poorly observed.271 Moreover, while 0.5 percent is a 
good start, it is much smaller than the percentage deposited by other oil-rich countries, such 
as Kuwait, which puts 10 percent of its oil revenues in its SWF.272


66   |   Sovereign Wealth Funds: Corruption and Other Governance Risks
The Unseen SWF
Today, there is almost no information available on the FFG. It is not a member of the 
International Forum of Sovereign Wealth Funds (IFSWF),273 and the 2019 SWF Report 
Card (the latest year available) gave Equatorial Guinea the lowest score of all countries: 11 
out of 100.274 The assessors could not find any recent report on the fund’s performance.275 
The IMF releases numbers on the BEAC, but it does not break out specific numbers for the 
FFG.276 Nonetheless, the IMF reports that Equatorial Guinea had a negative balance on its 
net foreign assets even when the government was bringing in higher hydrocarbon earnings,277 
as the Equatorial Guinean government’s funds at BEAC have been drawn down to support 
government spending.278 This is a red flag that the FFG may not be fully funded. 
The lack of transparency combines with well-documented corruption associated with the 
governing family and overall poor governance within Equatorial Guinea. As the IMF noted, 
“The [country’s] existing anti-corruption institutions are assessed to be highly vulnerable 
to political interference, have limited resources and some have not been established as 
prescribed by law.”279 The 2021 Open Budget Survey—which measures participation, 
oversight, and transparency of national budgets—gave Equatorial Guinea a score of 0 out of 
100 for its public participation and budget transparency and an 18 out of 100 on budgetary 
oversight.280 Transparency International gave the country a 17 out of 100 in its 2022 
Corruption Perceptions Index.281 
Evidence of Grand Corruption in Equatorial Guinea
This chapter does not allege that there has been any wrongdoing associated with Equatorial 
Guinea’s SWF, but the government’s well-documented history of grand corruption points 
to a need for greater scrutiny and accountability for the SWF to ensure that funds are not 
diverted for personal gain.
Officially a democracy, Equatorial Guinea is governed by the Obiang family. Teodoro 
Obiang Nguema Mbasogo has been president since 1979, when he seized power in a military 
coup.282 The country is rated “not free” by Freedom House and received a score of 0 for 
political rights in 2023.283
The president’s eldest son, Teodoro Nguema Obiang Mangue (referred to here by his 
surname Nguema284) has been the first vice president since November 2022.285 Before 
his promotion, he served as the forestry minister. The U.S. Department of Justice (DOJ) 
estimated that between 2005 and 2007, Ngeuma funneled into the United States at least 
$75 million, which was almost half of the annual education budget in Equatorial Guinea.286 
In 2014, the DOJ seized over $30 million in his assets, including two mansions, a private jet, 
luxury vehicles, and various Michael Jackson memorabilia (including seven life-sized statues 
of the singer, one of his diamond-studded gloves, and the red jacket worn in the “Thriller” 
music video).287 In 2016, Switzerland seized eleven luxury cars worth $8 million and a 
$120 million superyacht from Nguema.288 In 2018, Brazilian police seized $16.5 million in 
watches and cash.289 


Carnegie Endowment for International Peace   |   67
Perhaps the most notorious case against Nguema was the decade-long Biens Mal Acquis 
(“Ill-Gotten Gains”) case, which was resolved in 2021 when France’s highest appeals court 
upheld the guilty verdict against him. Ngeuma was the first foreign senior official to be 
tried in a French court of diverting corruptly acquired funds into investments on French 
territory.290 An estimated $150 million of property was seized—including a French mansion 
worth $120 million and eleven luxury cars (a Maserati, an Aston Martin, a Rolls Royce, 
a Porsche, two Bugattis, two Ferraris, and two Bentleys).291 Based on evidence from the 
French court, the British government also sanctioned Nguema with asset freezes and a travel 
ban.292 Throughout the trial, the Equatoguinean government asserted that, as vice president, 
Ngeuma enjoyed immunity from criminal prosecution and it filed legal action against 
France in the International Court of Justice.293
Another of the president’s sons, Gabriel Mbaga Obiang Lima (commonly referred to as 
Gabriel), is the minister of mines and hydrocarbons. Media reporting by the Organized 
Crime and Reporting Project (OCCRP)—a global network of investigative journalists—
alleged that Gabriel “often extorted money from businesses by demanding payments for 
events that are already funded by the government” and that companies linked to him “often 
make money by renting out residences to foreign oil companies or even the government.”294 
For instance, the OCCRP report alleged that a contract to create the National Institute 
of Hydrocarbons massively inflated the institute’s construction costs. Kickbacks allegedly 
included free renovations and construction work on hotels linked to Gabriel.295 
Beyond the immediate Obiang family, there have been media reports of repeated scandals 
involved with the state oil company, GEPetrol. In 2021, the OCCRP, working with 
the Equatoguinean online news site Diario Rombe, reported that GEPetrol’s managing 
director, Antonio Oburu Ondo, had used offshore firms to skim profits for himself from 
oil deals he set up. Part of this emerged via a $339 million oil corruption lawsuit that has 
been making its way through British and Swiss courts since 2015. The lawsuit claimed that 
fake companies were inserted into oil cargo sales to skim money.296 Oburu is married to 
Candida Okomo Nsue Mensa, who is the niece of the first lady of Equatorial Guinea and 
the daughter of the president’s chief of protocol.297 Okomo was named the deputy general 
director of GEPetrol in 2017.298 Oburu and Okomo bought Cypriot citizenship in 2017 
for 2.5 million euros ($2.6 million), and they own properties in Limassol, Cyprus; Accra, 
Ghana; Houston, United States; and Madrid, Spain. Some of these properties were bought 
via shell companies in the financial secrecy jurisdiction of the British Virgin Islands and 
using a bank account in Lebanon.299 
No Improvements on the Horizon
Under the Obiangs, Equatorial Guinea’s economic development has been phenomenal—
on paper. In 1979, Equatorial Guinea had an estimated gross domestic product (GDP) 
per capita of $170. By 2021, GDP per capita had risen to $14,600,300 after the country 
experienced an average 23.6 percent real GDP growth rate per year between 1996 and 
2008.301 Despite these figures, two-thirds of the population lives below the poverty line, 


68   |   Sovereign Wealth Funds: Corruption and Other Governance Risks
and Equatorial Guinea has the fourth-highest infant mortality rate in the world at 77.85 
per 1,000 live births.302 Only 67 percent of the population has electricity, and there are 
thirty-nine mobile phones per 100 inhabitants (and less than one fixed line phone per 100 
inhabitants).303 Perhaps as a result, it had the fifth-highest net migration rate in the world, 
with thirteen migrants per 1,000 of the population per year.304
Investigative journalism by local reporters trying to provide oversight of the FFG, or 
anything in Equatorial Guinea, has been difficult. Equatorial Guinea has one state-owned 
TV and radio station, plus a private TV and a private radio station, which are both owned 
by the president’s eldest son, Nguema.305 Receiving news from abroad can also be difficult 
since there are only 1,000 fixed broadband subscriptions in the country and only about half 
of the population has access to the internet.306 Obiang and his associates own the phone 
and internet companies, allowing them to control what information is shared. Especially 
during elections—including during the 2022 elections307—or violent government attacks 
against opposition parties, the regime shuts down access to the internet and/or social 
media. The government also blocks websites of media and nongovernmental organizations 
it considers critical of the regime.308 The Natural Resource Governance Institute noted that 
anti-corruption and good governance advocates are regularly targeted for harassment and 
arbitrary arrest. The judiciary lacks independence and includes such violations of rule of law 
as mass trials, trumped-up charges, and confessions obtained through torture.309 
Equatorial Guinea’s economy is not expected to improve soon. As the IMF noted in 2022, 
“the economy is projected to contract in 2023 and through the medium term, reflecting 
a reduction in hydrocarbon output together with a stalled structural reform agenda, weak 
governance and significant corruption vulnerabilities, subdued business confidence, and a 
weak banking sector.”310 The IMF assessed that “hydrocarbon revenues in Equatorial Guinea 
have passed their peak” and that the country has about $105.6 billion in hydrocarbon 
wealth remaining.311
Although there has not been any documented wrongdoing associated with Equatorial 
Guinea’s SWF, the Obiang family’s history of authoritarian governance and grand 
corruption, combined with the lack of transparency in the fund and the anticipated short 
time line for the country to profit from natural resource revenues, highlights the need for 
greatly improved governance for the SWF. 
Chapter 2 highlighted the lack of transparency in SWFs overall, while chapter 12 asserts the 
need for countries that receive investments from SWFs to establish guidelines to conduct 
due diligence on the sources of that money. Though none of the seizures of Obiang property 
associated with corruption in France, Switzerland, Brazil, and the United States were 
explicitly linked to the SWF, it nonetheless highlights the importance for recipient countries 
of requiring such due diligence should a similarly kleptocratic regime seek to move ill-gotten 
gains through an SWF. 


69
CHAPTER 6
﻿The Public Investment Fund  
and Saudi Arabia’s Engagement 
in Global Sport
Kristian Coates Ulrichsen
In October 2021, the English Premier League (EPL) approved the takeover of Newcastle 
United Football Club by the Public Investment Fund (PIF) of Saudi Arabia and two other 
parties. As the PIF acquired 80 percent of the 130-year-old club, it became the majority 
owner.312 Within minutes of the announcement of the takeover, thousands of jubilant 
Newcastle United supporters flooded the streets outside the St James’ Park stadium, 
celebrating and chanting slogans in support of the new Saudi owners.313 Ten days later, a 
sellout crowd at the first home game under PIF ownership saw many fans don Saudi thobes 
and Arab headscarves, while human rights advocates protested outside the stadium with 
images of murdered Saudi columnist Jamal Khashoggi.314 
The emphasis placed on soccer (and sport more broadly) by the PIF—and, by extension, the 
Kingdom of Saudi Arabia—since 2016, coupled with the rapturous nature of their welcome 
in Newcastle, shines a spotlight on the unconventional returns on such investments. 
Owning sports clubs overseas does little to generate job creation or technology transfer in 
the investing country; and professional soccer teams in the EPL have only recorded pre-tax 
profits four times in the last two decades (the twenty teams collectively lost, pre-tax, nearly 
£1 billion ($1.3 billion) in the 2019–2020 season alone).315 This reality suggests that financial 
rates of return were not necessarily uppermost in the PIF’s considerations. And, hence, the 
PIF’s acquisition presents a useful case study of how a sovereign wealth fund can pursue 
other objectives besides economic diversification and national development. 


70   |   Sovereign Wealth Funds: Corruption and Other Governance Risks
Moreover, the scale of the PIF’s (and the Saudi state’s) turn toward investment in a range 
of sports since 2018 indicates that Saudi Arabia will exercise growing influence across 
the global sporting landscape in ways that are increasingly visible and direct, whether 
through the ownership of teams and franchises or by hosting global events that position the 
Kingdom as a destination.316 Media reports suggest, for example, that Saudi authorities are 
aiming to win the hosting rights to twenty-five world championships across a range of sports 
by 2030, and as the sole bidder, Saudi Arabia is now expected to host the 2034 World Cup, 
too.317 Already, the Kingdom has secured the right to host the 2023 FIFA Club World Cup, 
the 2027 AFC Asian Cup, and the 2029 Asian Winter Games, with the latter set to take 
place at Trojena, a futuristic ski resort to be developed as part of the PIF’s Neom giga-project 
in northwest Saudi Arabia.318
No specific links to issues of corruption have emerged in the Public Investment Fund’s 
nascent foray into the sporting landscape, although questions have been raised about the 
process of decisionmaking within the PIF and the overspill of political considerations into 
investment policy.319 The proximity of the PIF to Crown Prince Mohammed bin Salman 
and its central role in the redistribution of political authority in Saudi Arabia since 2015 has 
ensured that “the PIF’s structure and investment strategy are enmeshed in elite politics” and 
injected “political drivers” associated with the personal policy preferences of the heir to the 
throne.320 Personalized aspects of decisionmaking, together with the unconventional and 
frequently intangible returns associated with sports-related investments, may well define and 
indeed distort the PIF’s mandate as 2030 approaches, especially if progress on developing 
the giga-projects is perceived to be lagging or underwhelming, and policymakers believe 
themselves to be under pressure to show results.321
Emergence of the PIF as the Saudi Sovereign Wealth Fund 
When sovereign wealth funds began to attract international attention during the 2007–2008 
global financial crisis, it was often noted that Saudi Arabia did not have a sovereign fund, at 
least by comparison with the externally focused investment authorities in Kuwait, Qatar, and 
the United Arab Emirates (UAE). According to a 2008 study of Gulf-based sovereign wealth 
funds, the Saudi Arabian Monetary Agency managed the Kingdom’s assets and the PIF was 
one of three state funds that invested locally and were not “standard” sovereign wealth funds 
(in other words, they did not emphasize external investment portfolios or priorities).322 From 
its formation in 1971 until 2015, when responsibility for its operations was transferred to the 
Council of Economic and Development Affairs (CEDA), the PIF was part of the Ministry of 
Finance and maintained a domestic-focused and largely low-key profile.323
This changed in March 2015, two months after the succession from King Abdullah to 
King Salman and the rise to prominence of the new king’s then twenty-nine-year-old son, 
Mohammed bin Salman. Appointed minister of defense and chairman of CEDA as part 
of the restructuring of the Saudi cabinet in January 2015, Mohammed bin Salman entered 
the line of succession in April when his father appointed him deputy crown prince (and, in 


Carnegie Endowment for International Peace   |   71
June 2017, crown prince, displacing his cousin, Mohammed bin Nayef).324 He immediately 
began to accumulate decisionmaking authority on a scale unprecedented in post-1953 Saudi 
Arabia.325 He assumed oversight of investment policy in March 2015, when the PIF was 
transferred from the ministry of finance to CEDA, as well as of energy policy, when he 
became chairman of a new supreme council for the state-run oil company Saudi Aramco in 
May 2015, just days after becoming deputy crown prince.326
In April 2016, Mohammed bin Salman unveiled Vision 2030, an ambitious plan to 
transform and diversify the Saudi economy, and entrusted the PIF with much of its project 
delivery, including associated giga-projects such as Neom. In his introduction to Vision 
2030, Mohammed bin Salman stated that Saudi Arabia would “transform the Public 
Investment Fund into the world’s largest sovereign wealth fund,” in part by transferring 
ownership of Saudi Aramco to the PIF and listing a proportion of its shares.327 Sport, 
entertainment, and tourism have all featured heavily in Vision 2030 and the six giga-projects 
launched by Mohammed bin Salman since 2017. In addition to Neom, these projects 
include Qiddiya, a large-scale entertainment, sports, and cultural complex near the capital 
Riyadh, as well as other large-scale developments along the Red Sea coastline.328 
The extent to which Vision 2030 and the giga-projects will be realized is yet to be 
determined and may not become fully apparent for many years to come. The degree to 
which Vision 2030 (and PIF investment ventures) can develop and diversify the domestic 
economic and industrial base and create sufficient new jobs for Saudi citizens as they 
enter the labor market will be the ultimate test of its success. Media reports in the Wall 
Street Journal have painted a picture of a less than harmonious working environment that 
seemingly has impacted Mohammed bin Salman’s initiatives.329 And yet the PIF remains 
integral to his plans to remake the Saudi state, both before and after he becomes king, 
as evidenced by the decision to transfer an additional 4 percent of Saudi Aramco shares, 
potentially worth some $80 billion, to PIF coffers in April 2023.330 Moreover, sport has 
emerged as an area of intense focus for the Saudi authorities, combining domestic and 
international considerations as well as large-scale and increasing commitment of resources.
Leveraging the Global Appeal of Sport 
Under Mohammed bin Salman, Saudi Arabia has become far more active in trying to 
harness the power of culture and sport to burnish its international image and move the 
narrative about the Kingdom away from issues such as human rights violations and the 
war in Yemen. This effort took on added importance after the October 2018 killing 
of Washington Post journalist Jamal Khashoggi by agents of the Saudi state who acted, 
according to U.S. intelligence agencies, with the approval of Mohammed bin Salman.331 
Some of the initial Saudi engagement with international sport was driven by Turki Al 
Sheikh, a close adviser to the crown prince, in both his professional capacity as chairman of 
the General Entertainment Authority and his private capacity as an investor in soccer clubs 
in Egypt, Spain, and Sudan.332 


72   |   Sovereign Wealth Funds: Corruption and Other Governance Risks
The scope and intensity of Saudi Arabia’s involvement in sporting initiatives, as a host 
and participant, quickened considerably after 2018. That year, the General Entertainment 
Authority signed a ten-year agreement with World Wrestling Entertainment to host two 
“crown jewel” events each year in the Kingdom, and the first one took place only a month 
after Khashoggi’s death.333 Multiyear agreements were also signed with the Italian and 
Spanish soccer federations to host each country’s super cup in Saudi Arabia in 2018 and 
2019 and in 2020 and 2022 respectively. In addition, major boxing matches took place in 
the town of Diriyah, the ancestral home of the House of Saud, and the inaugural Saudi 
Arabian Grand Prix was organized on a street circuit along the Jeddah Corniche in 2021 
as part of a ten-year deal with Formula One.334 The PIF also began to invest significantly 
in gaming and esports in 2022 through a subsidiary, the Savvy Games Group, established 
as part of the PIF’s new 2021–2025 strategy to build on a string of previous investments in 
various esports and gaming platforms and companies.335 
The EPL’s global profile and the contentious nature of the Newcastle United takeover process 
brought Saudi Arabia’s sporting outreach into even greater focus. The lengthy process 
lasted from April 2020 to October 2021, largely because the EPL sought assurances that 
the PIF was separate from the Saudi state and that the latter would not have control over 
the club.336 Proving the separation of the PIF and the Saudi state was a challenge, given 
that the PIF functioned as the sovereign wealth fund of Saudi Arabia and answered to the 
crown prince as chairman of the fund’s board. The board itself comprises six members of the 
Council of Ministers (the Saudi cabinet) and two advisers to the Royal Court.337 Evidence 
of separation was deemed necessary because the Saudi state was implicated in the pirating 
of regional broadcasting rights held by beIN Sports, a Qatar-based media group, including 
the illegal airing of matches from the EPL itself. In June 2020, a ruling by the World Trade 
Organization (WTO) linked the Kingdom to beoutQ, a shadowy entity that appeared in 
2017 during the blockade of Qatar by Saudi Arabia, Bahrain, Egypt, and the UAE.338 The 
fact that beIN Sports held the rights to broadcast EPL games in the Middle East and North 
Africa complicated the takeover of Newcastle United, as the WTO ruling established 
that the Saudi authorities had failed to act against the theft of those rights by an entity or 
individual operating under Saudi jurisdiction.
An October 2021 decision by Saudi authorities to restore beIN’s access to Saudi Arabia 
proved to be the key to breaking the impasse over the PIF-led takeover of Newcastle United, 
which was approved by the EPL the following day.339 The alacrity with which the EPL 
announced it had received, and accepted, “legally binding assurances” that the Saudi state 
would not control Newcastle United (without disclosing what those assurances were) seemed 
to indicate that the real holdup to the takeover had been the piracy issue affecting beIN, the 
EPL’s regional broadcast partner in the Middle East and North Africa.340 Newcastle United’s 
fortunes on the field went on to improve markedly, helped by a lavish outlay on new players. 
Ties between the club and Saudi Arabia also proliferated, evidenced by, for example, a 
mid-season warm-weather training week in Jeddah and a new jersey that, perhaps not 
uncoincidentally, resembled that of the Saudi Arabian national team.341 


Carnegie Endowment for International Peace   |   73
Critics of the Newcastle United acquisition have accused Saudi Arabia of “sports-
washing”—a nebulous term that emerged in the 2010s as authoritarian regimes began 
to actively engage more in the infrastructure and ecosystem of global sport and, in turn, 
challenge the historically Western-centric dominance of sporting institutions and mega-
event hosting.342 But it could also be said that governments are engaging in forms of 
nation branding and soft power projection to reach new audiences and channel narratives 
in new and (for them) more benign directions. The PIF has played an active role in this 
phenomenon through its involvement with Newcastle and, since 2022, its financial support 
of more than $2 billion for a breakaway golf tour, the LIV Golf Invitational Series.343 
Multiple PIF Objectives 
PIF leaders have tended to maintain a discreet silence about the decisionmaking process 
around putting the fund’s broad objectives—spelled out to great fanfare by Mohammed 
bin Salman—into practice. For example, in announcing the PIF’s new five-year strategy for 
2021–2025, the crown prince (and board chairman) declared that the fund would invest 
$40 billion each year domestically and create 1.8 million new jobs in Saudi Arabia, but he 
did not provide any specific details. In equally broad terms, PIF governor Yasir bin Othman 
al-Rumayyan added that the fund’s mandate was to “enable the private sector” in part by 
working with “innovative, transformative and disruptive companies around the world” to 
develop “the industries and opportunities of the future.”344 
Some investments in clear support of this mandate include the PIF’s investment of $1 billion 
in the American electric vehicle manufacturer Lucid Motors in 2019, and the February 2022 
announcement that Lucid would open a new assembly plant in Saudi Arabia and provide 
between 50,000 and 100,000 locally produced electric cars for the Saudi market over a 
ten-year period.345
Other conventional investments include esports and gaming, in terms of the investments’ 
compatibility with the mandate to contribute to the economic development and 
diversification of Saudi Arabia. This emerging and rapidly growing sector appears to be 
consistent with al-Rumayyan’s earmarking of “innovative, transformative and disruptive” 
companies and technologies as targets for PIF investments with the goal of establishing 
leadership in new economic sectors and positioning the Kingdom as a “growth engine.”346 
Also consistent is a separate PIF investment made in 2021—the acquisition of a minority 
stake in the McLaren Group—that was followed in 2022 by a “strategic title partnership” 
that saw Neom brand itself on McLaren’s Formula E and Extreme E racing cars and saw 
McLaren become a founding partner in an advanced and clean industries initiative to be 
based at a Neom research and innovation campus.347


74   |   Sovereign Wealth Funds: Corruption and Other Governance Risks
Less conventional or clear, however, are the PIF’s investments in Newcastle United and LIV 
Golf. These appear to be more about the projection of soft power and the use of sport to 
reach new constituencies outside the Kingdom’s borders. The global profile and mass appeal 
of the EPL could make Newcastle United a potent brand for Saudi Arabia, especially if 
the team performs well and if the jerseys ever feature advertisements for Saudi companies.348 
Other indirect benefits may contribute to aspects of Vision 2030, such as the promotion 
of Saudi Arabia as a tourism destination, an approach seen also in the 2022 unveiling of 
Argentinian soccer superstar Lionel Messi as a brand ambassador for the Saudi Tourism 
Authority.349 It is these less tangible (and hard-to-measure) outcomes of PIF investments 
that have motivated the accusations of “sports-washing”—just as the term has become 
popularized by events such as the 2022 FIFA World Cup in neighboring Qatar. 
The PIF’s decision to associate itself with, and finance, LIV Golf not only reflects al-
Rumayyan’s personal interest in golf but also suggests a very different approach to Saudi 
Arabia’s engagement in sport.350 It is one thing to own one of twenty teams in the EPL 
or organize one of twenty-two grand prix in the Formula One World Championship 
but quite another to back a breakaway golf tour that has positioned itself as a direct rival 
to the existing institutional structure, in this case the Professional Golfers’ Association 
(PGA) and DP World (European) Tour.351 The PIF’s backing of LIV Golf in 2022 and 
eventual agreement to combine commercial operations with the PGA and DP World 
Tour in June 2023 represented a striking breakthrough against the status quo in a 
notoriously conservative sport, consistent with al-Rumayyan’s enthusiasm for disruptive and 
transformative challengers.352 The fact that two of the eight tournaments in the inaugural 
season took place at courses owned by former U.S. president Donald Trump suggests that 
political motives could potentially be at play. Also seemingly political in nature is the PIF’s 
decision—reportedly against the advice of its investment committee—to invest $2 billion in 
Affinity Partners, a private equity firm established by Trump’s son-in-law and former senior 
adviser, Jared Kushner.353
Speaking to the media after unveiling plans for a smart city called The Line as part of the 
Neom project in 2022, Mohammed bin Salman asserted that Saudi Arabia would have 
a population of more than 50 million by 2030.354 The scale of increase (from a current 
population of 35.96 million in 2023355) suggests that a majority of the arrivals will be 
residents or visitors from overseas. It may be that, over the period leading up to 2030, 
investment into sport, through ownership, sponsorship, or event hosting, will create 
awareness of Saudi Arabia (and particularly the giga-projects) as a place to visit or live. 
Tapping into the mass global appeal of sport could in this way generate, over the long term, 
development of Saudi Arabia as a market for tourism, entertainment, and hospitality.356 
Whether this transpires or not will only become clear over years, but the PIF established 
a dedicated sports investment company (SRJ Sports Investments) in August 2023 as a 
statement of intent with a mandate to accelerate the growth of the sport sector in Saudi 
Arabia, localize partnerships, and contribute “to a more vibrant society,” however that may 
be measured.357


Carnegie Endowment for International Peace   |   75
Conclusion 
PIF and Saudi Arabia may be relatively late entrants into sport, especially by comparison 
with the states around them, such as Qatar, the UAE (both Dubai and Abu Dhabi), and 
even Bahrain, which first hosted a Formula One Grand Prix as far back as 2004.358 Sovereign 
wealth funds and the resource-rich states that they represent have become increasingly visible 
investors and participants in global sport over the past decade. Gulf states’ investments 
in European soccer teams such as Manchester City (owned since 2008 by the brother of 
the ruler of Abu Dhabi, also the president of the UAE) and Paris Saint-Germain (owned 
by Qatar Sports Investments since 2011) have reshaped the playing field and financial 
landscape and attracted criticism from fans and owners of other clubs. The Union of 
European Football Associations, the governing body of soccer in Europe, has investigated 
both Manchester City and Paris Saint-Germain for alleged breaches of financial fair play 
rules, suggesting that the clubs may have benefited from inflated sponsorship contracts with 
state-linked entities.359 The trend of sovereign wealth investment looks set to grow in tandem 
with the globalization of sport and the rebalancing of the sporting landscape beyond the 
traditional powerhouses of Europe and North America, and with the levels of resources now 
put forward by the PIF. Further study of the engagement of sovereign wealth funds in global 
sport is therefore important to shed light on possible motivations or objectives that seem to 
align with profit maximization or national development and diversification.




77
CHAPTER 7
﻿Sputnik V and the Russian  
Direct Investment Fund:  
Profiting From Coronavirus
Jodi Vittori
Coronavirus was running rampant through Ghana in early 2021. Exacerbating the crisis 
was a worldwide shortage of vaccines, especially for low-income countries. After India halted 
exports of the AstraZeneca coronavirus vaccine, no producer could promise deliveries before 
August 2021,360 imperiling the Ghanaian president’s goal of having every eligible citizen 
vaccinated by October of that year.361 The only vaccine Ghana’s minister of health, Kwaku 
Agyeman-Manu, found that could be delivered sooner was Russia’s Sputnik V vaccine, 
leading him to sign dubious contracts for it at double the going price. 
In front of a Ghanaian parliamentary commission, Agyeman-Manu testified that he 
tried to buy the vaccines directly from its producer, Russia’s Gamaleya Research Institute 
of Epidemiology and Microbiology, at the factory price of $20 per two-dose regimen.362 
Unfortunately, he could not use this more direct and cheaper route because Russia’s leading 
sovereign wealth fund, the Russian Direct Investment Fund (RDIF), had been tasked by 
Russian President Vladimir Putin with marketing the vaccine. The RDIF, in turn, had given 
the exclusive resale rights for exporting Sputnik V to a new company based in the United 
Arab Emirates (UAE), Aurugulf Health Investments.363 
Aurugulf, in turn, used a colorful cast of intermediaries and agents, including a member of 
an Emirati royal family and a convicted Norwegian fraudster, to sell the vaccine to many 
developing countries at double the cost to produce it. Agyeman-Manu testified that, because 
of the critical need for the vaccine, he reluctantly signed contracts for $38 per two-shot 
regimen rather than the $20 factory price.364 Fortunately, Ghana was able to get its money 
back after Aurugulf was unable to fulfill the contract, but it was hardly the only country to 
find itself paying well above market prices for this potentially life-saving vaccine.


78   |   Sovereign Wealth Funds: Corruption and Other Governance Risks
This report highlights several means that elites exploit to abuse sovereign wealth funds for 
private gain. One might not expect such rent-seeking activity around the provision of vital 
vaccines during a global pandemic. Nonetheless, investigative journalism and government 
inquiries have both documented the RDIF’s role in marketing Sputnik V at overinflated 
prices through a series of controversial intermediaries. There is no information about why 
some countries were charged more for the Sputnik V vaccine than others nor about how 
this additional money was distributed. Higher prices and the use of middlemen do not 
necessarily mean that corruption occurred. This case demonstrates, however, that contracts 
associated with emergency situations such as a pandemic that are further enmeshed in 
opaque sovereign wealth funds—especially a fund with a reputation as a “slush fund for 
President Vladimir Putin”365—can raise red flags for possible corrupt activity. 
Sputnik V
Putin himself launched the Sputnik V vaccine with great fanfare via a videoconference in 
August 2020, describing it as effective and so safe that one of his own daughters had been 
vaccinated.366 (Putin himself would not be vaccinated with Sputnik V until March 2021, 
and this was not disclosed until June 2021. The vaccination occurred privately and without 
a photo op.)367 The vaccine was advertised as having an efficacy of over 90 percent and a 
price half that of similarly effective vaccines. Russia also emphasized that it would be easier 
to transport and store since it would not require cold storage like mRNA vaccines, such as 
those produced by Pfizer or Moderna, making Sputnik V ideal for the developing world.368
Sputnik V was developed by the Gamaleya Research Institute of Epidemiology and 
Microbiology, a 140-year-old research center that had been involved in vaccinations for 
everything from inoculating Soviet citizens against smallpox to, more recently, producing 
experimental vaccines for Ebola and Middle East Respiratory Syndrome.369 But despite 
Putin’s assertions about the safety of Sputnik V, at the time, scientists had not published data 
from the vaccine’s Phase I and II trials and had not even started Phase III trials.370 
It was nonetheless marketed extensively internationally, with Russian officials claiming that 
it had been approved in seventy countries by September 2021.371 An early peer-reviewed 
report in the respected medical journal The Lancet stated that the vaccine was 91.6 percent 
effective and deemed it safe, boosting its appeal.372 Russian state networks RT and Sputnik 
News provided expansive coverage of the vaccine receiving positive receptions in countries 
like Argentina, Brazil, India, the Philippines, Thailand, and Venezuela.373 Russia’s exports 
were prioritized over domestic distribution—with millions of doses pledged to countries 
such as Hungary and Serbia—even while there were still substantial shortages within Russia.374
Despite the rhetoric of Russian vaccine diplomacy, the vaccine was provided almost solely 
on a commercial basis and without Russia providing doses through COVAX, the global 
initiative to distribute vaccines to low-income countries.375 At $20 for the two-dose vaccine, 
it cost much more than AstraZeneca at $3 per dose, Pfizer at $6.75, or Johnson & Johnson’s 
single-dose vaccine at $10.376 Moreover, production capacity never came close to living up 


Carnegie Endowment for International Peace   |   79
to the hype. For instance, a January 2021 story on Russian television claimed that hundreds 
of thousands of doses were being delivered daily across Russia; in reality, the numbers were 
only a few thousand per week.377 Moscow also developed an information campaign, touting 
Sputnik V while attacking Western vaccines’ safety, side effects, and approval procedures.378 
Any criticism of the vaccine was dismissed by Russia as Russophobic attacks.379
The Russian Direct Investment Fund
Putin assigned the RDIF the task of funding and marketing Sputnik V. The RDIF was 
established in 2011 by order of the former Russian president Dmitry Medvedev and also 
Putin, who was then serving as prime minister. It is an unusual form of sovereign wealth 
fund: rather than investing the proceeds from domestic oil or other natural resources outside 
of Russia to help diversify the economy, the RDIF focuses on establishing joint ventures 
with foreign firms and funds for investments within Russia. The Russian state matches other 
investors’ funds.380 The $40 billion fund has facilitated over 100 deals, with only about 10 
percent of the investment money coming from Russia.381 
Since its inception, the fund had been closely linked with the elite financiers. Inaugural 
investors included Blackstone Group’s Stephen Schwarzman, TPG Capital’s David 
Bonderman, and Apollo Global Management’s Leon Black, among others. (These three 
withdrew their names from a published list of advisers after Russia’s 2014 invasion of 
Ukraine.)382 At that time, the RDIF was part of Vnesheconombank (VEB), a Russian 
development fund linked to Russia’s security services that was partially sanctioned by the 
United States in 2015.383 The RDIF separated from VEB in 2016 and was not resanctioned 
until the February 2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine.384
Other investors filled in, however, and have remained with the RDIF even as sanctions have 
increased. In 2015, Saudi Arabia’s Public Investment Fund committed $10 billion to the 
RDIF and the China Investment Corporation (a Chinese sovereign wealth fund) invested 
another $10 billion two years later.385 Since 2013, the United Arab Emirates’ Mubadala 
fund has also been a prominent investor.386 As Matthew Murray, an adviser on ethics for the 
RDIF in its early days, noted, “[The RDIF] started making alliances with China and other 
countries that were not going to hold them to basic corporate governance, business ethics 
and anti-corruption standards.”387
Kirill Dmitriev, the RDIF’s director, came up with the name Sputnik V (the V stands for 
vaccine), likening the vaccine’s discovery to the Soviet Union’s launch of the world’s first 
artificial satellite.388 Dmitriev has been one of the key public backers of the vaccine in the 
media.389 He has long ties with the United States: he studied at Stanford University and 
Harvard Business School and has worked for Goldman Sachs and McKinsey & Co.390 
Dmitriev is married to Natalia Popova, the deputy director of a scientific institute called 
Innopraktika, which is part of a $1.5 billion project to build a technology hub at Moscow 
State University.391 Innopraktika is run by Putin’s younger daughter Katerina Tikhonova, 


80   |   Sovereign Wealth Funds: Corruption and Other Governance Risks
who studied at university with Popova. It is their relationship that was presumably 
Dmitriev’s entrée into Putin’s inner circle. Some have even floated Dmitriev’s name as a 
future deputy prime minister and a potential successor to Putin.392 Thus, “this combination 
of official and unofficial duties makes Dmitriev a crucial figure in the Sputnik V story, 
acting at the intersection of the public and nonpublic interests of the Putin regime.”393
The Sputnik V Supply Chain
One would expect that Russia’s Ministry of Foreign Affairs or perhaps its Ministry of Health 
would lead vaccine diplomacy. Instead, the supply chain for countries to purchase Sputnik V 
ran through the RDIF and a company called Human Vaccine that the fund had established 
to handle Sputnik V marketing.394 Some countries, such as European Union members 
Hungary and Slovakia, were able to make direct deals with Human Vaccine to buy Sputnik 
V doses for $20 for the two-dose regimen.395 Other countries, however, such as Ghana, 
Guyana, Lebanon, and Pakistan, had to go through another step in the supply chain because 
Human Vaccine had appointed Dubai-based Aurugulf as the “exclusive seller and distributor 
of Human Vaccine’s Sputnik V” for several countries in Africa and Asia.396
Aurugulf was registered in October 2020, just two months after Sputnik V was authorized 
in Russia.397 Rather than allowing government-to-government sales of the vaccine, Russian 
authorities told developing country governments—including Ghana’s—that they must use 
Aurugulf as a middleman in the transactions when those countries tried to deal directly 
with Russia. Russian officials were in some cases not even aware of this vaccine distribution 
agreement. A Russian diplomat in Kenya, for instance, stated that the Russian Embassy 
there was not involved in vaccine distribution at all.398 
Aurugulf’s company “agent” assigned to “develop, distribute and market” Sputnik V is 
a relatively minor member of the royal family of Dubai, His Highness Sheikh Ahmed 
Dalmook al-Maktoum.399 Per reporting by the Moscow Times, al-Maktoum received explicit 
approval from Moscow to sell Sputnik V in the developing world.400 Invoices for the vaccine 
sent to Pakistan and published by the Moscow Times were on the letterhead of his private 
office, leaving little doubt of his personal involvement.401 Payments for the vaccines Ghana 
bought (worth $64.6 million) were to go to al-Maktoum’s private office,402 and the deal with 
Ghana for the 3.4 million doses at $38 per two-shot regime would have netted Aurugulf $30 
million.403 Per the company’s website, Sputnik V appears to be its only product.
According to corporate registry documents seen by the Moscow Times, a conglomerate called 
Royal Group is one of the two entities that control Aurugulf.404 Royal Group is run by the 
UAE’s national security adviser (and brother of the UAE president) Sheikh Tahnoon bin 
Zayed al-Nahyan.405 
Another company that is part of Royal Group and linked to Aurugulf is Chimera 
Investment.406 It was involved in deals with private sector providers in Lebanon and 
Pakistan.407 Founded in 2017, Chimera Investment is an Abu Dhabi–based venture capital 


Carnegie Endowment for International Peace   |   81
firm.408 As recently as October 2021, Mubadala was a major investor in Chimera’s main 
investment fund.409 (See Chapter 11 for more information on Mubadala.)
In addition to al-Maktoum’s investments with the RDIF, Mubadala has had a co-investment 
program with the RDIF since 2013, whereby each contributed $1 billion to pursue 
investments in Russia.410 As of January 2022, Mubadala, the RDIF, and Sberinvest (a 
venture capital arm of Russia’s largest bank, Sberbank) had jointly invested $190 million 
in commercial data center operator IXcellerate, located in Moscow.411 In March 2022, 
Mubadala’s chief executive officer, Khaldoon Khalifa al-Mubarak, announced that the fund 
was pausing its investments in Russia because of Russia’s invasion of Ukraine. At the time, 
Mubadala claimed it had invested about $3 billion in fifty companies via the RDIF, but that 
its investment was down to less than 1 percent of its $243 billion portfolio.412 
In at least one case, Mubadala’s investments seemed to run in parallel with those of al-
Maktoum’s vaccine business activities. In October 2021, the president of Guyana, Irfaan 
Ali, visited an Emirati vaccine storage facility in Abu Dhabi with the chief executive officer 
of Abu Dhabi Ports, Mohamed Juma al-Shamisi, to discuss the possibility of creating a new 
logistics hub for the UAE in Guyana. Al-Maktoum was also in attendance. The day prior, 
the Guyanese minister of finance had attended a meeting in the Emirate of Dubai with a 
delegation from Mubadala regarding possible future investments in the country.413 Guyana, 
too, had purchased Sputnik V vaccines from Aurugulf in March 2021, also at double the 
factory price per dose.414
One of the few explanations given for the steep markup in some Sputnik V vaccine prices 
was transportation. The vaccine was being transshipped through the UAE rather than 
directly from Russia, per Sputnik V shipping documents. Nonetheless, the Moscow Times 
cites transportation costs as being about $0.10 per dose, so this should not have added 
substantially to the cost of the vaccination series.415 As a report by the Institute of Modern 
Russia points out, “Given the fact that the key person behind the Sputnik V market drive is 
a member of Putin’s inner circle, the lucrative market opportunities also suggest that Putin 
or his associates stand to gain personally from this effort.”416
Sputnik V’s Anomalous Intermediaries
While the trade network for many countries such as Hungary was straightforward—
countries purchased the vaccine directly from Human Vaccine LLC—other countries, like 
Ghana, were forced to use a complex network in which many of the intermediaries had 
unique business backgrounds. 
The head of the company designated as the intermediary for many of the purchases, 
Aurugulf Health Investment’s Sheikh Ahmed Dalmook al-Maktoum, had no medical or 
pharmaceutical background. Al-Maktoum is second cousin to the ruler of Dubai, Sheikh 
Mohammed bin Rashid al-Maktoum, who is also the vice president, prime minister, 
and minister of defense of the UAE.417 Sheikh Ahmed Dalmook al-Maktoum is also the 


82   |   Sovereign Wealth Funds: Corruption and Other Governance Risks
chairman of the board of the Dubai-based Africa and Middle East Resources Investment 
(Ameri) Group, whose website claims that it owns and operates electrical equipment around 
the world.418 However, Ameri Group has had a controversial past, including in Ghana. In 
2015, Norwegian investigative journalists documented that the group had signed a $510 
million agreement with Ghana’s minister of power for a BOOT (build, own, operate, and 
transfer) deal for ten gas turbines that would actually have been worth about $220 million 
if they had been bought directly from the producer, General Electric.419 Per al-Maktoum’s 
website, he signed a new agreement for “power projects” with Ghana’s Ministry of Energy on 
January 2, 2019. 
Another affiliate associated with Sputnik V is Norwegian Per Morten Hansen. A Norwegian 
newspaper has alleged that Hansen and al-Maktoum have been involved in pump-and-
dump shares scams on the London Stock Exchange.420 Over the years, Hansen has had 
several (some unsuccessful) careers in nightclub ownership, debt collection, noodles 
sales, diamond cultivation in Sierra Leone, cannabis oil production, and Bitcoin mining 
in Sweden.421 He also has developed a lengthy rap sheet. In 1992, he was convicted by a 
Norwegian court of receiving the proceeds of a crime (including a stolen lithograph created 
by the famous painter Edvard Munch), and in 2003, he was sentenced to eighteen months 
in prison for fraud for not paying customs duties. In 2010, he assisted then seventeen-year-
old Arkadiy Abramovich, the son of Russian oligarch Roman Abramovich, in his failed bid 
to buy the FC Copenhagen soccer team.422 He was arrested again in November 2019 in 
Copenhagen for money laundering at the request of Norwegian authorities; in March 2023, 
he was convicted and sentenced to two years and five months, which Hansen’s lawyer said he 
plans to appeal. In 2020, Norwegian authorities also seized two of his properties to settle a 
tax evasion.423 
Another controversial person associated with al-Maktoum and Hansen is Umar Farooq 
Zahoor, the former chief executive of Ameri Group. He is a Pakistani national who grew 
up in Norway. In 2003, Zahoor was convicted of embezzlement in Norway. He has also 
been accused by the Oslo police of being a ringleader of the Nordea bank swindle, in which 
he and a partner allegedly emptied $10 million from the bank account of a rich widow.424 
Zahoor denies he is guilty, and the Emirates has refused to extradite him back to Norway.425 
He is also wanted by Swiss authorities for allegations that he was running a fake bank there. 
His business partner was sentenced to more than three years in prison, but Zahoor escaped 
to Pakistan and then Dubai before he could be arrested; the statute of limitations in the case 
has since expired.426 Al-Maktoum’s office frequently denies that Zahoor works for him, but 
newspaper reports mention him signing contracts and employees have previously confirmed 
to journalists that Zahoor is indeed an employee, though his current position with the 
company is unclear.427 Zahoor accompanied al-Maktoum to Ghana in March 2021 to sign 
the contract for the Sputnik V vaccine.428 Zahoor has repeatedly denied all allegations.429
Hansen denies any involvement in upselling the Sputnik V vaccine to Ghana without 
Ghanian parliamentary approval despite audio recordings obtained by the Norwegian 
newspaper VG of Hansen discussing his role in the sale.430 Hansen also denied his 


Carnegie Endowment for International Peace   |   83
relationship with al-Maktoum to another Norwegian newspaper, saying, “I have no 
relationship with Sheikh Ahmed Dalmook al-Maktoum other than that I have invested 
in parallel with the sheikh on a couple of occasions.”431 Zahoor claimed to the same 
newspaper that the details of the Ghanaian contracts could not be disclosed because 
of nondisclosure agreements and that he was not involved in the negotiations for the 
contract.432 Al-Maktoum never responded to VG’s questions, but there is a letter purportedly 
signed by him as chairman of Ameri Group rebutting VG’s allegations on the website 
opensourceinvestigations.com.433  
Conclusion
Despite the lack of public comment from those involved in Sputnik V sales, there may 
be several reasons why the Russian government used such an indirect route for vaccine 
shipments, which were supposed to be a centerpiece of their vaccine diplomacy. The 
government may have wanted to limit liability or perhaps curry favor with the UAE, for 
instance.434 But the choice of intermediaries and the upselling of the vaccine raises concerns. 
Ghana was hardly the only country to pay an exorbitant price for vaccines. The RDIF and 
its intermediaries have also upsold the vaccine to Guyana, Iraq, and Pakistan.435 Like Ghana, 
Guyana was charged double the manufacturing price per Sputnik V dose by Ameri Group.436 
In Pakistan, a private company bought the vaccine for $45 per two-shot regimen and then 
sold it to patients for $78.437 Kenya paid the same $19 per dose as Ghana and Guyana but 
then sold it to clinics for $42 per dose, with some patients then paying as much as $70 per 
dose. Kenyan authorities paused the vaccine’s use due to health and safety concerns.438 
The global market for coronavirus vaccines was estimated to be worth $75 billion in 2020 
and $90 billion in 2021.439 Russia was supposed to provide enough doses for 700 million 
people,440 which at $20 per two-shot regimen would have been worth $14 billion. But even 
without the upselling concerns, delivery problems plagued Sputnik V exports, making 
the Russian vaccine more of an afterthought in the global market than a major player.441 
Guatemala ordered 8 million doses in April 2021 and put down an advance payment for 
half of them, but by July, it had only received 150,000 doses.442 Iran contracted for 5 million 
doses as part of a “first phase” agreement in February 2021 but had only received 920,000 
by July.443 Bolivia contracted for 5.2 million doses in December 2020 but had only received 
745,000 doses by the end of May 2021.444 Mexico contracted for 24 million doses in January 
2021 but received only 4.1 million by July. The list goes on.445
Ghana was fortunate that it received its money back from al-Maktoum after the country 
received only 20,000 of the 300,000 expected doses.446 Despite Ghana’s parliament finding 
that the health minister had breached the country’s constitution by not receiving approval 
for the contract from the cabinet or the Public Procurement Authority, he did not lose his 
job and remained in his post until February 2024 despite calls for his resignation.447 In the 
end, Ghanaians ended up having to wait for the AstraZeneca and Pfizer vaccine deliveries to 
resume in August 2021.448


84   |   Sovereign Wealth Funds: Corruption and Other Governance Risks
Aurugulf was not the only intermediary for Sputnik V. Forbes has reported that the San Juan 
province of Argentina attempted to purchase the Sputnik V vaccine at double the standard 
price through a German intermediary called RuL AG and deposited 18 million euros ($21 
million per the exchange rate in March 2021) in escrow to pay for the doses, but said the 
contract was breached after delays and incomplete documentation.449 Like Sheikh Ahmed 
Dalmook, RuL AG specializes in the energy business rather than the medical sector. The 
company is run by Stephan Guth, who is also the director of the German lower-division 
soccer team FC Lokomotive Leipzig and sits on the board of a firm called PHC Torpedo 
Leipzig that promotes ice hockey in Leipzig.450 Guth’s various business enterprises have a 
limited presence online.451
Meanwhile, Sputnik V never received World Health Organization (WHO) approval, and 
countries like Brazil, Kenya, Namibia, and South Africa have discontinued its use over safety 
concerns.452 In response to the Russian invasion of Ukraine, the U.S. Treasury Department 
and the European Union sanctioned the RDIF;453 the U.S. Treasury labeled the RDIF “a 
symbol of Russian kleptocracy” and stated that it is widely considered a “slush fund for 
President Vladimir Putin.”454 In a statement on the official Sputnik V English-language 
website, the RDIF responded that it “was never involved in any political activities” and 
that the sanctions could deprive many in the world of access to Russian vaccines.455 The 
statement also claims that the RDIF “always fully complies with laws of the countries where 
it conducts its investments” and that “defamatory and denigrating statements made by the 
Biden administration about RDIF have absolutely no basis and represent blatant violation 
of its [the fund’s] rights.”456 In response to sanctions and the lack of WHO approval, the 
head of the Gamaleya Research Institute of Epidemiology and Microbiology, Alexander 
Gintsburg, argued that approval had deliberately not been granted to Sputnik V to prevent a 
large share of the world’s vaccine market from shifting to the Russian Federation.
Fortunately, in early 2022, the medical journal Lancet Regional Health—Americas 
announced that other vaccines that use mRNA technology, such as the Moderna, Pfizer, and 
AstraZeneca vaccines, could be used as second doses for Sputnik V based on a study from 
Argentina.457 Only about 2.5 percent of those vaccinated worldwide received the Sputnik V 
shot, and only about 300 million doses were sold.458
During a pandemic, the public might reasonably expect a country’s government to allocate 
money to relevant health authorities to develop a vaccine and its foreign affairs ministry 
to be in charge of arranging deals with other countries, especially if those deals are part 
of much-touted vaccine diplomacy. In the case of Sputnik V, however, the development, 
marketing, and export of Sputnik V were assigned to the country’s sovereign wealth fund. 
This decreased the potential transparency and accountability around vaccine-related 
expenditures, especially given the notorious links to corruption among associates of the 
RDIF. The cast of shadowy intermediaries involved with the Sputnik V export network only 
heightens concerns about rent-seeking and outright corruption. The coronavirus pandemic 
has revealed an urgent need to improve governance associated with public health—especially 
during emergency situations and when governance is outsourced to sovereign wealth funds.


85
CHAPTER 8
﻿Sovereign Wealth Funds When 
There Is No Sovereign Wealth: 
The Case of Turkey
Aykan Erdemir
Sovereign wealth funds come in different shapes and sizes. While some act as savings 
and stabilization funds, others function as strategic investment funds that make equity 
investments or as national development banks that create loans. In contrast, Türkiye’s 
sovereign wealth fund, Türkiye Wealth Fund (TWF), primarily falls into the category of a 
state-owned fund that holds shares in state-owned enterprises.  
When TWF started its operations in 2016 with a founding capital of merely $15.6 million, 
critics claimed that the fund would function as a “parallel budget” that the Turkish 
government could exploit to carry out economic and financial transactions outside of 
parliamentary oversight and public audits.459 Eight years on, TWF has become a telling 
case: Turkish President Recep Tayyip Erdoğan has used the fund to reward individual and 
institutional clients, settle political scores, consolidate economic and political power, and 
shield his economic and financial policies from parliamentary oversight and public audits. 
This misuse has further deepened the country’s acute governance deficit and contributed 
to the economy’s underperformance. And TWF has failed to demonstrate any value-added 
by transferring state shares of various enterprises from the Treasury to the sovereign wealth 
fund. On the contrary, TWF’s takeover of these enterprises and assets has received repeated 
criticism for exacerbating Türkiye’s transparency, accountability, and governance deficits.


86   |   Sovereign Wealth Funds: Corruption and Other Governance Risks
The Motive: The Rush to Consolidate Political and Economic Power
The draft bill that fifteen lawmakers of Türkiye’s ruling Justice and Development Party 
(AKP) submitted to the Turkish parliament in August 2016 to establish a sovereign wealth 
fund could not have come at a more awkward time.460 Less than a month before, a rogue 
faction within the Turkish military failed to overthrow the government in a bloody coup 
attempt that left nearly 300 dead and thousands injured.461 Thus, the Turkish government’s 
rush to establish a sovereign wealth fund in the midst of a draconian state of emergency 
and without relevant stakeholder deliberations likely had more to do with Erdoğan’s need 
to consolidate his political and economic power.462 The envisioned TWF would bring state-
owned enterprises and their assets more firmly under the presidential office’s direct control.
As documented in the TWF timeline in figure 1,463 on July 27, 2016—only twelve days after 
the failed coup attempt—Türkiye’s Council of Ministers decided to prepare a government 
proposal to set up a sovereign wealth fund and submitted its draft to parliament five days later 
as part of a much larger omnibus bill.464 After pushback by opposition lawmakers against 
using such an omnibus bill to establish a sovereign wealth fund, the government walked back 
and hastily made arrangements to resubmit the proposal as a draft bill.465 A new, final bill was 
rushed through parliament and passed on August 19,466 coming into effect on August 26.467
Figure 1. Timeline of the Türkiye Wealth Fund
Source: See endnote 463.


Carnegie Endowment for International Peace   |   87
The Revenue Deficit: The Scramble for Resources
The key challenge TWF faced at the outset was finding the funds to manage. Although the 
founding capital of TWF was only $15.6 million, Türkiye’s then finance minister Nihat 
Zeybekçi said in August 2016 that the Turkish government’s target was to manage $200 
billion “as soon as possible,” although he did not specify from where such a sum would 
come.468 (Türkiye, which imported 99 percent of its gas and 93 percent of its oil as of 2020, 
suffers from a chronic trade deficit.469) 
Furthermore, since the country had not had a budget surplus since 1970, there was neither 
commodity export revenue nor a budget surplus that the government could provide to TWF.470 
In the absence of any viable revenue stream, the Turkish government transferred state-owned 
enterprises and assets to TWF. In January 2017, the government issued a state-of-emergency 
decree to hand over the national lottery and betting rights to the fund.471 The next month, 
the government used another state-of-emergency decree to transfer its holdings in the 
country’s most valuable publicly owned companies to TWF.472 This transfer included the 
Treasury’s stakes in the country’s two largest public lenders, Ziraat Bank and Halkbank; the 
state oil company Turkish Petroleum Corporation; the flagship carrier Turkish Airlines; and 
the former state telecommunications monopoly Turk Telekom.
The transfers moved many of Türkiye’s most valuable assets more firmly under Erdoğan’s 
direct control. As a result, TWF not only gives Erdoğan—who appointed himself the TWF 
chair in September 2018—greater control over the management, finances, and appointments 
at state-owned enterprises but also the ability to evade the oversight of Türkiye’s parliament 
and the Court of Accounts.473
The transfers also drew criticism from experts. Refet Gürkaynak, one of Türkiye’s leading 
economists, criticized the government’s move by saying, “A wealth fund is established to 
utilize public resources that grow with budget surpluses. Ours is to squander public capital 
that has been accumulated in the past.”
474 He added, “The establishment of a wealth fund for Turkey, 
which does not have a budget surplus, is like getting a lighthouse for landlocked Ankara.”
In April 2020, TWF acquired all shares of Türkiye’s public insurance and pension 
companies for $938 million.475 As of October 2023 the fund stated on its website that its 
portfolio includes a range of domestic assets, including “30 companies, 2 [betting] licenses 
and real estates in 7 sectors,” with 79 percent in financial services, 9 percent in transport and 
logistics, 7 percent in energy, and 4 percent in technology and telecom.476 Through these 
acquisitions, TWF amassed $240 billion in assets, including $33 billion in equity, by the 
end of 2019.477 According to the Sovereign Wealth Fund Institute, TWF’s assets exceeded 
$279 billion as of 2023.478
Meanwhile, the Turkish government turned TWF into a collateral instrument to take out 
additional loans despite the country’s already sizable debt burden of around $450 billion; 
there was a need to refinance $170 billion in mainly dollar-denominated loans in 2022 


88   |   Sovereign Wealth Funds: Corruption and Other Governance Risks
alone.479 TWF’s first attempt to borrow funds in October 2017—a ten-year loan of $5 
billion from the Industrial and Commercial Bank of China—did not materialize.480 But 
in March 2019, the fund received its first syndicated loan of 1 billion euros ($1.13 billion) 
for a two-year term via a consortium of ten banks.481 The following year, TWF availed the 
services of four international lenders for its debut Eurobond sale.482 In March 2021, the fund 
took advantage of the government’s guarantee on 95 percent of the facility to refinance its 
2019 loan with a 1.25 billion euro ($1.49 billion) syndicated loan, increasing the number of 
participants to fourteen banks from eleven countries.483 
During the brief deliberations on TWF at the Turkish parliament in 2016, Türkiye’s 
opposition politicians warned about the risks that would be posed by TWF emerging as an 
alternative institution for taking out sovereign debt—competing with the ability of not only 
the Treasury but also private corporations to access local and international capital markets.484 
In January 2021, the Turkish daily Sözcü reported, “The wealth fund turned into a debt 
fund.”485 One of the finance experts quoted in the piece warned that TWF, which would 
have already gone bankrupt if it were a private entity, had turned into a second Treasury, 
whose constant need for loans was unsustainable.
The use of TWF as part of a flurry of international borrowing has coincided with the 
downgrade of the country’s sovereign debt. In September 2016, less than a month after 
TWF’s establishment, credit ratings agency Moody’s downgraded Türkiye’s sovereign credit 
rating from investment grade Baa3 to noninvestment grade Ba1, citing concerns about the 
erosion of the rule of law following the country’s abortive coup.486 Two years later, Moody’s 
cut the country’s credit rating further, citing Ankara’s increasing reliance on external capital 
flows and rising risk of government default.487 
TWF’s bond rating has also suffered. In December 2021, the global rating agency Fitch 
revised its outlook on TWF from stable to negative, rating it BB-, which implies “an elevated 
vulnerability to default risk, particularly in the event of adverse changes in business or 
economic conditions over time.”488 The continued decline in TWF’s credit ratings, alongside 
Türkiye’s sovereign credit rating, will make it more challenging and costly for TWF to find 
the additional loans required to roll over its debt and keep the fund afloat.
Such financial headwinds were one of the reasons behind what Bloomberg reported 
as TWF’s reluctance to “rely on the bond market or use its own cash” to finance its 
controversial January 2022 attempt to buy a majority stake at Turk Telekom, the country’s 
second-largest telecom company.489 TWF’s interest in Turk Telekom first became public in 
September 2021, which Bloomberg analysts presented as the latest episode of the “creeping 
re-nationalization of Turkey’s telecommunications industry.”490 Fifty-five percent of Turk 
Telekom’s shares were under the control of a consortium of Türkiye’s leading banks, who 
had taken over the company in December 2018 following a massive default.491


Carnegie Endowment for International Peace   |   89
The Turkish government owned only a minority share, but it exerted outsized control over 
Turk Telekom through its ownership of what investors call a “golden share,” which allowed 
the government to veto any change in Turk Telekom’s management or sale.492 Hence, when 
TWF approached private lenders (who together held 55 percent of the company’s shares) 
with a request for loans for TWF’s planned buyout of those very same banks’ shares, TWF 
was making demands from a position of immense political and economic power. The banks 
have a strong interest in resolving what Bloomberg calls “the years-long saga surrounding the 
ownership structure” at Turk Telekom and closing the chapter on the biggest nonperforming 
loan in Turkish history, which poses significant financial risks to the banks’ profitability.493 
The power Erdoğan and TWF had to hurt these banks financially (through the 
government’s golden share at Turk Telekom) provided TWF with significant leverage 
to persuade the banks to provide a $1.6 billion loan on favorable terms to TWF.494 The 
fund then purchased the banks’ shares in Turk Telekom in March 2022. This move set a 
controversial precedent for financing the TWF through not only syndicated loans from 
international financial institutions but also loans from local banks. These banks had to offer 
favorable terms on loans and sales, including “a two-year payment-free grace period with 
repayment over the following four years.”495
The Governance Deficit: A Family Enterprise
When TWF was accepted as a member of the International Forum of Sovereign Wealth 
Funds (IFSWF) less than nine months after its establishment, TWF’s then chairman 
Mehmet Bostan claimed that “admission to a prestigious international community such as 
IFSWF is an indication that [the fund’s] management structure and transparency has been 
designed using the world’s best governance principles.”496 TWF’s membership in the IFSWF, 
however, was merely a fig leaf that failed to hide the governance and transparency deficit 
marring the fund since its launch. The Linaburg-Maduell Transparency Index developed at 
the Sovereign Wealth Fund Institute in 2008 recommends a minimum rating of 8 out 10 for 
a sovereign wealth fund to claim “adequate transparency,”497 and TWF is rated a 6 out of 10. 
Although this rating places TWF above nineteen other sovereign wealth funds in an index 
of fifty-two funds worldwide, the fund has long been marred by inadequate transparency, 
arbitrary rule, and a severe lack of accountability.
The composition of TWF’s board highlights the potential conflicts of interest and close 
links with the Erdoğan regime. Though the Turkish government reportedly worked 
with international executive search firms to recruit senior bankers for senior TWF board 
positions,498 its initial board appointed in 2017 nonetheless demonstrated a meritocracy 
deficit. One of the five board members was Erdoğan’s senior adviser Yiğit Bulut, a 
controversial figure who alleged at the height of the 2013 Gezi Park protests—countrywide 
protests that shook the Erdoğan regime—that foreign powers tried to kill the Turkish 
leader by telekinesis.499 He also claimed that Germany’s flag carrier Lufthansa was behind 


90   |   Sovereign Wealth Funds: Corruption and Other Governance Risks
a conspiracy to provoke mass protests in Türkiye to eliminate competition from Turkish 
Airlines.500 Although the other four board members were two finance professionals and 
two academics known for their loyalty to the government, Erdoğan’s desire for more direct 
control led to a complete reshuffle in less than two years.
In September 2018, three months after becoming executive president under Türkiye’s 
newly launched presidential system, Erdoğan removed the entire TWF board from office 
and appointed himself as chairman of TWF.501 He also designated his son-in-law Berat 
Albayrak—whom he had appointed as minister of treasury and finance two months 
earlier—as his deputy at the fund.502 Another board member appointed by Erdoğan was 
Erişah Arıcan, who was Albayrak’s PhD thesis adviser and—according to Albrayrak’s leaked 
emails—drafted his doctoral thesis on his behalf.503 As opposition presidential contender 
Muharrem İnce remarked, “The man who has captured the state . . . has now taken public 
companies prisoners.”504 As another opposition politician, Selin Sayek-Böke, has noted, 
TWF is “essentially a family company” through which the Turkish “people’s property, the 
nation’s income is taken out of the budget and transferred to the (presidential) palace’s company.”505 
In November 2020, Albayrak left his position in TWF—three weeks after his resignation 
as minister of treasury and finance amid rumors of a rift with his father-in-law Erdoğan.506 
The nepotism and political favoritism demonstrated in TWF’s board appointments, and 
the possible conflicts of interests involved, not only represent an abuse of public position 
for private gain but also hurt the public since these individuals are not able to fully perform 
their fiduciary duties in the best interest of the Turkish taxpayers.
The Accountability Deficit: Top-Secret Public Finances
In addition to potential conflicts of interest in its leadership, newly established secrecy rules 
regarding TWF hamper public transparency and accountability. The Turkish parliament 
has the constitutional right to oversee all enterprises where the state directly or indirectly 
controls at least half the shares. Nonetheless, in January 2021, when the Turkish parliament’s 
Plan and Budget Committee convened to deliberate on TWF’s annual audit report prepared 
by the State Supervisory Council, the report included a “secret” designation, in contrast to 
the report’s earlier public iterations.507 This meant that if parliamentarians were to make 
any statements about the report in a public committee hearing, they could potentially land 
in court for breaching official secrets. Consequently, several opposition members of the 
committee left the January meeting, protesting that proper parliamentary oversight of TWF 
under these conditions was not possible.508
TWF is also exempt from oversight by Türkiye’s Court of Accounts, which issues public 
audit reports. Instead, independent audits are conducted by a company of TWF’s choice. 
Meanwhile, Türkiye’s government officials, as reported by Bloomberg, have been trumpeting 
“the formation of such a large pool of capital outside the budget as a kind of cure-all, 
piquing investor interest with pledges to use it for everything from defending the lira and 


Carnegie Endowment for International Peace   |   91
buoying the stock market to recapitalizing banks and cutting borrowing costs.”509 Experts 
therefore continue to warn about the potential risks of such opaque and unaccountable 
interventions in Türkiye’s financial markets. They cite the ways in which TWF hurts the 
country’s private sector, including by undermining competition through the provision of 
unfair advantages to companies under its control and by raising borrowing costs for others, 
thus exacerbating financial volatility rather than curbing it.510
Conflicts of Interest: Settling Political Scores
Türkiye’s largest mobile phone company Turkcell is one case that best illustrates the 
conflicts of interest and how the Erdoğan government has used TWF to settle political 
scores and consolidate power.511 On June 28, 2020, TWF disclosed its intent to acquire 26.2 
percent of Turkcell’s shares by entering agreements with four firms: Sweden’s multinational 
telecommunications firm, Telia Company; Russian billionaire Mikhail Fridman’s 
LetterOne;512 then Turkish billionaire Mehmet Emin Karamehmet’s Çukurova Holding;513 
and Türkiye’s largest public lender, Ziraat Bank.514 
Exhausted by what Bloomberg called a “15-year-old feud for control” over Turkcell that 
resulted in “spats over board representation, dividends, and other issues,” Telia Company 
sold its 24 percent indirect share in Turkcell for $530 million.515 This dollar figure 
represented a 54 percent discount compared to Turkcell’s market value and amounted to a 
$322 million loss for Telia.516 
What prompted the Swedish company to exit Turkcell at a loss was a bitter campaign 
Erdoğan had been waging against Türkiye’s secular business elites since his Islamist-rooted 
party, the AKP, came to power in 2002, long before the establishment of TWF. 
Çukurova Holding is a Turkish conglomerate with subsidiaries in industrial, construction, 
information, and communication technologies as well as media, transportation, trade, 
energy, and financial services.517 In 2011, Forbes Turkey listed Çukurova Holding’s chairman, 
Mehmet Emin Karamehmet—a pro-secular and liberal figure—as Türkiye’s richest man, 
with a net worth of $4 billion.518 That year, however, the Wall Street Journal reported that 
Karamehmet was “fighting to survive” as he struggled with the financial and legal fallout 
from Türkiye’s 2001 banking crisis and the AKP’s growing pressure on pro-secular media 
bosses.519 Karamehmet was not only battling “Swedish and Russian shareholders to keep 
his stake in Turkcell” but also fighting “a nearly 12-year prison sentence for fraud” and the 
government’s freezing of “$1 billion of [Çukurova Holding’s] assets as collateral for allegedly 
unpaid taxes.” In 2015, Forbes reported that his net worth had declined to $1.15 billion and 
dropped him from its billionaires list the following year.520


92   |   Sovereign Wealth Funds: Corruption and Other Governance Risks
Erdoğan’s efforts to solidify his control over the country’s leading telecommunications 
company while also sidelining a secular businessperson culminated with TWF’s acquisition 
of Turkcell shares in 2020. The resulting reshuffle allowed Erdoğan to appoint five out of 
Turkcell’s nine board members.521 This was made possible when Ziraat Bank, fully owned 
by TWF, received Karamehmet’s shares in exchange for the $1.6 billion debt Karamehmet’s 
companies owed to the public lender.522
As a result of Karamehmet’s deal with Ziraat Bank, TWF needed to pay “$1.6 billion to 
Ziraat Bank and $530 million to Telia,” a sum that would have forced the fund to issue debt 
securities, since that amount was not available in its coffers.523 Five months later, TWF sold 
10 percent of the Borsa Istanbul stock exchange to the Qatari sovereign wealth fund for 
$200 million in another opaque deal criticized by the Turkish opposition.524 (Qatari Emir 
Sheikh Tamim bin Hamad Al Thani is one of Erdoğan’s closest political allies.525)
When TWF relieved Ziraat Bank of its nonperforming $1.6 billion loan to Karamehmet’s 
companies, it also injected about $3 billion into Ziraat alongside two other Turkish public 
lenders.526 Since TWF was cash-strapped, it turned to borrowing from these three public 
lenders to fund its cash injections into the very same banks, as disclosed by TWF’s May 
2020 plans to “issue debt securities” for state-owned banks to “purchase at market price.”527 
It appears that Ziraat Bank’s purchase of TWF’s debt securities, which in turn funded a 
capital injection in Ziraat Bank, also helped TWF relieve Ziraat Bank of its $1.6 billion 
nonperforming loan to Turkcell. What made this government attempt to solidify control 
over Turkcell even more controversial was an apparent conflict of interest of one of the key 
decisionmakers in the process: Hüseyin Aydın, then chief executive officer of Ziraat Bank, 
who also sat on the boards of TWF and Turkcell; all three entities were involved in this 
troubling chain of financial transactions.
Meanwhile, Turkcell shares acquired from Telia and Karamehmet’s Cukurova Finance 
were placed with a new subsidiary of TWF instead of with the sovereign wealth fund itself.528 
That subsidiary, TVF Bilgi Teknolojileri İletişim Hizmetleri Yatırım Sanayi ve Ticaret 
Anonim Şirketi (TVF BTIH), is an Istanbul-based joint stock company established on 
June 5, 2020, with a registered capital of only 5 million Turkish liras ($740,000). Thus, a 
company with less than $1 million of registered capital came to control Turkcell, which had 
a market capitalization of $4.2 billion as of August 2023.529
As part of this new structure, a new class of privileged shares was created, comprising 15 
percent of Turkcell’s total shares. These are owned entirely by TWF through TVF BTIH 
and grant TWF the power to elect five out of nine members of Turkcell’s board. TWF 
claims this will improve governance and protect minority shareholders.530 This assertion 
is highly questionable. The Turkish government’s majority control of the board does not 
reassure minority shareholders, whose concerns about corporate governance deficits were 
exacerbated by the irregularities and conflicts of interest resulting from the various dealings 
among TWF, Ziraat Bank, and Turkcell.


Carnegie Endowment for International Peace   |   93
The governance deficit at TWF-controlled Turkcell again made headlines in January 
2022, when Fridman’s LetterOne, the second-largest shareholder at Turkcell after TWF 
with 19.8 percent of the shares, called for a board reshuffle.531 LetterOne’s push for a 
governance overhaul included a proposal to appoint four unaffiliated board members 
to replace Erdoğan’s political appointees, three of whom lacked competences in the 
telecommunications field; this was a move aimed at attracting international investors. 
LetterOne’s latest call followed earlier attempts in November 2021 to encourage the 
board to enact changes, including “setting up a new board committee to review costs, 
asset monetization, and capital allocation.”532 LetterOne Managing Director Ben Babcock 
expressed his frustration by stating, “We sought to engage constructively with the Turkcell 
board to address our legitimate concerns but the board has chosen not to engage with us.”533 This 
provides further evidence of the governance problems haunting TWF-controlled Turkcell. 
Conclusion: TWF, A Showcase of Worst Practices
The transfer of state shares from the Turkish Treasury to TWF has exacerbated Türkiye’s 
transparency, accountability, and governance deficits. TWF’s financial transactions and 
corporate manipulation have caused far-reaching economic problems and raised concerns 
over possible mismanagement and corruption.
Furthermore, the Turkish president’s use of TWF for political gain—rewarding clients, 
manipulating transactions, assigning board members, and shielding policies from 
parliamentary oversight and audit—highlights the potential for a sovereign wealth fund to 
be manipulated and stresses the need for greater transparency and oversight.
None of these developments should come as a surprise. Shortly after the establishment of 
TWF, a Turkish journalist warned that the fund could end up being a “poverty fund,” 
triggering an economic crisis rather than preventing one.534 Since 2018, the Turkish lira has 
lost three-quarters of its value against the U.S. dollar, and inflation has reached 80 percent 
as of August 2022.535 As prices skyrocketed, the New York Times reported that scores of 
Turkish citizens were lining up in long queues to buy government-subsidized bread, as 
people’s “salaries and pensions no longer cover even the staples of life.”536
The problematic role TWF plays in the Turkish economy goes hand in hand with Erdoğan’s 
unorthodox economic experiment that tries to lower inflation by lowering interest 
rates.537 And, meanwhile, corruption in the country is increasing, as evidenced by the 
country’s dramatic decline in rank from 54 to 101 in the Corruption Perceptions Index of 
Transparency International within the last decade.538 TWF is therefore emblematic of a 
larger malaise in Türkiye, as rising authoritarianism undermines democratic governance, 
transparency, accountability, free markets, and a rules-based economy.


94   |   Sovereign Wealth Funds: Corruption and Other Governance Risks
Thus, during its first five years in action, TWF hurt the Turkish economy rather than 
attracting capital and boosting the country’s development. As of 2020, the Erdoğan 
government’s financial mismanagement had already prompted the most significant 
outflows from Türkiye’s debt and equity markets in more than a decade and dried up foreign 
direct investment from Ankara’s traditional economic partners in the West.539 The London-
based chief economist of a global investment bank stated in October 2021 that Türkiye had 
become “an irrelevance to global emerging market investors” since the country comprised 
only “0.2% of the Global Emerging Market MSCI equity index.”540 MSCI, the world’s 
largest index provider, warned the previous year that it was considering ejecting Türkiye 
from its emerging market index and reclassifying the country as a “frontier” or “standalone” 
market.541
The case of TWF highlights how poor governance and transparency can exacerbate 
state capture and create further debt burdens that current and future citizens must bear.  
Ultimately, TWF, instead of pushing an emerging market economy closer to the level of a 
developed economy, has acted as the final nail in the coffin. Türkiye remains a struggling 
emerging market economy, with much less appeal to foreign investors. And it therefore 
greatly risks relegation, as its transparency, accountability, and governance deficits resemble 
those of a frontier market economy more and more with each passing day.


95
CHAPTER 9
﻿Sovereign Wealth Funds and 
Infrastructure: China’s Belt 
and Road Initiative
Nate Sibley
Infrastructure investment is expected to reach $79 trillion globally by 2040, but alongside 
extractive industries such as oil and gas, it is the economic sector that remains most 
strongly associated with corruption risks.542 The significant funds involved in major 
projects may present a tempting target for corrupt officials and private sector fraudsters 
alike. Complicated and opaque contractual arrangements, a lack of transparency and 
accountability mechanisms for public funds, and the need to maintain political patronage 
networks can all contribute to creating the ideal conditions for bribery and embezzlement.
The consequences are especially serious for developing countries, most of which can ill afford 
the 20–30 percent of project value often estimated to be lost through corruption.543 The 
International Monetary Fund’s analysis suggests that low-income developing countries in 
particular lose, on average, 53 percent of project resources to inefficiencies, including corruption.544
These heightened corruption risks have been widely understood for decades. It is for 
this reason that major international lenders frequently attach conditions related to 
good governance when providing loans or grants for infrastructure projects. In fact, the 
importance of infrastructure development and the vast sums of money involved often 
provide external donors or investors with considerable influence over decisions made by 
recipient governments. This has led many to criticize international lenders for imposing 
measures that are too constrictive, impinging on recipient countries’ sovereignty; some critics 
have gone as far as to level accusations of neocolonialism.545
In 2013, China’s newly ascended President Xi Jinping announced a global infrastructure 
plan that promised to upend the entire sector. China’s Belt and Road Initiative (BRI) has not 
only supercharged infrastructure investment worldwide but has brought these long-standing 
questions about corruption and political influence to the fore.


96   |   Sovereign Wealth Funds: Corruption and Other Governance Risks
To bankroll the BRI’s launch and expansion, Xi turned to the rising might of China’s 
sovereign wealth funds (SWFs), policy banks, and other state-owned financial institutions. 
This chapter provides a brief overview of these entities’ role in funding BRI projects 
worldwide and examines whether this behavior has exacerbated vulnerabilities to corruption 
and Chinese political pressure in recipient countries.
The Belt and Road Initiative
The BRI is China’s flagship overseas infrastructure investment program and an 
amalgamation of the Silk Road Economic Belt scheme and the 21st Century Maritime Silk 
Road scheme. The BRI was known initially as One Belt One Road, but after a period of 
policy shuffling, it emerged in its current form in 2015.
The BRI is not an entirely new concept for China but rather a reorganization and expansion 
of existing initiatives that grew out of China’s Going Out policy that had encouraged 
Chinese companies to invest overseas since 1999. Many existing overseas development 
projects were simply repackaged under the BRI umbrella.
China’s Objectives
In 2013, Xi identified “five connectivities” that embodied his aspirations for what the BRI 
would become: “We hope to achieve policy, infrastructure, trade, financial, and people-to-
people connectivity and thus build a new platform for international co-operation to create 
new drivers of shared development.”546 To date, however, the BRI’s expansion has been 
spearheaded almost exclusively by infrastructure deals.
While Xi and senior Chinese Communist Party (CCP) leaders set the overall policy goals 
for the BRI, these were broadly framed from the outset and delegated to a wide range of 
state entities with very different, and sometimes conflicting or competing, priorities. But 
generally, the BRI aims to advance Chinese priorities regarding economic growth, national 
security, and global influence.547
There were compelling domestic reasons for embarking upon what was touted at the time 
as a Chinese Marshall Plan. The government policies that propelled China’s extraordinary 
economic growth had also created severe overcapacity in some sectors. Access to new trade 
routes and export markets was sought to ease the pressure valve that constrained China’s 
economy, alleviating the prospect of economic meltdown and political instability. Beijing 
also hoped that propelling the BRI overland through China into Central Asia would spark 
development in the country’s poorer western regions, including the increasingly restive Xinjiang.548
Sustaining economic growth may have been China’s primary impetus for launching the 
BRI, but political and security concerns also featured prominently in early policy planning. 
Beijing believed a major infrastructure investment program that could replicate China’s own 


Carnegie Endowment for International Peace   |   97
poverty alleviation efforts around the world—providing an alternative development model 
from the prevailing dependence on Western concessional lenders—would be a prestigious 
achievement befitting a rising power.
Chinese officials were also concerned with countering the United States’ 2010 “pivot to 
Asia.” Beijing sought to intensify periphery diplomacy to engage neighboring countries, as 
well as to create economic ties that would bring them politically closer to China and expand 
its regional hegemony.549
China’s security considerations also included protecting and diversifying its critical supply 
routes. Developing the China-Pakistan economic corridor and opening Gwadar Port to 
Chinese shipping, for example, was meant to resolve the “Malacca Dilemma,” whereby 
almost 80 percent of China’s oil imports and 40 percent of its total trade in goods pass 
through a narrow shipping channel that is highly vulnerable to naval blockade.550
Given these political and security considerations—and China’s aggressive push for global 
influence—many observers have questioned whether Beijing’s underlying plan was to 
deliberately entrap recipient countries by entangling their leaders in corruption scandals 
and saddling them with unsustainable debt; this would render them vulnerable to Chinese 
political pressure or even force them to surrender strategically valuable land. The evidence 
for and against this idea of “debt-trap diplomacy” is considered in detail below.
Composition and Structure
Officially, the BRI consists of six overland economic corridors that cross through Central 
Asia and additional sea trade routes extending through the Indo-Pacific. Yet there is no 
formal national membership process or structure, with participation most often signified 
through non–legally binding memorandums of understanding (MOUs) or other less formal 
cooperation agreements between China and the recipient government. The number of BRI 
participants was just thirty-one in the period 2013–2016 but exploded to 120 in 2017–2019 
and has grown again to 140 since 2019.551 The BRI is also no longer geographically confined 
to its six stated economic corridors, with participants popping up in the Caribbean and 
Latin America.
Neither is there any official list of all BRI projects. There are no consistent standards, 
certification schemes, or even branding efforts that signify whether individual Chinese-
backed overseas infrastructure projects are formally part of the BRI or not (unless they are 
explicitly mentioned in MOUs).
Unsurprisingly, efforts to understand what the BRI actually is, let alone to monitor its 
expansion and measure its impact, have often proven difficult for external observers. This 
includes estimates of how much China has actually spent, or committed to spending, 
on BRI projects worldwide. As of mid-2023, the American Enterprise Institute put 
total investment and construction costs at roughly $965 billion.552 The Center for 


98   |   Sovereign Wealth Funds: Corruption and Other Governance Risks
Global Development, meanwhile, counted total announced investments at $8 trillion in 
2018.553 These are both sound attempts to measure unreliable information that resulted in 
staggeringly different figures.
The BRI is best understood as an organizing concept and guiding plan for China’s overseas 
infrastructure investment. The absence of clear objectives and an institutional framework 
creates inherent risks regarding oversight and accountability. This applies particularly to how 
BRI expansion has been financed.
How the BRI Is Financed
China’s rapid ascent to become the world’s second-largest economy and leading trading 
partner had placed it in possession of some $1.5 trillion in foreign currency reserves in 2007, 
a figure unprecedented in global history but one that would continue surging to nearly $4 
trillion in 2014.554 Instead of continuing to pile these funds into the low-yielding, default 
investment instrument—U.S. Treasury bonds—Xi sought to put China’s foreign exchange 
holdings to work in advancing his many domestic and overseas policy priorities. This 
included launching and expanding the BRI.
The institutional infrastructure around BRI lending is complex, fragmented, and not 
particularly transparent.555 As noted in figure 1,556 at the apex sits the State Council, which 
approves major decisions, with the Ministry of Finance and the recently created Chinese 
International Development Cooperation Agency also directly involved in oversight and 
approvals. The Ministries of Commerce and Foreign Affairs coordinate the overseas activities 
of Chinese companies working under the BRI.
The vast majority of BRI loans are negotiated and provided by China’s state-owned 
policy banks and, increasingly, its state-owned commercial banks. These institutions are 
accountable to the political bodies listed above, but they appear to have relative autonomy 
in the day-to-day business of BRI lending. Created to help drive China’s economic 
liberalization reforms, Chinese policy and commercial banks have played a critical role in 
shaping the country’s financial sector and emergence as a global economic power. 
The People’s Bank of China, China’s central bank, dominated the country’s financial 
sector until the 1990s, when what are now known as the “big five” state-owned banks 
were commercialized and began lending on a more competitive basis: the Industrial 
and Commercial Bank of China, China Construction Bank, Bank of China, Bank of 
Communications, and Agricultural Bank of China.
China’s policy banks—the Agricultural Development Bank of China, China Development 
Bank (CDB), and the Export-Import Bank of China (Exim Bank)—were established 
in 1994 with a different mandate. The policy banks exist explicitly to implement the 
government’s economic and financial agenda.


Carnegie Endowment for International Peace   |   99
Of these institutions, by far the most important for BRI purposes are CDB and the Exim 
Bank. According to a recent report on BRI financing by AidData, these two policy banks 
provided around three-quarters of all BRI loans as of 2017.557 However, the commercial 
banks have assumed an increasingly prominent role throughout the BRI’s lifespan, with 
lending activities increasing fivefold during the BRI’s first five years.558
Figure 1. Decisionmaking Authority Within the Belt and Road Initiative
Two trends are important to note. First, there has been a shift toward more commercially 
oriented lending during the BRI’s lifespan, reflecting growing concerns in Beijing about 
rising debt levels and the long-term viability of the initiative.559 Second, there has been a 
sharp decline in new BRI loans since 2017. Lending from CDB and the Exim Bank dropped 
from a peak of $75 billion in 2016 to just $4 billion in 2019.560 This does not suggest that 
the BRI will end anytime soon, but rather that Beijing is rethinking its approach in light 
of various challenges discussed in the sections below. Gone is the era of easy money for 
ambitious infrastructure megaprojects; the BRI label is now increasingly being applied to 
less expensive initiatives in academia, green energy, telecommunications, and other sectors 
more aligned with the other four BRI “connectivities” originally outlined by Xi.561 
Source: Author’s illustration


100   |   Sovereign Wealth Funds: Corruption and Other Governance Risks
The Role of China’s Sovereign Wealth Funds
As figure 2 demonstrates, China’s policy banks and state-owned commercial banks are the 
front-end lenders in BRI financing. But it is the SWFs responsible for managing foreign 
exchange reserves that, through the state-owned banks, have ultimately provided much of 
the financing for the BRI.562 The funds rarely appear by name in external studies of BRI 
project financing, however, because for the most part, they have not tended to make direct 
investments in BRI projects.
CDB’s major shareholders are the Ministry of Finance, Central Huijin Investment, and 
Buttonwood Investment Holding. The Exim Bank is wholly owned by the Chinese 
government and subordinate to the State Council. Central Huijin and Buttonwood are 
companies that serve as investment vehicles for two Chinese SWFs: the China Investment 
Corporation (CIC) and the State Administration of Foreign Exchange (SAFE) respectively.
These are the means through which the policy banks are capitalized with foreign exchange 
reserves. Notably, Buttonwood was established by SAFE specifically to finance the creation 
of the Silk Road Fund, a Chinese SWF intended exclusively to support BRI expansion 
(though it currently accounts for just a fraction of total investments). But through 
Buttonwood, SAFE also provided CDB and the Exim Bank with major injections of $48 
billion and $45 billion respectively in 2015.563
Figure 2. Control of China’s Two Largest Policy Banks
Source: Author’s illustration


Carnegie Endowment for International Peace   |   101
State Administration of Foreign Exchange
SAFE is a vice-ministry that has also been a subsidiary department of the People’s Bank of 
China since 1998. As the name suggests, its primary duty is managing and investing China’s 
foreign exchange reserves.
Relatively little is known about SAFE’s corporate governance beyond its basic organizational 
structure and senior personnel. Nor does it publicly disclose information about the nature 
of its investments. These are managed through corporate subsidiaries, including the SAFE 
Investment Company, based in Hong Kong (the existence of which SAFE did not admit 
until 2008), and more recently, the Buttonwood investment platform.564 As the scholar 
William Norris suggests, “such a predilection for secrecy, a lack of public accountability, 
and an absence of transparency make SAFE well-suited to be used to pursue noncommercial 
activities.”565
China Investment Corporation
CIC is China’s only officially acknowledged SWF. It was launched in 2007 with $200 
billion in initial funding and a mission to diversify China’s foreign exchange holdings and 
seek maximum returns.566 CIC is a company under Chinese law and operates in a more 
transparent manner than SAFE. It oversees both domestic investments and a vast overseas 
portfolio, with reported total assets of around $1.2 trillion as of the end of 2020.567 It is the 
second-largest SWF globally after the Government Pension Fund of Norway, though it is 
fast closing on the latter for the top spot.
CIC was created by the Chinese government partly as a response to criticisms that SAFE 
had made imprudent overseas investments and was not an efficient guardian of China’s 
foreign exchange holdings. CIC therefore competes with SAFE within the framework of 
China’s financial bureaucracy, having assumed control of some of the latter’s historical 
responsibilities.
CIC began operations just months before the onset of the 2007–2008 global financial crisis 
and initially sustained heavy losses from having taken major direct stakes in U.S. financial 
institutions such as Blackstone and Morgan Stanley.568 These losses, and the criticism leveled 
at CIC by Chinese officials and the public, reportedly brought CIC under stricter control 
and prompted it to refocus on other sectors, including energy and natural resources.569
Whereas SAFE has always conducted itself in the manner of a policy bank, CIC is generally 
considered to have operated, initially at least, primarily in line with its commercial mission 
and largely in compliance with international standards pertaining to corporate governance.570 
In 2008, for example, CIC joined the International Forum of SWFs, and its officials were 
actively involved in drawing up the Santiago Principles.


102   |   Sovereign Wealth Funds: Corruption and Other Governance Risks
After Xi’s accession and the launch of the BRI, however, CIC’s focus changed, adopting 
more of a policy orientation to support its expansion. The fund has invested directly, and 
through  consortiums, in several major overseas deals in the infrastructure and real estate 
sectors, including under the BRI.571 In 2015, for example, CIC acquired a controlling stake 
in the Kumport Terminal, Türkiye’s third-largest container port.572 Just one year later, 
it participated in a consortium to purchase a fifty-year lease on the Port of Melbourne, 
Australia’s main cargo and container port.573
CIC’s sudden interest in commercial assets that also possessed potential strategic value began 
to attract scrutiny from Western governments. As Zongyuan Zoe Liu has observed, this 
forced CIC to become “innovative in structuring deals in such a way as to pass scrutiny and 
receive approval that otherwise would be nearly impossible to obtain.”574
In early 2023, for example, a new register of real estate ownership by foreign entities in the 
United Kingdom (which is not part of the BRI) revealed that CIC had used offshore shell 
companies to acquire more than 250 properties, including critical regional infrastructure 
and food supply chain facilities.575
In late 2019, CIC’s executive vice president Zhao Haiying estimated total CIC investments 
in BRI countries to be worth approximately $28.1 billion.576 However, the truth is that 
CIC’s complicated investment structures make it impossible to understand the full nature 
and extent of its involvement.
What is clear, however, is that—as Stephen Thomas and Ji Chen conclude—SAFE and 
CIC “have provided much of the capital, as well as the financial intermediation tools and 
financial management to move funds from China’s foreign exchange reserves to President 
Xi’s BRI projects and to help oversee the use of the funds. These new roles . . . have required 
more of a policy orientation for China’s SWFs . . . [as well as] significant changes in 
personnel, business practices, and investment goals.”577
BRI Corruption Risks
Despite Beijing’s lofty intentions for the BRI, it has been plagued from the outset by 
opaque deals and corruption scandals. This is partly because China’s state-owned financial 
institutions have consistently engaged in lending practices that are indiscriminate, opaque, 
and unaccountable. Xi himself has acknowledged the scale of the problem, telling a 2019 
summit of participant countries that “everything should be done in a transparent way and 
we should have zero tolerance for corruption.”578
Before examining how China’s state lenders may have influenced corruption and political 
risks associated with the BRI, it is helpful (and indeed, only fair) to look briefly at these 
issues within China itself. After all, China is a partner in every BRI deal.


Carnegie Endowment for International Peace   |   103
Despite China’s meteoric economic growth, corruption remains a serious and widespread 
problem. This apparent paradox arises because while many other developing countries have 
continued to struggle with petty and acquisitive forms of corruption, China has generally 
cracked down on these growth-inhibiting forms of graft.579 
Instead, Chinese corruption is characterized by the prevalence of what the academic Yuen 
Yuen Ang calls “access money”: bribes that enable entrepreneurs not only to secure a permit 
or other one-off bureaucratic favor but to also build relationships with influential officials 
capable of repeatedly creating new business opportunities (and who themselves are given 
strong incentives to foster economic growth by China’s central government).
While uniquely capable of spurring short-term growth, particularly in investment-heavy 
sectors such as housing and infrastructure, “access money” is ultimately not beneficial 
because it creates perverse incentives and encourages risk-taking with consequences that 
quickly become apparent during periods of economic difficulty. Ang does not directly 
address the BRI, but it is helpful to bear these issues in mind when thinking about the 
development model China has sought to promote through it and how China’s state-owned 
lenders and companies have conducted themselves during BRI projects.
Like other major Chinese financial institutions, the SWFs and the policy and commercial 
banks involved in BRI financing have found themselves in the crosshairs of Xi’s sweeping 
anti-corruption campaign. Launched in 2013, the initiative aims to reduce corruption, 
strengthen party “discipline,” and consolidate Xi’s powerbase. It has reportedly investigated 
and punished more than 4 million cadres and nearly 500 senior officials to date.580
A 2016 probe by the CCP’s powerful anti-graft body, the Central Commission for Discipline 
Inspection, reported of CIC that “there were wrongdoings in policymaking and severe 
problems in the tunnelling of interests” and that problems of discipline “occurred frequently.”581 
Both CIC and SAFE were reexamined by the commission in early 2022 as part of a broader 
crackdown on financial sector excess.582 However, these pronouncements should be treated 
cautiously given the politicized nature of the anti-corruption campaign. It is entirely possible 
that those targeted were perceived to have demonstrated ideological disloyalty to Xi or the 
CCP, or had simply engaged in corporate expenditure or other conduct that was not illegal 
but deemed to be excessive by image-conscious party bosses.
Profligate Lending
China’s policy banks are the vehicle through which Beijing has unleashed hundreds of 
billions of dollars into some of the most corrupt countries on Earth. Of course, many of 
these countries are also among the world’s poorest and consequently have the greatest need 
for infrastructure investment on the scale promised by the BRI. In 2019, the World Bank 
estimated that trade in BRI corridor economies was 30 percent below potential and foreign 


104   |   Sovereign Wealth Funds: Corruption and Other Governance Risks
direct investment was 70 percent below potential. BRI transport projects alone, if properly 
implemented, could help to lift 7.6 million people from extreme poverty and 32 million 
people from moderate poverty.583
But there are good reasons why many BRI countries are not attractive prospects for 
international donors and investors, especially in risk-prone sectors like infrastructure.
Brookings Institution research indicates that BRI participant countries are overwhelmingly 
“less democratic, politically stable, and economically developed” than nonparticipants.584 
AidData found that 69 percent of official lending by China between 2000 and 2017 went to 
countries whose credit ratings scored below the global median and that 90 percent of BRI-
era official lending went to countries that scored beneath the median of the World Bank’s 
Control of Corruption index.585
And this is problematic because, in an extension of China’s stated policy of noninterference 
in other countries’ internal affairs, the country generally provides BRI loans with few or 
no preconditions pertaining to transparency, rule of law, or other factors that shape the 
wider investment climate. By way of illustration, Xi outlined China’s “five nos” in its policy 
toward Africa in a 2018 speech: “No interference in the way African countries pursue their 
development paths according to their national conditions; no interference in a country’s 
internal affairs; no imposition of China’s will on African countries; no attachment of 
political strings to assistance to Africa; and no seeking of selfish political gains in investment 
and financing cooperation.”586
The promise of abundant easy money made the BRI an irresistible alternative to Western 
development financing for many governments, who had long bristled at what they saw as 
burdensome conditions that interfered with their sovereignty (or perhaps threatened their 
kleptocracy). In some cases, the prospect of BRI money provided a popularity boost to 
autocrats who otherwise struggled to maintain legitimacy.587
Beyond a general affinity for democracy and human rights, there is a practical reason 
Western concessional lenders routinely insist on governance preconditions: they make 
infrastructure projects less likely to fail. AidData found that 35 percent of BRI projects had 
run into major implementation problems of some kind, such as corruption scandals, labor 
violations, environmental hazards, or public protests.588 Interestingly, China’s non-BRI 
infrastructure project portfolio encountered far fewer such problems, suggesting that this 
propensity for trouble is baked into the BRI itself.
In the longer term, this kind of indiscriminate lending poses a problem for China as much 
as for recipient countries. Despite concerns about debt diplomacy, sovereign lending is a 
legally undeveloped area that lacks effective enforcement mechanisms. Beijing has taken 
on extraordinary levels of financial risk by exporting its state-led, debt-fueled development 
model to governments with track records of mismanagement and default and then relying 
on those governments to uphold implicit liability guarantees for private sector borrowers. 


Carnegie Endowment for International Peace   |   105
As noted above, recognition of these risks in Beijing is partly why BRI lending has slowed 
significantly in recent years. But the scale of debt associated with the BRI will continue to 
present significant risks for the global financial system and economy for the foreseeable future. 
Opaque Negotiations
The corruption risks surrounding BRI projects have also been exacerbated by deliberate 
lack of transparency on the part of China’s state-owned lenders. Typically, BRI financing 
is arranged through bilateral agreements between the Chinese state banks and recipient 
governments. A Peterson Institute study of 100 bilateral Chinese loans found that all loans 
since 2014 have included “unusual” and “far-reaching” confidentiality clauses that do not 
permit borrowers to disclose any of the contract terms or related information.589
The Maldives’ Sinamalé Bridge and related BRI projects illustrate how secretive terms 
can catch initially supportive populations unawares. Upon meeting with the Chinese 
ambassador in 2018, incoming President Ibrahim Mohamed Solih discovered that his 
country’s BRI debt was not $1.5 billion as he feared, but rather $3 billion—more than twice 
the government’s annual revenue at the time.590
It is often unclear not only how much is being lent, but to whom. AidData director Brad 
Parks has observed that the BRI is actually “a story about the rise of hidden debt and the 
fall of sovereign debt.”591 AidData estimated that, as of 2021, BRI countries collectively 
owed some $385 billion to China that was not being reported to international financial 
institutions in the normal way, warping key statistics about the global financial system. This 
is because, while China’s pre-BRI lending was mostly provided directly to governments, 
nearly 70 percent is now directed to state-owned companies and banks, special purpose 
investment vehicles, joint ventures, and private sector firms. These debts, though often 
substantial, do not appear on the public books—though government liability assurances 
mean that the public will still be on the hook should something go awry.
Lack of Accountability
Finally, the backing of China’s state-owned banks means that corrupt local elites and 
Chinese companies engaged in BRI projects face little or no accountability for wrongdoing.
China introduced a foreign bribery law in 2011 but, despite the immense exposure of its 
companies overseas, has never initiated any enforcement proceedings.592 Coupled with 
China’s repressive media and civil society environment, this means that Chinese companies 
engaged in BRI projects are not subject to policing and public scrutiny in the same way that, 
for example, U.S. companies are supposed to be under the Foreign Corrupt Practices Act. 


106   |   Sovereign Wealth Funds: Corruption and Other Governance Risks
This in turn makes Chinese lenders and contractors more attractive partners for corrupt 
local elites—not only because they can freely distribute bribes, but also because there is less 
chance of being implicated in legal trouble later on.
This pattern has not gone unnoticed, and several major Chinese contractors involved in 
BRI projects have been debarred by the World Bank for alleged financial malpractice and 
“misconduct during the procurement process.”593 Such high-profile censure might prove 
reputationally and financially fatal for many Western competitors. But many Chinese firms 
can ignore such concerns because they are ultimately backed not by commercially minded 
investors but by China’s state-owned banks.
Debt-Trap Diplomacy
China ostensibly maintains a policy of noninterference in other countries’ internal affairs. 
But as the corruption scandals and debt levels piled up, many observers began to question 
whether China was using the BRI as a vehicle for “debt-trap diplomacy”—both in order 
to exert political pressure on recipient countries and to acquire land and other strategically 
valuable assets in cases of default.
There is evidence to support the debt-trap theory, but it derives from a small number of cases 
that are regularly cited as reflecting wider systemic issues. 
Sri Lanka’s Hambantota port in particular has become the poster child for BRI 
misadventures. According to a New York Times investigation, Sri Lankan officials claimed 
that their Chinese counterparts discussed the intelligence and strategic possibilities of the 
port’s location throughout loan negotiations. When Sri Lanka sought to renegotiate the 
repayment timeline and obtain more financing, Chinese officials refused to ease the terms 
and insisted instead on the transfer of equity in the port, leading to its effective surrender 
in the form of a ninety-nine-year lease.594 It is impossible to know how many BRI contracts 
include such terms because they are kept secret. To date, however, this kind of predatory 
enforcement by China has in fact occurred relatively rarely.
The preponderance of expert opinion has therefore shifted against the idea that the BRI’s 
underlying grand strategy was always one of deliberate entrapment. Analysis by Chatham 
House—not only of the Sri Lanka case but of China’s role in Malaysia’s 1MDB scandal 
(see Chapter 3), where then Malaysian prime minister Najib Razak solicited help from 
Chinese BRI firms and officials to cover up the alleged theft  of around $4.5 billion from the 
country’s sovereign development fund—illustrates how it is often local elites that negotiate 
unfavorable terms and instigate corruption schemes in order to service their domestic 
agendas.595 The authors also suggest that China’s state-owned financial institutions are 
simply too fragmented, poorly coordinated, and prone to in-fighting to coherently advance 
China’s geopolitical aims.


Carnegie Endowment for International Peace   |   107
Informed opinion within BRI recipient countries also provides a more nuanced picture than 
prevailing Western representations of the BRI. A recent survey of policymakers, academics, 
and business and media leaders in BRI recipient countries found that 41.6 percent of 
respondents believed that the BRI represented a net benefit for their countries, with just 
17.8 percent viewing it as a net cost. On whether they felt China had deliberately set out to 
entrap their leaders, about 30 percent felt so but about 42 percent did not.596 Many blamed 
domestic factors, such as corruption and reckless borrowing habits, for rising debt levels 
rather than participation in the BRI.
Yet the fact remains that China retains tremendous potential leverage over many BRI 
countries. As economist Megan Greene points out, the BRI coincided with a relatively 
benign period of easy monetary policy and ample liquidity.597 Amid growing unease within 
China over the state of the economy, and particularly financial institutions’ role in fueling a 
real estate bubble, there is significant public sensitivity to debt-related issues and presumably 
little patience for China’s foreign debtors.598 
The feeling appears to be mutual in many BRI recipient countries. AidData notes that 
concerns over corruption and changing public sentiment toward China have led to more 
BRI projects being canceled.599 The BRI also faces growing political opposition from China’s 
major rivals. These include India, whose regional interests the BRI most directly threatens, 
and the G7, which has announced a rival Build Back Better World infrastructure plan to 
mobilize private sector investment.600
There are several reasons to be concerned that BRI debt could soon be enforced more 
ruthlessly or even activated as political leverage: Chinese domestic concerns, the potential 
end of China’s political honeymoon with major BRI recipient countries, and the 
intensification of U.S.-China competition globally. As always with the BRI, questions about 
corruption and political interference do not lend themselves to a simple narrative. What is 
certain is that the state-owned banks’ lending practices as described above—indiscriminate, 
opaque, and unaccountable—set the BRI up to become, as the scholar Jonathan Hillman 
has observed, “a global trail of trouble.”601
Conclusion
Unlike some of the other SWFs examined in this report, China’s SAFE and CIC were not 
created or captured by political elites for the purposes of illicit self-enrichment—nor are 
their personnel directly involved in the day-to-day graft that afflicts so many BRI projects. 
On the contrary, they are major players in the global financial system in their own right.
But beyond their commercial mission to profitably invest China’s vast foreign exchange 
reserves, China’s SWFs and other state-owned financial institutions are also instruments 
of the CCP and its bid for global influence. In that role, they have provided and directed 


108   |   Sovereign Wealth Funds: Corruption and Other Governance Risks
massive surges of capital that have flowed through the policy banks into BRI projects 
worldwide. This financing was arranged, in the vast majority of cases, without serious regard 
for due diligence or commercial viability, using secret contracts that have concealed the scale 
and seriousness of recipient countries’ potential liabilities.
China’s profligate use of its vast sovereign wealth to advance economic and political 
objectives has raised corruption risks not in just one country but 140 countries. Though the 
notion of deliberate debt-trap diplomacy has been brought into question, there remains a real 
and growing risk that China will exploit its financial leverage over BRI partners—whether 
to claim what it is owed while its own economy falters or to seize strategic advantages in its 
global race for influence against the United States.


109
CHAPTER 10
﻿Golden Passports and Visas:  
The Case of Malta’s SWF
Lakshmi Kumar
Citizenship by Investment (CBI) programs, better known as “golden passport” schemes, 
are not new. They have long enabled the ultra-wealthy, including the very corrupt, to evade 
scrutiny for misdeeds, hide assets, and acquire international mobility. Cyprus, the United 
Kingdom, the United States, and much of the Caribbean have citizenship or residency 
programs through investments.602 What sets the Maltese CBI program apart is that the 
revenues generated from passport sales have been used to fund its sovereign wealth fund (SWF).603 
To fully understand why an SWF that is financed through the sale of passports is an 
especially high-risk investment vehicle for corruption, this chapter first examines the 
strength and transparency of the Maltese CBI program, as well as the reputation that similar 
programs in other countries have garnered. An SWF that runs a high risk of being funded 
using corrupt, laundered, or ill-gotten wealth strikes at the heart of what the SWF represents 
by creating a dependency on potential ill-gotten gains to fund domestic development. 
Furthermore, for the Maltese government, to use an SWF to invest such proceeds is to benefit 
from the misdeeds of the corrupt and the criminal. It also allows money that may be ill-gotten to 
move easily through the financial system under the protection that an SWF provides.
A “Corrupting Island in a Corrupting Sea”
Malta is a small island in the Mediterranean Sea, which, despite its EU member state status 
since 2004, has been referred to as a “corrupting island in a ‘corrupting sea’” and has had a 
“disproportionate role as a hub for transnational illicit flows and criminal activities.”604 This 
is in part due to its low level of law enforcement resources and its location as a gateway 
between North Africa and Europe,605 which have given it a long history as a smuggling 
“logistical hub”606 and “smugglers’ hideout.”607 But Malta’s reputation also stems from its 
documented history of state capture by elites networked into long-standing organized crime 
and corruption networks.608 Its Corruption Perceptions Index score (54 out of a possible 100) 
is far below the Western European average of 66.609


110   |   Sovereign Wealth Funds: Corruption and Other Governance Risks
Malta’s notoriety as a corrupt country with declining rule of law norms came into 
international prominence on October 16, 2017, when Maltese investigative journalist 
Daphne Caruana Galizia was assassinated by a hitman using a car bomb. Galizia’s murder 
brought the extent and scope of corruption in Malta to the attention of a much wider 
public.610 Starting in 2016, when she was able to access information from the law firm 
Mossack Fonseca as a part of the Panama Papers leak, Galizia had begun to map out corrupt 
networks that she and other investigative journalists alleged went all the way to the top of 
the Maltese elite—including Joseph Muscat, who was prime minister from 2013 to 2020.611 
Among the various corruption and organized crime–related cases she was investigating 
at the time of her death was Malta’s sale of so-called golden passports,612 which Muscat 
had been actively promoting, especially at “citizenship seminars” in numerous locations, 
including Beirut and Dubai.613
Malta has had a variety of CBI programs; the 2014 iteration was called the Individual 
Investment Program (IIP). An individual could be eligible for Maltese citizenship and a 
passport if they invested 650,000 euros ($864,500) into Malta’s SWF; purchased 150,000 
euros ($199,500) of Maltese stocks or shares; bought a property worth at least €350,000 
($465,500); or paid at least €16,000 ($21,280) to rent one, in addition to maintaining 
resident status in Malta for at least twelve months (though they were not required to actually 
live in Malta during those twelve months). Citizenship for family members required further 
investments. From mid-2017 to mid-2018 alone, the scheme brought in €162 million ($186.3 
million), which was about 1.38 percent of Malta’s gross domestic product.614
After payments and investments totaling €1.15 million, one could become a full-fledged 
citizen of the European Union (EU) with a passport and all the accompanying citizenship 
and travel opportunities.615 Applicants were supposed to be fully vetted for security risks. 
These due diligence checks were vitally important given that Malta is a member of both 
the EU and its Schengen Agreement. From 2014 to 2019, Malta granted citizenship to 833 
investors and 2,109 family members.616
Citizenship by Investment Schemes  
and Residency by Investment Schemes
As this compilation has repeatedly noted, SWFs are normally used to take excess funds—
usually from the sale of natural resources—and invest them outside of the country as 
a means to diversify the economy, create jobs and other opportunities for the country’s 
citizens, and generate wealth for future generations. However, the cases of both Malta 
and Türkiye (see chapter 8) highlight the unique potential for funds established without 
sovereign wealth to be exploited. Türkiye has funded its SWF via the takeover of state-owned 
enterprises and debt, and Malta has funded its SWF in large part through its CBI scheme.


Carnegie Endowment for International Peace   |   111
CBI schemes—as well as Residency by Investment (RBI), or “golden visa,” schemes—aim 
to attract foreign investment from high-net-worth individuals in return for citizenship and 
residency rights, respectively.617 The earliest adopters of these types of schemes were Tonga 
and the Caribbean nation of Saint Kitts and Nevis.618 Today, many countries offer such 
programs, including Australia, the United Kingdom, and the United States.619  
Although each country’s schemes are unique in terms of participation requirements and the 
rights granted in exchange, they all share a common goal of boosting the domestic economy.620 
CBI and RBI programs became increasingly attractive to EU member states following the 
2007–2008 global financial crisis as a seemingly easy way to support local economies. 
For outsiders, EU citizenship affords visa-free travel to up to 182 countries.621 It is these 
rights, in particular the freedom of movement of persons and capital, that are often 
advertised as the main attractive features of such schemes. The rationale, according to 
investment advisory firm Renascence Capital, is that “investment migration enables wealthy 
individuals to transcend the constraints imposed on them by their passport and country of 
origin, tapping into financial, career, and educational opportunities on a global scale.”622
Supporters argue that there are legitimate reasons for golden passport schemes. While this 
may be true, paying just over €1 million for all the benefits that an EU passport entails can 
also be a very good deal for the criminal and corrupt. Individuals involved in organized 
crime and corruption who obtain an EU passport are then able to travel throughout the 
world. Their EU citizenship status may allow them to conduct banking and business under 
looser standards than would be required under their original passports. These individuals 
receive all of the rights to privacy and rule of law and protections against any expropriations 
that are accorded to EU citizens. The scheme also provides the potential for golden passport 
holders to do all of this under a new name, enabling them to bypass security checks or flags 
on their previous identities.  
Because of the significant risks associated with CBI and RBI programs, SWFs capitalized 
through these structures can become conduits for bypassing standard transparency checks 
applied in normal financial transactions and banking relationships, thereby serving as a 
mechanism for tainted funds to enter the domestic and international financial systems. 
Funds transferred from Malta, an EU country, to a third country such as the United 
Kingdom or United States may be deemed lower risk than they would be if the same 
transfer was made from the CBI holder’s original country of nationality, which facilitates the 
laundering or transfer of illicitly obtained funds. In this way, the reputation of the individual 
may be rehabilitated and any risk based on their nationality may be concealed, allowing for 
the placement, layering, and integration of funds that would otherwise be unable to enter 
the EU’s financial system. 


112   |   Sovereign Wealth Funds: Corruption and Other Governance Risks
Investment flows from CBI and RBI schemes can also hurt financial stability and raise the 
demand for and prices of real estate for locals.623 In a 2018 report, the European Parliament 
stated that the social impacts from CBI programs could also make it more difficult for low-
income sections of the population to access housing as property prices increase.624
The national security and money laundering risks are even greater. Current criminal 
background checks and other due diligence performed on the applicants for golden passports 
or visas and the sources of their funds have been “questionable” at best.625 The European 
Parliament noted that “CBI/RBI schemes tend to be located in Member States that are 
particularly prone to risks related to financial secrecy, such as tax avoidance and money 
laundering, and corruption.”626 
Despite the four-tier due diligence process established to vet applicants, several high-profile 
Russian individuals with political ties to Russia obtained citizenship through Malta’s 
IIP between 2016 and 2018.627 For example, in 2016, Arkady Volozh, the founder and 
chief executive officer of Russia’s top search engine, Yandex (known as the “Google of 
Russia”), purchased Maltese citizenship for himself and his family.628 Also that year, Alexey 
Alexandrovich Marey, the former chief executive officer of now sanctioned Alfa-Bank Russia 
(the largest private bank in Russia), and his family became Maltese citizens.629 Maxim Shubarev, 
chairman of Setl Group (one of Russia’s largest financial and industrial associations), was 
also able to buy a Maltese passport in 2018.630 Pavel Grachev, the chief executive officer 
of Polyus Gold (the largest producer of gold in Russia and one of the world’s largest gold 
mining companies), purchased Maltese passports for himself and his family in 2017.631 
According to a news report, “almost half of his declared net worth of €42 million [$47.46 
million] is derived from a single ‘bonus payment’ of €20 million [$22.6 million] paid to him 
by a BVI shell company, Ninelco Investments Ltd.”632 These names are just a few of the over 
700 Russians that by 2018 were able to purchase Maltese citizenship.633
The EU has recognized the risks of CBI programs, as noted in its fifth anti–money 
laundering directive. The directive notes that CBI schemes demonstrate a potentially “higher 
risk” for money laundering.634 And the European Parliament has specifically warned about 
the risks associated with Malta’s IIP, including the likelihood of money laundering, the 
Maltese authorities’ lack of appetite for taking action, and the program’s inadequate due 
diligence process. 
These concerns gained more visibility in 2022 following the Russian invasion of Ukraine, 
as the public has become more aware of the estimated 3 billion or more euros invested into 
Europe by Russian nationals using these schemes. These investments resulted in more than 
4,000 Russian nationals receiving residency or citizenship in the EU.635 Most EU member 
states, Malta included, ceased accepting applications for golden passports or visas from 
Russian nationals following the invasion.636 


Carnegie Endowment for International Peace   |   113
Malta’s Citizenship by Investment Programs
Following scrutiny from the European Commission and domestic pressures linked to the 
murder of Galizia, Malta closed its IIP in 2020, stating it had reached its application cap.637 
However, in November 2020, Malta launched a new CBI program that offers citizenship 
through extraordinary service to Malta or through investments. In addition to a cap of 400 
certificates of naturalization per annum and 1,500 in total, excluding dependents, the new 
program has slightly more robust residency requirements.638 
Yet the closing of the IIP did not put an end to the scrutiny. In April 2021, a series of 
investigative journalism stories were published based on leaks from the citizenship advisory 
firm Henley & Partners, which has been intimately linked with Malta’s CBI programs since 
the program’s inception. These leaks revealed, for instance, that Saudi Prince Bandar Al 
Saud’s name was never published in Malta’s citizenship registry after he received citizenship 
in 2017.639 Saudis cannot receive dual citizenship without Saudi government permission, 
which is rarely granted. As a result, this case has called the accuracy of Malta’s public 
citizenship registry into question.640
The same leaks revealed that citizenship applicants tended to come from states with a higher 
risk of money laundering. A plurality of applicants came from Russia (37 percent), followed 
by China (12 percent) and Saudi Arabia (10 percent).641 Some applicants already held second 
passports, including citizenship from Saint Kitts and Nevis. 
The leaks also revealed that one of Henley & Partners’ highest-profile clients was Low Taek 
Jho, better known as Jho Low, the mastermind behind the Malaysia 1MDB corruption 
scandal (see chapter 3). Henley & Partners denied that Low was their client; while he sought 
a Maltese passport through the firm, they stated that he was not eligible for their programs 
due to the reputational risk of having him as a client. Yet a subsidiary of the firm reportedly 
helped Low purchase real estate in Cyprus through a Cypriot CBI scheme, and in return, 
the subsidiary company received a €650,000 ($721,500) commission for the purchase plus at 
least €60,000 ($66,600) in other fees.642
Moreover, many applicants spent only a few days total in Malta or rented empty apartments. 
In one case, an individual from the United Arab Emirates was able to arrive in the morning, 
take his oath of allegiance as a new citizen, and leave the country again all within a mere 
nine hours.643 Another citizenship applicant asked the law firm for the cheapest possible 
citizenship options that would meet the program’s demands. A yacht could be rented in 
Malta to prove a residency link.644 Henley & Partners has responded that it is not their 
responsibility to vet applicants—that is up to the receiving country.645 Other news reports 
from 2018 and 2019 revealed that a “Russian who was allegedly at the center of a money 
laundering scheme” and an Egyptian “arrested in New York on alleged fraud charges”646 
were both given Maltese citizenship.647 In 2018, the European Parliamentary Research 
Service calculated that from 2014 to 2016 “more than 38% of all naturalisations in Malta 
were obtained via their CBI scheme.”648 


114   |   Sovereign Wealth Funds: Corruption and Other Governance Risks
In October 2020, the European Union sent Malta an official notice to end the scheme, 
citing the lack of genuine link requirements for applicants as a violation of EU law.649 In 
April 2022, the EU threatened legal action because, unlike other countries with CBI 
programs, Malta had not ceased its program, though it had blocked Russians and 
Belarusians from applying.650
The Maltese National Development and Social Fund 
It is against this backdrop that the money laundering and corruption risks associated with 
channeling money from the CBI program into Malta’s SWF must be examined. Malta’s 
SWF, the Maltese National Development and Social Fund (NDSF), was established in 2015 
as part of the 2014 IIP program.651  
The NDSF was created with broad national development and social goals. These include 
contributing to major projects of national importance; promoting and supporting the 
advancement of education, research, innovation, justice and the rule of law, employment, 
and public health; encouraging gender equality; preventing discrimination; and respecting 
human rights.652
Despite these laudable aims, what bears scrutiny is the source of money by which Malta’s 
national development and social goals are funded. According to the NDSF’s website, until 
April 2020, when the IIP program was wound down, 70 percent of all contributions received 
through passport sales were managed and administered by the NDSF (see figure 1).653


Carnegie Endowment for International Peace   |   115
Note: Abbreviations are Central Bank of Malta (CBM) and BOV Asset Management (BOVAM). 
Source: Adapted from “Annual Report 2020,” National Development and Social Fund, 2021, 7, https://ndsf.com.mt/en/D 
ocuments/
Annual-Reports/Annual-Report-2020.pdf.  
Figure 1. Individual Investor Program Funding of the NDSF
The NDSF’s most recent publicly available financial statements show net assets that total 
€598.1 million.654 These proceeds are allocated across three portfolios: a directed portfolio 
(70 percent), a discretionary portfolio (30 percent), and an unallocated portfolio (cash 
balances).655 Each portfolio has its own unique management structures.
The discretionary portfolio receives 30 percent of all funds from the CBI program. 
Management of the portfolio, according to the NDSF annual report, has been assigned to 
an unnamed “leading global investment manager” by the Central Bank of Malta.656 This 
is atypical for SWFs (at least those that follow best practices). Both Norway’s SWF and 
Singapore’s GIC fund name their investment managers on their websites.657 Even Angola’s 
SWF (see chapter 4) publicly named Quantum Global as the fund’s asset manager. 
Providing basic information about the investment manager would give assurance of 
the reputation and standards that will be in place for NDSF investments. Additionally, 
providing the manager’s name allows for independent oversight, as it did in the case of 
Angola’s SWF, where journalists were able to expose the many conflicts of interest and poor 
financial integrity standards surrounding the fund’s former asset manager.


116   |   Sovereign Wealth Funds: Corruption and Other Governance Risks
From a money laundering standpoint, what is relevant is that the discretionary portfolio 
includes “solely investments in high-quality foreign instruments.”658 As a state-sponsored 
investment vehicle, the fund has easy access to North American and EU assets with few 
questions asked despite the numerous risks associated with NDSF money. Typically, 80 
percent of the discretionary portfolio is allocated to foreign bonds, with the remainder 
allocated to foreign equity.659 In 2020, 6.5 percent of these funds were directly invested in 
U.S. equities with a similar amount directed into emerging market (EM) equity funds (see 
figure 2).
Figure 2. Allocation of the NDSF’s Discretionary Portfolio, December 2020
Source: Adapted from “Annual Report 2020,” National Development and Social Fund, 2021, 11, https://nd 
sf.com.mt/
en/Documents/Annual-Reports/Annual-Report-2020.pdf.
The directed portfolio, which contains 70 percent of the funds that the NDSF receives from 
the CBI program, is supposed to be used for social and development purposes. The fund 
acknowledges that these investments may not necessarily provide a direct financial return to 
the NDSF.660 As of December 31, 2020, this portfolio had a market value of €260 million 
($297 million) and consisted solely of domestic assets listed on the Malta Stock Exchange.661 
The total market capitalization of the Maltese stock exchange is $4.34 billion, meaning that 
the NDSF owns close to 6 percent of all of the value in the stock exchange. This is worrying, 
as a significant chunk of domestic investment and, in turn, the strength and stability of 
Malta’s stock market comes from money obtained through passport sales in a program that 
is at high risk for corruption.  


Carnegie Endowment for International Peace   |   117
Despite the stated allocations of funds to be held in the directed, and discretionary portfolio, 
40 percent of the total NDSF assets is held in cash ($259.2 million).662 This is a remarkably 
high amount of cash for an SWF to have on hand.663 Funds like the NDSF whose mandates 
include priorities such as “the advancement of education, research, innovation, social 
purposes”664 and so on are referred to as strategic development SWFs. Because the NDSF 
has also been used to shore up the country’s budget deficit, it also seems to serve as a kind 
of stabilization fund. But analysis of investment strategies across different fund types 
indicates that stabilization funds tend to keep over 50 percent as cash and cash equivalents.665 
Strategic development funds on the other hand “tend to invest up to 50 percent of their 
assets domestically, with the difference globally spread across fixed income securities, 
public equities and cash equivalents, and private market investments.”666 This investment 
strategy also seems to largely mirror that of the NDSF. But strategic development funds 
tend to invest on average only 10 percent of their assets under management in cash or cash 
equivalents. The amount of unallocated cash in the NDSF’s budget given the fund’s stated 
purpose is surprising. If the cash is unallocated and does not earn interest, and if the law 
does not specify guard rails for its use, those are significant red flags for potential corruption 
and mismanagement.
Finally,  
as other chapters in this report have highlighted, minimizing potential conflicts 
of interest between those tasked with managing investments and the areas that the fund is 
investing in is critical to mitigate corruption risks. With the NDSF, the governance structure 
of the fund raises concerns. As displayed in figure 3, David Curmi, who was the NDSF’s 
chairman from 2015 to 2021, had individual interests in several companies that NDSF also 
had stakes in. 667 


118   |   Sovereign Wealth Funds: Corruption and Other Governance Risks
Figure 3. Overlapping Investment Interests of the NDSF and Former Chairman David Curmi
Note: Arrows represent the ownership structure of companies. 
Source: Author’s illustration.
Per the Paradise Papers, David Curmi either currently serves or has served on the boards 
of multiple Maltese companies, including Growth Investments Limited, Tigne’ Point 
Marketing, Mapfre Middlesea, Middlesea Assist, Premium Realty, Tigne’ Contracting, 
Midi, LB Factors, and Plaza Centers. While some of the entities are publicly traded, others 
are subsidiaries that can be traced back to the NDSF through either ownership or shared 
investments. For example, Premium Realty is owned by a consortium of companies that 
includes MSV Life. Curmi has served on the boards of both companies and on that of one 
of MSV Life’s parent companies, Mapfre Middlesea (a publicly traded entity). 
The other owner of MSV Life, Bank of Valetta, is a publicly traded company in which the 
NDSF holds an equity interest. As a result, multiple parties have made investments into 
companies in which Curmi exerts a certain degree of influence. There is nothing inherently 
illegal about this significant overlap in investment choices. However, from a governance 
and anti-corruption standpoint, it raises questions about the independence and oversight 
mechanisms used for the investment decisionmaking process within the fund.668 


Carnegie Endowment for International Peace   |   119
The Profitability of “Mining Sovereignty” 
It is striking how profitable “mining sovereignty” has been for the Maltese government. 
Malta had a year-over-year budget deficit from the early 1990s until about 2015. The deficit 
rapidly shrank following the introduction of the IIP in 2013, and in 2017, the country’s 
budget surplus was €438.6 million ($495.6 million)—as one article stated, this amounted 
to “an astonishing 3.9% of GDP, higher than any other EU country, and fourth highest in 
the world.”669 The same article went on to say that 90 percent of this surplus was attributable 
to the revenue generated from passport sales. Reportedly, as tweeted by Muscat, within four 
years of the program, the country was able to reverse the deficit created by the three previous 
administrations. To some commentators, this may seem like shrewd economic policy, but 
from an anti-corruption standpoint, this indicates that there is little incentive to adhere to 
the highest standards for processing applicants in the CBI program.
The NDSF’s capitalization via the golden passport scheme also means that the SWF is 
directly intertwined with Malta’s CBI. The risks of the NDSF’s direct capitalization from 
Malta’s CBI can be inferred from the European Parliament’s 2018 report on CBI and 
RBI schemes, which noted that these schemes were typically located in in member states 
with heightened risks of tax avoidance, money laundering, and corruption.670 This again 
highlights a potential reputational risk for the NDSF because of its close association with 
and direct capitalization from a CBI scheme.671 
NDSF’s complex relationship with corruption risks does not involve only the source of 
its funds but also how its investments have been structured; the investments are deeply 
embedded into the Maltese economy and can therefore threaten its stability. For instance, 
in 2018, the NDSF acquired a 49 percent stake in Lombard Bank, one of Malta’s largest 
banking institutions. In the same year, the Maltese SWF was considered the forty-third-
largest SWF in the world by assets under management.672 The CBI program allowed the 
NDSF to grow incredibly profitable—to the point that it recorded a balance of half a billion 
U.S. dollars in 2018, which placed it “on par with the sovereign wealth fund of Vietnam . 
. . a country of nearly 100 million people with an economy 20 times the size of Malta’s.”673 
However, since the coronavirus pandemic, the NDSF’s assets under management have fallen 
sharply, and the fund now ranks as the ninetieth-largest SWF in the world.674
Nonetheless, surveys show that only a minority (26 percent) of Maltese citizens support 
the sale of citizenship.675 The European Parliament report makes the case that “the 
vulnerabilities associated with CBI/RBI schemes . . . can negatively affect the population’s 
trust in the institutions.” The report also noted that a Eurobarometer survey carried out in 
November 2017, not long after Galizia was murdered, “showed that the Maltese citizens 
trust the justice system and police less than the EU average: trust in the Maltese justice 
and legal system stands at 35%, which is less than the EU average of 50%. The police are 
trusted at a level of 53%, also below the 72% EU average.”676 The authors recognize that “it 
is difficult to determine a direct causal link,” but “arguably the multiplication of allegations 
and ongoing investigations in Malta probably have an impact on its population.”677 If so, one 


120   |   Sovereign Wealth Funds: Corruption and Other Governance Risks
must wonder what impact this has on the viability of funding an SWF through the proceeds 
of a CBI program and whether the Maltese authorities will need to reconsider the manner in 
which the NDSF is funded.
The European Union is closing its remaining CBI programs, but plenty of other CBI 
programs endure around the world, and they may provide many of the same benefits and 
risks to the international system as Malta’s program.  
While the goals of such programs—to provide additional investments and jobs—are 
laudable, the risks associated with them are extremely high. As argued in this chapter, 
funding a state’s SWF through potentially illicit proceeds undermines a country’s rule of 
law and its citizens’ trust in democratic institutions. The development associated with such 
funding mechanisms can also give ruling parties an edge in elections, helping solidify their 
state capture. Further, such funding approaches can create perverse incentives whereby states 
come to rely on illicit funding to stay afloat. Current Maltese Prime Minister Robert Abela 
noted that maintaining Malta’s CBI program, even in the face of EU pressure, enabled the 
country to create a budgetary buffer from coronavirus challenges: “We will be defending 
Malta. Had it not been for the contributions from that [CBI] programme, which we are in 
the process of winding down, we would probably not have been in a position to present a 
budget of this scale.”678
The modus operandi of the NDSF also raises significant concerns about the way money 
held in state-owned investment vehicles is able to move through the international financial 
system with reduced scrutiny, as it is assumed that the source of funds is legitimate. CBI 
and RBI schemes can lead to very real risks to the larger international system, especially 
when they are run by states like Malta that appear especially vulnerable to criminal state 
capture. These schemes have the potential to facilitate strategic corruption in Western states 
by making it easy for authoritarians to seed their crony facilitators abroad under the cover of 
Western residency or citizenship. In turn, these authoritarians can better avoid sanctions and 
facilitate the laundering of kleptocratic assets that help keep their regimes in power. Their 
money can then be used to influence Western politicians and other power brokers in ways 
that may undermine larger national security considerations—as the public outing of Russian 
oligarchs’ roles in state capture and in undermining the West has made clear.


121
CHAPTER 11
﻿Sovereign Wealth Funds  
and Arms Exports: The Case of  
UAE’s Mubadala and Tawazun
Jodi Vittori
The defense sector has long been recognized for its association with corruption. Around 
the world, the shielding of large amounts of money and equipment under a veil of national 
security secrecy creates conditions ripe for bribes, kickbacks, and patronage. 
Especially worrisome to good governance and arms control advocates are defense offset 
agreements. Defense offsets, sometimes referred to as “industrial participation” or 
“countertrade,” are provisions in arms contracts that promise specific benefits to the 
contracting country as a condition of that country purchasing defense articles or services 
from a nondomestic supplier. In the United Arab Emirates (UAE), the details of these 
“sweetener” side deals—and sometimes even their existence—are secret. The UAE wraps 
an additional layer of complexity and opacity around defense procurement arrangements by 
funneling much of the funds and contracts through Emirati sovereign wealth funds. 
This chapter discusses defense offsets and their corruption risks, the role of the UAE’s 
sovereign wealth funds in offset projects, and the associated potential for rent-seeking 
behavior. This chapter does not allege any illegal activity by the Emirati government or 
Western defense firms. However, Transparency International has rated the UAE as especially 
susceptible to defense corruption. The UAE’s history of abuse of its sovereign wealth funds 
for money laundering (see chapter 3) and the secrecy surrounding many aspects of the 
Emirati defense sector create concerns that the Emirati defense procurement system could be 
at risk  for abuse.


122   |   Sovereign Wealth Funds: Corruption and Other Governance Risks
The UAE, Sovereign Wealth Funds, and Defense Offset 
Agreements
States use offset agreements to help make up for, or “offset,” some of the foreign currency 
leaving the country when arms or defense services are purchased from abroad. Offset 
agreements are divided into two types: direct and indirect. Direct offsets are directly linked 
to the specific defense goods in an agreement, such as requiring some of the components 
of a fighter aircraft to be made in the purchasing country.679 Indirect offsets can be any 
side sweetener contracts agreed to as a condition for a defense contract, such as a deal for 
training associated with an aircraft purchase. And they do not need to have any links 
to the defense sector at all: as part of fulfilling offset obligations of selling arms to Saudi 
Arabia, defense firms Raytheon (U.S.) and Thales (France) financed a Saudi shrimp farm.680 
Consequently, indirect offset agreements are considered especially high-risk for patronage 
and corruption due to the secrecy surrounding them and the ability to funnel the contracts 
and subcontracts, and their associated funding, into any enterprise.
The UAE is unique in that two of its major sovereign wealth funds, the Mubadala 
Investment Company and the sovereign funds associated with the Tawazun Council 
(formerly known as the Tawazun Economic Council), were initially established to funnel 
proceeds from defense offsets to Emirati companies and citizens.681 Through a complex series 
of mergers and reorganizations, they remain intimately tied to the Emirati defense industry. 
Figure 1 displays a timeline of the development of key actors that comprise the nexus of their 
sovereign wealth funds and the arms trade; figure 2 demonstrates the relationships between 
the various actors.682 
Source: Author’s illustration. 
Figure 1. Timeline of the Development of the UAE’s Defense-Associated Sovereign Wealth Funds


Carnegie Endowment for International Peace   |   123
Figure 2. Relationship Among Emirati Sovereign Wealth Funds and the Defense Industry
Source: Author’s illustration.  
Mubadala, which is Arabic for “exchange,” was founded in 2002 as the Mubadala 
Development Company to diversify the UAE economy,683 but it originates with the UAE 
Offsets Group (UOG), which is sometimes cited as the Offsets Development Company. The 
UOG was founded by Amin Badr el-Din, a Jordanian who at the time was an adviser to 
then chief of staff of the UAE Armed Forces (now Emirati President) Sheikh Mohammed 
Bin Zayed Al Nahyan (commonly referred to by his initials MBZ). El-Din is credited with 
writing the UOG’s guidelines and elevating offsets as part of the UAE’s larger economic 
development plans.684 A 2022 filing with the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission 
(SEC), regarding a company in which el-Din is a board member, states, “Between 1990–
2000, Dr. Badr el-Din has been Chairman and Chief Executive to the UAE Offsets Group, 
also known as Mubadala, which he created in the early 1990s.” The SEC filing goes on to 
note that it was the UOG which established the “Mubadala sovereign fund.”685 
Mubadala was created as a civilian adjunct to the overall defense offset program of the 
Emirate of Abu Dhabi’s military-procurement-focused, high-tech industrial development 
program.686 The fund is a public joint stock company, with the Government of Abu Dhabi 


124   |   Sovereign Wealth Funds: Corruption and Other Governance Risks
as its sole shareholder.687 Mubadala acts as a holding company for local start-ups and joint 
ventures, often with foreign firms as coinvestors. The fund also makes strategic investments 
in foreign firms, with the goal of moving some of their production to Abu Dhabi.688 Today, 
Mubadala’s portfolio is much larger than just defense offset–related financing and includes 
investments in sectors such as healthcare, pharmaceuticals, metals and mining, and real 
estate spanning over fifty countries.689 It is nonetheless still used to help funnel Emirati 
defense offsets, such as a 2021 deal between a Swiss aircraft manufacturer, Pilatus, and the 
UAE company Strata. That deal was funneled through Mubadala to complete an offset deal 
for the UAE’s prior purchase of Swiss trainer aircraft.690
In 2017, the Mubadala Development Company absorbed another Emirati sovereign wealth 
fund, the International Petroleum Investment Company (IPIC). The merged funds are 
now called the Mubadala Investment Company.691 As described in chapter 3, IPIC—and 
especially its subsidiary Aabar Investments—had been embroiled in the infamous Malaysian 
1MDB money laundering scandal in which Emiratis who ran IPIC helped Malaysian elites 
launder at least $4 billion from Malaysia’s 1MDB sovereign development fund.692 In 2018, 
Mubadala was merged again, this time with the Abu Dhabi Investment Council, bringing 
its assets to $284 billion693 and becoming the third-largest sovereign wealth fund in the UAE 
and the thirteenth-largest in the world.694
Another series of Emirati sovereign development funds within the UAE’s defense offset 
program are those under the control of the Tawazun Council (commonly referred to simply 
as Tawazun).695 It was established in 1992 as the investment arm of the UAE’s Offset 
Program Bureau until it was renamed in 2007 and again in 2022.696 Tawazun oversees the 
military component of the various defense offset agreements.697 Per its website regarding its 
core functions, “Tawazun Council is an independent government entity that works closely 
with the Ministry of Defense, Abu Dhabi Police and security agencies in the UAE”698  To 
maintain a dialogue between the Tawazun Council and defense contractors, there is also a 
Foreign Defence Contractors Council, which consists of the representatives of the Tawazun 
Council, companies that supply the UAE Armed Forces, and any third parties they choose 
to invite.699
Mubadala and Tawazun co-owned a group that until 2019 was called the Emirates Defence 
Industries Company (EDIC); it was renamed EDGE Group in 2019 and absorbed into 
Mubadala. EDGE is now the UAE’s main state-owned defense industry conglomerate, 
with more than twenty-five companies.700 In addition to absorbing EDIC, Mubadala also 
absorbed Tawazun’s sovereign development fund, called Tawazun Holding, as well as 
another defense conglomerate called the Advanced Instruments Group.701 (Confusingly, 
despite Tawazun Holding moving under the Mubadala SWF,  the Tawazun Council remains 
distinct from Mubadala.)
When Tawazun Holding was moved under Mubadala in 2019, the Emirati government 
created a new $680 million sovereign fund under the control of the Tawazun Council called 
the Defense and Security Development Fund (now called the Strategic Development Fund).702 


Carnegie Endowment for International Peace   |   125
This 2019 fund invests both domestically and internationally. For instance, it has signed 
agreements to set up a factory in the UAE for 3-D printing with an Australian firm703 and 
has invested in Al Marakeb, an Emirati firm that develops and updates unmanned surface 
drones.704 With a Singaporean partner, the fund has also invested in an Israeli satellite firm, 
hiSky Ltd.705 The Strategic Development Fund has also partnered with three UAE state-
owned banks to provide low-cost, low-collateral loans to Emirati small and medium sized 
enterprises in the security and defense sectors.706
UAE’s Defense Offset Corruption Risks
Offset contracts are a major means for defense companies to improve an arms contract 
proposal’s standing vis-à-vis other bidders, but they can also be a pathway for kickbacks and 
patronage, whereby senior officials of the purchasing country can direct offsets to their own 
companies or to underlings in return for loyalty.707 Countries can require offset deals to be 
public and transparent, but a high degree of secrecy is more often the norm. Some countries, 
including the UAE, declare these contracts to be secret. Others, like the United States, 
provide only the bare minimum of information, as described in box 1.708 
Box 1: U.S. Defense Offset Agreement Oversight
The United States provides minimal transparency into U.S. defense firms’ defense offset agreements. 
The U.S. Congress acknowledged in legislation in 1992 that “. . . certain offsets for military exports 
are economically inefficient and market distorting” and as a result, congressional legislation directed 
the executive branch to take a hands-off approach to offsets between companies and purchasing 
governments. Thus, any offset decisions are solely for the companies involved. U.S. government  
funds cannot be used to finance offsets associated with security assistance. 
There are numerous loopholes, however. For instance, offset administration costs incurred as part of 
foreign military sales contracts can be considered a legitimate cost of the contract, including offset 
staffing, brokering and trading services, legal support, some consultant activity, market assistance, 
employee travel, and taxes and duties. There is limited information about offset contracts available 
to the U.S. government or American public. For any defense exports that require congressional 
notification (offset contracts valued at over $5 million), Congress must be told if an offset is known  
to exist, if the country has a standard offset requirement, and if it is a direct or indirect offset, as 
well as provide a general description. Defense offset information must be treated as confidential 
information, however, so there is no public oversight. Congress may ask for additional information  
on any proposed offset agreements. 
For foreign military sales, the exporting company is not required to provide the Department of 
Defense contracting officer cost or pricing data so long as the foreign government has assured 
U.S. foreign assistance personnel that “adequate price competition” has occurred. While defense 
companies can theoretically fall afoul of the Foreign Corrupt Practices Act, these are technically 


126   |   Sovereign Wealth Funds: Corruption and Other Governance Risks
contract provisions that are explicitly allowed under U.S. laws, so the companies will almost certainly 
technically be in the clear. 
With direct commercial sales (DCS, or defense agreements made directly between a company 
and foreign government without the U.S. government acting as an intermediary), there are even 
fewer oversight or transparency requirements. Almost no disclosure is required for indirect offsets 
associated with DCS sales, unless the proposed DCS sale requires congressional notification. 
Even when companies are required to provide information to the U.S. government on offset deals 
associated with the sale, there is no requirement to list the foreign recipients of these deals. The U.S. 
Department of Commerce’s Bureau of Industry and Security has recently proposed a rule to expand 
the requirements to report offsets in defense sales agreements within their purview. Laws such as 
the Foreign Corrupt Practices Act, however, still apply.
The large monetary value of these side contracts—plus their secrecy—has led to some 
breathtaking examples of corruption. For instance, a British law enforcement investigation 
of the Al Yamamah arms deal between the British government, British Aerospace (now 
called BAE Systems), and the Saudi government documented at least 6 billion British 
pounds ($12 billion at the time)709 in bribes going to the Saudi royal family through secret 
accounts, shell companies, and fraudulent invoices.710 Many of these kickbacks were part of 
the offsets associated with the deal. Likewise, the ongoing corruption trial against former 
South African president Jacob Zuma involves kickbacks from corrupt arms deals from 1999 
to 2005 when he was deputy president.711 Many of the bribes and preferential contracts to 
Zuma and his cronies were allegedly funneled through the associated offset contracts. The 
World Peace Foundation’s online Compendium of Arms Trade Corruption documents the 
use of offsets for corrupt purposes in at least eleven of the forty cases they assess,712 thus 
raising red flags among anti-corruption and arms control advocates. 
Global totals of offset contracts are hard to come by, but some aggregate figures and 
estimates suggest they are substantial. For the United States, in 2019 (the latest data 
available), indirect offsets made up 70 percent of obligations by American defense companies 
(and direct offsets made up the other 30 percent), with ten U.S. defense contractors signing 
thirty-one new offset agreements with eleven countries.713 The total value of these offsets was 
$8.2 billion, or 62.5 percent of the value of the arms contracts signed that year. Lockheed 
Martin alone had $17.5 billion in offset agreements outstanding at the end of 2020, up from 
$12.1 billion in 2018.714 
The management consultancy Avascent estimates that the worldwide total value of defense 
offset contracts from 2021 to 2025 will be $371 billion, but only $229 billion will be 
fulfilled.715 There is no means of estimating what percentage of these contracts may be 
diverted for patronage, overpriced for kickbacks, or paid for but never completed. However, 
even if it is a mere 10 percent of the expected value of all offset contracts over the next five 
years, then $37 billion could disappear from government treasuries—a staggering sum.


Carnegie Endowment for International Peace   |   127
The aggregate numbers above are an undercount, as not all offset agreements are officially 
declared. In some cases, firms may camouflage offsets, for example by becoming major 
shareholders in local firms. Firms would not report such deals as official offsets, and a U.S. 
foreign military sales contract notification would claim that there were no known offsets 
associated with the arms agreement in question.716 
The UAE requires that any defense contract over $10 million must contain associated offsets 
worth at least 60 percent of the contract value.717 That is, if a company were to fulfill a $10 
million contract, it would also have to expend $6 million worth of direct or indirect offsets. 
Tawazun handles the offset contract negotiations and monitoring.718 Companies have a 
variety of means of fulfilling their offset obligations, including investing in projects where 
at least one entity is a local partner; manufacturing products in the UAE and exporting 
them or providing the products to foreign buyers; taking part in technology transfer; 
establishing a company in the Abu Dhabi Global Market free zone; and offering internships 
and job placement for UAE nationals.719 Indirect offsets have been funneled into a wide 
array of investments, including luxury real estate; leasing programs for aircraft, oil tankers, 
agricultural and fish farming, shipbuilding, and waste management; and agreements for 
Western legal and financial firm services.720 
As scholar Shana Marshall has explained in her study of offsets in the UAE, Saudi Arabia, 
and Kuwait, “Official rationales have focused on increasing employment opportunities for 
Gulf nationals, attracting new technologies and foreign investment, and reducing the Gulf 
economies’ reliance on oil and gas exports through strategies of diversification.”721 These 
are all worthy goals. She notes, however, that offsets have created few actual jobs, especially 
compared to the large burden that offsets place on state budgets, particularly since the 
cost of defense purchases increases to cover the cost of the offset deals. Moreover, because 
the countries making the purchases front much of the cost of offsets through tax credits 
and other investment incentives, these programs can be an especially inefficient means of 
generating job growth and facilitating technology transfer.722 
Marshall contends that “the primary area where offsets do have a discernable impact is on 
investment portfolios of influential domestic elites.”723 She argues this is the real driving 
force behind these side deals. When examining a 2008 study by an Abu Dhabi–based 
investment bank, Marshall found that eight of the ten most powerful families in Abu Dhabi 
held significant shares and/or board seats on an average of 3.8 companies that had been 
established by, or received substantial investment from, an offset agreement. The families 
included that of UAE’s president, MBZ.724 Such investments may legitimately advance the 
UAE’s goal of diversifying its economy away from oil, but they appear to be extensively 
linked to UAE’s elites.
The public and private sectors in the UAE—especially in strategic sectors like defense—have 
long been intertwined. As a foreign executive quoted in the Financial Times put it, “The line 
between royals and business [in Abu Dhabi] is getting blurred. I don’t think it exists now; it’s 
very hard to say what is the exclusive preserve of the private sector . . . I don’t think there are 
any credible private sector players in strategic sectors.”725


128   |   Sovereign Wealth Funds: Corruption and Other Governance Risks
Because so many of the deals are extremely complex, tracking the various flows of funds 
and potential conflicts of interest can be a challenge, even when the deals are publicized. 
For example, in 1997, an offset deal for Jordan involving Royal Jordanian airlines’ lease 
payments included the UAE government, thirty-seven banks, and four defense companies.726 
In another example, a 2007 deal called Project Alpha, facilitated by a defense offset broker 
called Blenheim Capital, involved fifteen defense companies that were pooling funds to 
provide financing for the main highway between Dubai and Abu Dhabi, plus the Al Raha 
Beach development, partnering with a then three-year-old company called Aldar Properties.727 
The project did indeed assist with the development of the UAE: today, Aldar is one of the 
largest developers in the UAE. At the time of the investment, the founder and chairman of 
Aldar, Ahmed Ali Al Sayegh, had also served on the board of the UAE Offsets Group (now 
called Tawazun) and since then has been a board member on many other firms funded with 
offset contracts.728 He is also a founding board member of Mubadala.729 Mubadala was a 
founding stakeholder in Aldar and continues to hold a 25 percent stake in the company.730
There are additional mechanisms for firms to keep an arm’s length from the actual offset 
contract. For instance, in the UAE, a defense company does not actually have to be a part of 
a joint venture to fulfill an offset obligation. Instead, it can encourage a third-party supplier 
to enter a joint venture. In addition, company “offset credits” can be applied not only to the 
contract at hand but also—if there are “leftover” credits—to other defense contracts it has 
been awarded, or they can even be traded to other firms who need offset credits to reach 
their requirements.731
To help handle these complex exchanges, companies often use offset brokers. A few key 
firms stand out, such as Chescor Capital, which is incorporated in Mauritius, located in 
a Dubai free zone, and was started by Amin Badr El Din, the aforementioned founder of 
the UAE Offsets Group and Mubadala.732 One of the most prolific offset brokers had been 
the aforementioned London-based Blenheim Capital (formerly called Summit Corporate 
Services), which was established by a former adviser to the UAE offsets program in the 
1990s, R. Grant Rogan, and by the UAE Offsets Group. One oil industry journal noted at 
the time that it was the “brainchild” of el-Din and MBZ. Blenheim Capital was initially 
financed through offset funds provided by Lockheed Martin and funneled through 
Mubadala; it was recently dissolved after its founder declared bankruptcy.733 Firms like 
Blenheim Capital handle the buying and selling of offset credits on behalf of defense 
companies, while allowing defense companies to keep an extra layer between themselves 
and whoever ultimately receives the offset funds. This especially concerns anti-corruption 
and arms control advocates. According to Transparency International’s Defense Companies 
Index, which measures the defense industry’s commitment to combating corruption, defense 
companies are less committed to combating corruption involving defense offsets than 
any other area of their corporate policies. Based on an analysis of 134 defense companies 
worldwide, 90 percent of surveyed companies exhibited “limited” to “very low” commitment 
to combatting corruption in this area.734 


Carnegie Endowment for International Peace   |   129
In the UAE, there is an additional option for fulfilling offset contract obligations: cash. In 
2016, Tawazun introduced an Accelerated Project Funding option for offsets. Contractors 
could invest cash into projects that were part of Tawazun. As an offset trade publication 
noted at the time, “the process would be transparent to overcome the challenges for US 
primes concerning cash payments and the Foreign Corrupt Practices Act.”735 Details were 
scant because defense contractors who attended a meeting where the announcement was 
made were forced to sign nondisclosure agreements. The cash payments would be given a 
multiplier of six, meaning that if a company owed $6 million in offset commitments, paying 
$1 million in cash to the fund would yield the equivalent of the $6 million requirement.736 
More recent trade publications note that cash contributions now have a multiplier value of 2, 
the same multiplier that salaries of UAE nationals hired via offset agreements have.737
The scheme received unwanted attention in 2017, when a series of leaked emails revealed the 
cash payment option.738 (This arrangement violates the basic tenets of offset contracts, which 
are supposed to support the Emirati economy by bringing in new technologies or know-how 
or providing local employment.739) At the time, an arms industry expert, William Hartung, 
noted, “Offsets are a common practice in the global arms trade, and they are largely 
unregulated . . . I’m less familiar with the idea of using cash payments, which seem at best a 
form of legalized bribery.”740 Despite the publicity, cash contributions are still permitted per 
the UAE’s 2019 offset guidelines.741
UAE Defense Sector Procurement Corruption Risks
According to Transparency International’s Government Defence Integrity Index (GDI), 
which assesses the comprehensiveness of anti-corruption measures in national defense 
institutions,742 the UAE is considered a “very high risk” country for defense sector 
corruption. Procurement processes are opaque, underregulated, and lack public oversight—
and are therefore highly susceptible to corrupt schemes.743 Based on research conducted in 
2019, the GDI found no laws or regulations that address the UAE’s defense procurement 
process. Instead, acquisitions are guided by a secret strategy derived by a small team of 
Emirati officials and foreign consultants. The UAE has no official reporting mechanisms 
regarding defense acquisitions except for occasional disclosures to defense industry 
journalists and experts. While some basic internal auditing practices are in place, there are 
no external oversight bodies that can monitor the administration of the UAE’s  
defense purchases.744 
Yet funneling defense offset contracts and associated financing through sovereign funds does 
not necessarily impede transparency and accountability if those funds are fully transparent 
and accountable. Indeed, Mubadala scored a 75 out of 100 in 2019 on the Peterson 
Institute’s sovereign wealth fund scorecard on transparency and accountability. (The average 
score was 66.) Mubadala also largely complies with the Santiago Principles for governing 
sovereign wealth funds.745 Further, it received a score of 10 out of 10 on the Linaburg-
Maduell Sovereign Wealth Fund Transparency Index (LMTI).746


130   |   Sovereign Wealth Funds: Corruption and Other Governance Risks
On the other hand, funds run by Tawazun have not been rated by the Peterson Institute or 
in the LMTI, nor is Tawazun a member of the International Forum of Sovereign Wealth 
Funds or a signatory to the Santiago Principles. The organization and administration of its 
funds and projects have also been excessively secretive. While Tawazun has publicly provided 
broad offset guidance, its treatment of specific policies has been described by contractors as 
“paranoid, secretive, and bizarre.”747 For example, when new offset guidelines were sent out 
to contractors by the Emirati government in 2019, every page of the eighteen-page document 
was embossed with the following: “Highly Restricted. This information must not be shared 
in any circumstance with anyone other than its intended recipients.” The document also 
included other confidentiality warnings within the policy.748 
Both Mubadala and Tawazun are ultimately run by UAE’s president, most known by his 
initials MBZ.749 He has also personally been closely linked with defense offsets, having 
headed the UAE Offsets Group in the 1990s and early 2000s when he was chief of staff of 
the UAE Armed Forces.750
Leadership between Mubadala and Tawazun and the entities that they control is fluid, 
which could lead to conflict-of-interest concerns. For instance, the current director of 
Tawazun, His Excellency Tareq Al Hosani, was formerly an associate director at Mubadala.751 
In addition to his duties at Tawazun, he sits on the boards of many companies funded 
by Mubadala and/or administered by Tawazun. For example, he is on the board of the 
International Golden Group (IGG), which was funded in part by Tawazun and in part by 
the Kaabi family,752 while its chairman is former Armed Forces deputy chief of staff Major 
General Mohammad Helal Al Kaabi.753 In September 2021, Tawazun increased its holdings 
of IGG by an undisclosed amount. The IGG provides “partnering services” for foreign 
defense companies and thus has numerous joint ventures with Tawazun-associated firms.754 
Al Hosani is also on the board of Al Yah Satellite Communication (Yahsat), where he was 
the executive director before taking up the Tawazun position.755 Yahsat was 100 percent 
capitalized by Mubadala through offset partners Thales, Astrium, and European Aeronautic 
Defence and Space (EADS, a division of Airbus).756 He also sits on the board of the EDGE 
Group, the consortium of companies run by Tawazun. This is not to suggest that these links 
have led to specific acts of corruption, undue influence, or other impropriety—only that 
there are potential risks associated with the linkages.
Some firms taking part in Emirati offset agreements have expressed concerns about the 
appearance of corruption. In 2012, for example, an offset trade magazine reported how 
firms were especially concerned at how Tawazun’s former chief executive officer, Saif Al 
Hajeri, was also the chief executive officer of Tawazun Holding (a predecessor to the current 
SDF). The director of Tawazun’s offset unit at the time, Matar Al Romaithi, justified this 
by stating, “[Saif Al Hajeri] is not getting anything personally. Tawazun Holding is our 
investment arm, which is part of the Tawazun Economic Council, and both of them are 
government entities. So where is the conflict of interest?”757 He later stated, “We don’t want 
international companies to feel or to have a sense of doubt . . . The international firms we 
have consulted confirm we are not in breach of any conflict of interests or bribery acts.”758


Carnegie Endowment for International Peace   |   131
It Is Not Only the UAE: Global Defense Offset Risks
The UAE is not the only country that executes defense offset contracts through its sovereign 
wealth funds. Saudi Arabian Military Industries (the main partner for companies engaged 
in offset obligations there),759 the Helicopter Company, and other Saudi defense companies 
are wholly owned subsidiaries of the country’s Public Investment Fund (PIF),760 and civilian 
offsets are managed by the PIF.761 PIF is one of the largest sovereign wealth funds globally, 
with over $600 billion in assets, and it seeks to have over $1 trillion in funds by the end 
of 2025, with about 30 percent of those being international investments (more details on 
PIF can be found in chapter 6).762 Saudi Arabia’s General Authority for Military Industries, 
which is a subsidiary of the PIF and which is responsible for managing the country’s defense-
related offset programs,763 also recently signed a memorandum of understanding with 
Tawazun to facilitate cooperation between both groups, including joint ventures.764 As with 
the UAE offset program, “cash donations” are also acceptable to fulfill offset obligations.765
According to Transparency International’s GDI Index, Saudi Arabia is also at critical risk of 
defense corruption.766 The Saudi defense sector has been embroiled in large-scale corruption 
scandals, including the aforementioned Al Yamamah deal. In March 2024, two middlemen 
employed by British company GPT Special Project Management Ltd (now part of EADS) 
were acquitted by a British court for bribing then head of the Saudi Arabian National 
Guard, Prince Miteb bin Abdullah (son of then Saudi King Abdullah), with millions of 
dollars between 2007 and 2010. A jury acquitted the middlemen after they successfully 
argued that their payments had been authorized by the Saudi and British governments.767 
And PIF, headed by Saudi Arabia’s Crown Prince Mohammed bin Salman, is currently 
involved in a civil dispute over $3.5 billion missing from a Saudi counterterrorism fund.768 
Bahrain has also developed an offsets program. The Bahrain Defense Forces recently signed 
a memorandum of understanding with Tawazun to “share expertise on offset programmes.”769 
This memorandum came after Bahrain established a formal offset program for the first 
time in September 2020, which was reported to be almost identical to the UAE’s program.770 
Per a November 2021 agreement, foreign suppliers with offset obligations in Bahrain can 
meet those requirements in the UAE and vice versa.771 Bahrain’s sovereign wealth fund, 
Mumtalakat, has also recently signed a co-investment deal with Mubadala.772 Per an offset 
trade publication regarding Bahrain’s offset guidelines, 
The guidelines are almost entirely a replica of the policy published by the 
UAE. Large parts of the document are identical, with the words “Bahrain” 
and “BDF” (Bahrain Defence Force) replacing “UAE” and “Tawazun.” The 
quotas, multipliers, penalties, project categories and performance periods 
are also identical, although Bahrain sets a lower threshold.773 
Like Saudi Arabia and the UAE, Bahrain’s defense sector is considered to be at critical 
risk for susceptibility to defense-related corruption.774 The royal family maintains absolute 
control over politics and the economy, controlling the country’s oil wealth, its security sector, 
and its sovereign wealth fund.775


132   |   Sovereign Wealth Funds: Corruption and Other Governance Risks
Ramifications and Recommendations
One area that requires additional study is the potentially significant ramifications for 
regional security. The lack of transparency into defense offset agreements makes such 
assessments exceedingly difficult, but the activities of some companies funded through the 
combination of offsets and sovereign wealth funds indicates a possible troubling nexus. 
For example, Horizon Flight Training Academy was started in 2002 with funds from 
Mubadala and remains 100 percent owned by the fund as part of the new EDGE 
conglomerate. Its purpose is to train civilian and military pilots, trainers, and technicians.776 
The majority of its pilots go to the Emirati military, 777 where they have flown in highly 
controversial military operations in Yemen.778 One of the members of Horizon Flight 
Academy’s board is retired U.S. Army Lieutenant Colonel Stephen Toumajan, who appears 
to have commanded the UAE’s Joint Aviation Command (its combat helicopter wing). 
According to reports, Toumajan has officially been a contractor for Knowledge International, 
a U.S. sister company of Knowledge Point, another EDGE company.779 Though he has 
previously told the press that he is merely an adviser to the UAE, he has also identified 
himself as a “commanding general of the Joint Aviation Command of the UAE” and wore 
a uniform with insignia designating him as such in a U.S. Defense Department video from 
2017.780 Toumajan has sat on the board of directors of other EDGE companies including 
Knowledge Point,781 which demonstrates the close links between Mubadala, Tawazun, their 
associated companies, and Emirati military activities and oversight.
Moreover, the IGG has been identified in arms sale deals with signs of malfeasance. The 
former head of a Ukrainian arms firm told the Organized Crime and Corruption Reporting 
Project (OCCRP) in 2017 that Emirati firms, including IGG, sponsored arms shipments 
to places such as South Sudan. Documents provided to OCCRP from a Ukrainian arms 
firm included a “framework agreement” to ship $169 million worth in arms to South Sudan 
despite an EU arms embargo, with IGG acting as a broker.782 In January 2024, IGG was 
added under the EDGE Group umbrella owned by Mubadala.783
Given these allegations regarding UN sanctions violations and possible human rights 
violations associated with defense companies under the auspices of Mubadala and Tawazun, 
more insight into these funds and their associated offset contracts would help civil society, 
scholars, and the intelligence community better understand these entanglements.
Ideally, both the United States and the UAE would open up their offset-related arms 
procurement and export contracts to public scrutiny. At a minimum, the U.S. Congress 
should legislate changes to defense offset contracts that require public disclosure of 
summaries of these contracts, pricing details, and the beneficial owners of any associated 
contracts and subcontracts. The beneficial owners of offset agreements that are part of the 
U.S. Foreign Military Sales program could be made known under Section 885 of the Fiscal 
Year 2021 National Defense Authorization Act, which requires making beneficial ownership 
information for federal contracts available. This information could also be publicly posted 


Carnegie Endowment for International Peace   |   133
through the Federal Awardee Performance and Integrity Information System,784 as well as 
the more easily accessible USAspending database.785 These steps would partially solve the 
problem, but they still would not enable the public disclosure of offsets associated with 
arms sales made through direct commercial sales between defense export companies and a 
government, nor would they cover military exports classified as “dual use” or those offsets 
that shirk the “offset” moniker. While there are substantial corruption concerns regarding 
the use of defense offset agreements globally, taking these steps would at least help ensure 
that the U.S. government is not complicit in corrupt offset-related activities abroad.
This compilation has documented how elites can use sovereign wealth funds for rent-seeking 
activity, including corruption. The combination of opaque defense procurement contracts 
intertwined with sovereign wealth funds in countries already considered highly susceptible 
to defense-related corruption should be of concern to governments, the defense sector, and 
civil society. Furthermore, the fact that potential corruption activities can have significant 
effects on peace and security only heightens the need for sovereign wealth funds to undergo 
much higher levels of scrutiny and associated government regulation by arms-exporting nations.


134   |   Sovereign Wealth Funds: Corruption and Other Governance Risks


135
CHAPTER 12
﻿What’s Next? A Road Map to  
Address SWF Illicit Finance, 
Corruption, and Governance Gaps
Lakshmi Kumar
When used appropriately, sovereign wealth funds (SWFs) can help address budget deficits 
by using natural resource revenues, help save resources for future generations, or serve as a 
bulwark against natural resource–associated long-term economic harms, better known as 
“Dutch disease.”786 Yet as the preceding chapters of this compilation have demonstrated, 
SWFs can sometimes severely “undermine public financial management and become sources 
of patronage and nepotism.”787 Essentially, within the universe of SWFs, there is a significant 
governance gap, which has created the opportunity for systemic corruption and associated 
issues to take hold. Instances of corruption can be traced to a variety of institutional and 
environmental factors, including
•	
absence of clear definitions for SWFs; 
•	
corruption-rich environments or those with weak rule of law;
•	
weak or absent independent oversight of SWFs; 
•	
ever-changing objectives and mandates of SWFs; 
•	
poorly defined withdrawal, deposit, and investment rules; 
•	
conflicts of interest between private sector intermediaries and SWFs; and 
•	
absence of mandated financial reporting and financial transparency obligations. 
The problem at the heart of this compilation is that without adequate protections it is easy 
for SWFs to operate in a potential “sea of corruption” instead of operating as “islands of 
good governance.” Therefore, a path toward improved governance must focus not only on 
strengthening how SWFs operate institutionally but also on reforming the international 


136   |   Sovereign Wealth Funds: Corruption and Other Governance Risks
environment of norms that affect SWFs and the array of actors that interact with and benefit 
from SWF activity. This chapter sets out recommendations to achieve such reform, focusing 
on the reform in three areas:
1.	 countries where SWFs invest and private sector intermediaries that interact with 
SWFs; 
2.	 countries where SWFs are created (particularly reforms related to how these SWFs 
should implement well-defined governance and operational norms); and
3.	 international standards for SWFs.
Policy Reform for Countries Where SWFs Invest and Private 
Sector Intermediaries That Interact With SWFs
As outlined in the first chapter, SWF investment is inexorably tied to the larger international 
regulatory debate on foreign direct investment (FDI) and the protection of national security. 
This debate has birthed laws at the national level that scrutinize SWF investment for 
national security intrusions. 
The United States, as both the world’s top foreign investor and the top recipient of foreign 
investment, presents an example case of how reforms targeting SWFs have developed. The 
United States has traditionally championed open investment environments,788 which has 
greatly benefited its economy. A report from the U.S. Department of Commerce found that 
10 percent of U.S. employment (16 million jobs) were attributable to foreign investment in 2019.789 
At the same time, the United States and other countries that have traditionally welcomed 
foreign investment are worried about SWF investment undermining their security. The 
concerns around security and foreign investments have always been closely linked to 
the challenges stemming from ongoing global geopolitics at the time of investment. 
For instance, in the late 1980s, the Japanese government attempted to acquire a U.S. 
semiconductor company, which led to the passage of the Exon-Florio amendment to the 
Defense Production Act.790 The amendment gave the president the power to block any 
potential foreign investments or to divest foreign investments from U.S. companies if they 
constituted a threat to U.S. national security.791 The Japanese government’s attempted 
acquisition in fact came at a time when U.S.-Japan relations were tense amid a trade war 
and U.S. concerns about how the rise of Japan as a global super power could threaten U.S. 
economic interests.792 Fast forward to today, and there are similar but perhaps even more 
pressing concerns around potential Chinese government investments in sensitive U.S. 
technology sectors (see figure 1). These concerns resulted in the passage of the Foreign 
Investment Risk Review Modernization Act of 2018 and the 2022 Executive Order on 
Ensuring Robust Consideration of Evolving National Security Risks by the Committee on 
Foreign Investment in the United States (CFIUS).793 The 2022 executive order represented 
the first time that a U.S. president “expressly directed CFIUS to prioritize certain national 
security risks when reviewing covered transactions.”794


Carnegie Endowment for International Peace   |   137
Figure 1. Timeline of U.S. Foreign Investment Laws and Influencing Events (1872–2022)
Source: Adapted from “Sovereign Wealth Funds: Laws Limiting Foreign Investment Affect Certain U.S. Assets and Agencies Have Various 
Enforcement Processes,” U.S. Government Accountability Office, May 2009, 20, https://www.gao.gov/assets/gao-09-608.pdf. 
With SWFs, national security risks are only magnified due to the size of the assets at their 
disposal, their investment strategies, and the assumptions that because they are “of” the 
government their actions are intertwined with the country’s foreign policy objectives. These 
concerns and risks have been at the heart of a debate on how to protect a country’s national 
security while also fostering an open investment environment. In 2006–2007, when security 
concerns among countries of the Organisation of Economic Co-operation and Development 
peaked, more than a dozen countries representing more than 40 percent of inward FDI 
adopted or debated new laws to scrutinize SWF- or foreign government–linked FDI.795 In 
broad terms, these laws and other FDI laws primarily seek to target three kinds of national 
security threats. 
•	
One threat is the denial or manipulation of access that would make a country 
dependent on a foreign supplier. An example is the 1990 attempted acquisition of 
U.S.-based Semi-Gas Systems by a Japanese company, Nippon Sanso Holdings.796 
The acquisition would have raised the Japanese company’s global market share to 40 
percent.
•	
A second threat is the leak of sensitive technology or know-how. An example is the 
1992 attempted acquisition of a U.S. missile company, Ling-Temco-Vought, by a 
French company, Thomson-CSF (now called Thales).797 The successful acquisition 
would have provided the French company (and therefore potentially the French 
government) with access to critical U.S. technology.


138   |   Sovereign Wealth Funds: Corruption and Other Governance Risks
•	
A third threat is infiltration, espionage, and disruption. An example is the 2005 
attempted acquisition by Dubai Ports World of a company that owned or leased ter-
minal facilities in U.S. ports in Baltimore, Houston, Miami, New Orleans, Newark, 
and Philadelphia. The acquisition would have provided the United Arab Emirates a 
mechanism for “clandestine observation or disruption.”798
National Laws and SWF and Money Laundering Restrictions
A perusal through legal restrictions on foreign or SWF investment across ten jurisdictions 
demonstrates that the scope of national security threats has expanded, but the scope does 
not automatically include corruption, money laundering, and other similar risks. This might 
be an acceptable situation, however, if governments were to use existing national anti-
corruption or anti–money laundering (AML) statues in their countries to target risks from 
specialized vehicles like SWFs. 
In the United States, federal laws do not specifically restrict SWF investments but rather 
look to scrutinize or restrict foreign investments that pose a national security risk. These laws 
operate in conjunction with sector-specific restrictions in areas such as telecommunications 
or energy and other state-specific laws that restrict foreign investment.799 But outside of 
generalized restrictions, there appears to be no publicly available U.S. guidance on how to 
address or conduct anti–money laundering due diligence on SWFs. 
Other countries, such as the United Kingdom (UK), have partial directed guidance on how 
to address anti–money laundering and counter threat finance (AML/CFT) risks in SWFs. 
The Joint Money Laundering Steering Group (JMLSG), a private sector body representing 
the financial sector in the UK, produces guidance to help the industry meet the country’s 
AML/CFT obligations. Though the guidance provided is not legally binding, it does receive 
approval from the UK Treasury prior to publication. The guidance is noteworthy in that it 
specifically calls out the national security threats posed by SWFs because the funds can be 
used for “political, rather than purely financial objectives, by acquiring controlling interests 
in strategically important industries or destabilising economies.” Among other positive 
features, the JMLSG guidance 
•	
specifically requires an entity with AML/CFT obligations to look at the country 
context from which the SWF originates; 
•	
states that SWFs will typically not qualify for simplified due diligence; 
•	
draws specific attention to the risk of politically exposed persons and SWFs; and
•	
instructs obliged entities to check whether withdrawals made from the SWF match 
its mandate and objective.800 


Carnegie Endowment for International Peace   |   139
While positive, efficacy of the guidance is reduced because of the overarching directive 
that SWF-related risks be viewed through the possible destabilizing effect on economies 
rather than the possible theft of funds or problematic origins of the funds themselves.801 The 
guidance does not raise the specific factors that lead to money laundering or corruption.
Another limitation of the JMLSG guidance is that it only captures funds owned by 
the national government as SWFs, thereby excluding funds like the Alaska Permanent 
Fund from within its purview.802 This once again exposes how a lack of uniformity in 
understanding what an SWF is can affect its due diligence treatment. 
India, which is another key SWF investment destination (see chapter 1), also provides 
directed AML/CFT guidance. However, in contrast to the UK, the country’s capital markets 
regulator, the Securities and Exchange Board of India, treats SWF investments as Category 
1 investments on par with those of other supranational entities like the United Nations and 
other multilateral organizations, foreign and central banks, and government-related foreign 
investors. Under Indian regulations, entities classified as Category 1 are automatically 
qualified as being of lowest risk. This is especially concerning because there is no distinction 
to be made for due diligence based on the SWF’s origin, mandate, or investment strategy. 
SWFs get an automatic carte blanche because of their “sovereign” nature.803 This once again exposes 
a lack of a consistent international understanding on the types of risks SWFs present. 
Because of this lack of scrutiny or interest outside the national security lens, there is almost 
no information available on certain SWFs that raise red flags. For example, chapter 5 in 
this compilation highlighted the opacity around the Fund for Future Generations (FFG) 
in Equatorial Guinea. Two leading data providers on SWFs could not find any verifiable 
information on how and where the FFG was investing. Similarly, there was no information 
available on the investment patterns of Malta’s National Social Development Fund 
(NSDF). There were only mentions of art, money granted to charities, and equity and bond 
investments in the United States and emerging markets (see chapter 10). This is despite the 
fact that the funds associated with the NSDF stem from the country’s controversial and 
much criticized “golden passport” program. 
Another particularly glaring example is the State Oil Fund of the Republic of Azerbaijan 
(SOFAZ). The fund is known for lacking transparency and operating in a country 
where, according to a 2022 assessment by the U.S. Department of State, “a small group 
of government-connected holding companies dominates the economy . . . and judicial 
transparency is lacking.”804 Critics have raised concerns that projects funded by the SOFAZ 
are often awarded to companies associated with ruling political elites in Azerbaijan.805 
Despite these legitimate concerns, the fund has invested over $1.2 billion in the real estate 
sector.806 The SOFAZ has direct commercial real estate investments in France, Italy, Japan, 
Russia, and the UK.807 As of 2021, the fund was also expected to invest $400 million in 
commercial real estate deals in Asia, Europe, and the United States.808 The fund has been 
making investments in U.S. real estate since 2015 and was expected to deploy $50 million in 
unlisted real estate funds across North America and Asia and Europe in 2023.809 


140   |   Sovereign Wealth Funds: Corruption and Other Governance Risks
A 2020 report titled “The Empty Bucket of the State Oil Fund of Azerbaijan” found that 
the SOFAZ’s real estate investments globally amount to $2 billion and are managed by 
subsidiary institutions of the SOFAZ.810 The profits from the real estate sector are supposedly 
used to pay for the services of these subsidiary institutions, yet the ownership and control of 
these institutions remain shrouded in mystery. The real estate investments also do not appear 
to generate profits for the fund itself.811 
The SOFAZ invests in real estate through private funds. However, in the United States, 
these funds are not required to carry out AML/CFT due diligence; and in other countries, 
regulators have struggled to adequately enforce AML/CFT regulation in this space. The 
secretive investments made in the United States by Russian oligarch Roman Abramovich, for 
example, were possible because of the secrecy and lack of due diligence required in the real 
estate sector. The absence or weakness of regulatory mechanisms in investment destination 
countries therefore creates a perfect situation whereby subsidiary institutions making deals 
for the SOFAZ do not undergo necessary scrutiny. Taken together, this exposes gaps not 
just in the AML/CFT and anti-corruption treatment of SWFs but also in how private 
investment funds are regulated globally. 
Finally, there are concerns that SOFAZ is being used to whitewash the image of 
Azerbaijan—similar to how Saudi Arabia may be using SWF investments in sports to 
improve its image and increase its influence despite the potential lack of returns on this 
investment (see chapter 6). Through the SOFAZ, over the past few years, Azerbaijan has 
been hosting and funding the Eurovision competition, the first European Games, and the 
Islamic Solidarity Games, as well as a Formula 1 grand prix.812 But there have been questions 
about whether these investments have provided benefits to the people of Azerbaijan and 
about who benefits from the large construction projects undertaken to host these events.813 
The organizing bodies for these large international events that award hosting privileges to 
Azerbaijan do not appear to be concerned about the inherent risks of self-enrichment by 
political elites in such an economic environment. 
To address this basket of corruption, money laundering, and other governance risks 
associated with SWFs, national governments and private sector actors must first 
recognize the enabling role they have in facilitating red flag behavior and then address the 
governance and regulatory gaps that allow this behavior. With this in mind, several policy 
recommendations could help address those gaps.
•	
National governments should establish a regulatory rubric that examines SWFs for 
both national security risks and significant corruption and money laundering risks. 
This would automatically make verifiable information on particularly high-risk 
SWFs more readily available.
•	
Because SWFs often invest through private equity funds, hedge funds, and venture 
capital funds, jurisdictions should ensure that the private investment fund sector 
has requisite AML/CFT obligations, such as full customer due diligence. And these 
obligations should be appropriately enforced.


Carnegie Endowment for International Peace   |   141
•	
Jurisdictions should prioritize the creation of strong beneficial ownership registries 
that require a business, trust, charity, or other entity to declare who owns or con-
trols it. If the beneficial owner includes a SWF, this should have to be declared as 
part of the registry process. This is critical for continued information sharing and to 
track the movement of political elites’ ill-gotten gains, which can move more easily 
via these funds. 
•	
Financial institutions and entities obliged to implement AML/CFT frameworks 
should be provided detailed guidance on how to assess SWFs for AML/CFT and 
corruption risks. The “sovereign” nature of a fund should not provide automatic 
legitimacy to an SWF’s financial transaction. The language in the UK’s JMLSG 
offers a good starting point.
•	
Jurisdictions should implement more stringent penalties, including the loss of 
a license and criminal prosecution, for individuals who enable corrupt activity. 
Despite record fines, financial institutions, law firms, accounting firms, and other 
intermediaries continue to engage in bad behavior, as laid out in numerous examples 
throughout this compilation.
•	
Governing bodies for international sporting events should ensure that any SWFs 
involved are subject to the independent audit or disclosure requirements of contracts 
awarded, including full financial reporting to address associated corruption and 
money laundering risks. 
•	
Capital market regulators, such as the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission, 
should create more detailed SWF investment forms that include the name and 
location of all sub-funds, coinvestments, and direct and indirect investments.
Policy Reform in Countries Where SWFs Are Created
Throughout the history of SWFs, the absence of well-defined, robust governance frameworks 
has contributed to the loss of billions of dollars as a result of poor investment decisions, 
mismanagement, and corruption. Both the Libyan and Kuwaiti SWFs lost billions because 
investments from their respective funds were used to benefit allies close to the country’s 
regimes or private sector intermediaries responsible for managing the funds’ resources.814 
In the case of Libya, prior to the Malaysian 1MDB scandal, Goldman Sachs was implicated 
in the mismanagement of funds at the Libyan Investment Authority (LIA).815 In a lawsuit 
filed by the LIA, the fund alleged that Goldman Sachs’ mismanagement had lost the fund 
$1.2 billion.816 A subsequent two-and-a-half-year court battle in the UK ultimately cleared 
Goldman Sachs of wrongdoing but exposed the bank’s questionable business practices in 
securing the LIA as a client.817 The LIA made similar allegations of fraud and corruption 
against three other banks: JP Morgan, Credit Suisse, and Société Générale. Société Générale 


142   |   Sovereign Wealth Funds: Corruption and Other Governance Risks
apologized to the LIA and agreed to a $860 million settlement.818 For both the JP Morgan 
and Credit Suisse suits, there was no opportunity to decide them on their merits because 
they were filed after the statute of limitations had expired.819
In Kuwait’s case, lawsuits filed in New York alleged that the management at Grouo Torras—
the holding company for the Kuwait Investment Authority’s Spanish investments—used 
a network of “shell companies, fictitious loans, fraud and embezzlement” and stole $950 
million. As a result, the people of Kuwait lost $5 billion through “colossal mismanagement.”820 
The scandal led to the conviction of two individuals on embezzlement charges in Kuwait, 
legal action in several countries, and a new Kuwaiti law that requires parliamentary scrutiny 
of investment decisions.821 
In other cases, the lack of clear rules on how and when money from SWFs can be 
withdrawn has allowed billions of dollars to be removed. That was the case for Nigeria’s 
Excess Crude Account (ECA). The ECA was set up in 2004 to protect Nigeria’s budgets 
against volatility caused by changing crude oil prices, and it has long faced criticism 
because successive governments have made arbitrary withdrawals that have rarely provided 
tangible development benefits to Nigeria.822 In 2022, the ECA was in the headlines because 
the account’s assets fell to around $375,000 from $2.1 billion in 2015 and $20 billion in 
2009.823 In 2019, “$1 billion was withdrawn for the procurement of critical equipment for 
the Nigerian army, Navy and Air Force; $496 million was paid for 12 Super Tucano attack 
aircraft for the Air Force, while $380.5 million was disbursed for the procurement of various 
critical military equipment in a direct government to government contract.”824 There was 
particular criticism around the acquisition of the Tucano aircraft because that purchase did 
not receive prior approval from the National Assembly.825 A report by Nigeria’s National 
Economic Council found that 67 percent of withdrawals from the ECA between January 
2005 and June 2015 “violated the operating principles of the fund.”826 
Many critics have noted that the ECA has no governance norms concerning deposits, 
withdrawals, and how the savings can be used.827 In 2017, for example, the Natural Resource 
Governance Institute (NRGI) assessed the ECA as the most poorly governed natural 
resource–based SWF.828 The institute found that the government failed to disclose any of 
the “rules or practices governing deposits, withdrawals or investments of the ECA.”829 The 
NRGI even asserted that the account was “so opaque” that there was “no way to know 
how much may be lost to mismanagement.”830 In 2019, the International Monetary Fund 
(IMF)—using the NRGI’s methodology—found that out of thirty-three natural resource–
based SWFs, the ECA was the second-most poorly governed SWF.831
Another risk typically seen with SWFs is that ruling governments use them to bypass the 
budget process, which usually requires parliamentary approval. The SOFAZ, for instance, 
does not require parliamentary approval, and funds can be directly executed at the behest of 
the president.832 Similarly, Türkiye’s SWF has been used as a parallel budget that can avoid 
most parliamentary scrutiny and oversight (see chapter 8). 


Carnegie Endowment for International Peace   |   143
Fortunately, substantive work has been done to identify the key reforms needed to ensure 
that states create robust accountability mechanisms. But the absence of global assessments 
or enforcement mechanisms, such as through civil society mechanisms or investigative 
journalism, has limited the broad-based uptake of these suggested reforms. Leading experts 
in the field have identified four internal reform efforts that are critical to addressing SWF-
related corruption, money laundering, and governance challenges. 
1.	 Establish a well-defined institutional structure for the SWF, including by setting 
clear fund objectives. For instance, plainly state whether the fund seeks to stabilize 
the budget, save for future generations, or dedicate its resources to development 
goals; disallow the use of vague, undefined terms that can make it hard to assess 
the SWF’s objectives. One of the three objectives of the SOFAZ is “preserving 
macroeconomic stability,” but there is no definition on what exactly this constitutes 
in Azerbaijan.833
2.	 Set a rules-based investment mandate that spells out what percentage can be made 
in equities versus real estate versus development projects. Restricting domestic 
expenditure through the SWF and mandating that domestic investments follow 
a budgetary process are additional ways to mitigate fund losses and risks around 
patronage networks and crony capitalism.834
3.	 Develop and operationalize well-defined, rational fiscal rules. The rules would 
dictate when and how money could be withdrawn and deposited into the fund. 
For instance, Russia and Abu Dhabi in the United Arab Emirates do not have 
withdrawal and deposit rules.835 By contrast, Alaska and Texas in the United States, 
as well as Chile, Norway, and Timor-Leste, have clear rules on withdrawals and 
deposits and require disclosures on fund activities, transactions, and fund managers.
4.	 Establish independent oversight of the fund. This would ensure that there is a 
clear division of responsibilities between the fund manager, who has overarching 
authority over the SWF, and those running the day-to-day operations; and it would 
also help create a clear mapping of the ethical and conflict of interest considerations. 
Additionally, it would ensure that the fund provides an exhaustive disclosure of its 
investments, fund managers, and audited financial statements. Independent over-
sight authorities within the country should monitor fund behavior and raise queries 
about management and performance. Alberta in Canada, North Dakota and Texas 
in the United States, and Norway have funds with strong independent oversight 
mechanisms.836 SWFs must be accountable politically to a parliament or congress, 
accountable legally to the judiciary, and accountable operationally to the auditor 
general or some other supervisory body that is both formal and independent. There 
should also be sufficient information available for civil society, journalists, and 
international organizations like the IMF so that they can also serve as effective 
oversight mechanisms.837


144   |   Sovereign Wealth Funds: Corruption and Other Governance Risks
Revisiting and Reframing International Standards on SWFs
Chapters 1 and 2 of this compilation set out the international standards, norms, and 
guidance documents that govern the operation of SWFs. These introductory chapters, and 
the case studies that follow, show that SWFs globally operate in an environment of soft 
norms. Notably, the International Forum of Sovereign Wealth Funds (IFSWF), which is the 
main organizing body for SWFs, and its associated Santiago Principles, which include SWF 
best practices formalized in 2008, were created to “address the issues surrounding excess 
reserve accumulation, as well as appease national security concerns emanating from foreign 
government-affiliated investments.”838 This language from the IFSWF’s website is rather 
telling and demonstrates the dual intent behind these principles: to ensure the appropriate 
governance of SWFs and provide peace of mind to countries where SWFs invest. However, 
since their creation, the twenty-four Santiago Principles have remained entirely voluntary 
and have not been reviewed or updated. The fact that they are voluntary and appear to have 
been created to “appease” rather than provide a “robust standard” helps make the case that 
SWFs are ill-equipped to address and enforce the governance challenges such funds and 
the security concerns of the countries where they invest. This inability to address security 
concerns is evident, given that in the fifteen years since the principles came into being, 
countries have had to expand the laws and restrictions governing foreign investment. For 
example, in 2005, less than five countries had investment screening procedures.839 By 2022, 
this number had shot up to over thirty-five countries with investment screening procedures 
(see figure 3 ).840 
While the Santiago Principles have long provided clear context for studying and regulating 
SWFs’ impact, nowhere in the drafting language is there an explicit reference to the 
potential for abuse. Because the principles have remained static, they do not account for 
recent changes in how SWFs are used and operated. For instance, principle 14 (more 
technically referred to as GAPP 14), which supports the creation of adequate internal 
policies for SWFs when dealing with third parties, does not account for a mechanism to deal 
with external governance considerations when an SWF directly interacts with the global 
financial system.841 Similarly, GAPP 18.2 states that “the investment policy should address 
the extent to which internal and/or external investment managers are used, the range of their 
activities and authority, and the process by which they are selected, and their performance 
monitored.”842 Yet this once again ignores the risks presented from the investments themselves. 
When the language was first drafted, SWFs were comprised of primarily passive investors 
relying on external fund managers.843 However, since then, the mandates, objectives, 
investment strategies, and types of SWF funding models have drastically evolved. Today’s 
SWFs are active direct investors that often coinvest with private sector entities (see chapter 
1). Yet the Santiago Principles do not advocate that SWFs disclose or assess their investments 
on economic and financial grounds.844 As noted by one assessment, the Santiago Principles 
are inward-looking and appear ill-equipped to address the governance risks of SWFs that 
operate as external actors.845 


Carnegie Endowment for International Peace   |   145
Critics of the Santiago Principles also note that there is no explicit acknowledgment of 
the significant increase in “novel forms of partnership and collaboration” in “sovereign-
private arrangements.”846 Explicitly recognizing this increase and enhancing the disclosure 
requirements for these arrangements would alleviate concerns around both national security 
and corruption risks.847 For instance, the more recent expansion of powers under the U.S. 
CFIUS review process was done to address Chinese and Russian investments in sensitive 
U.S. technology spaces masked as investments through U.S. private investment funds (see 
chapter 1).848 
Additionally, there is no requirement to publish audited statements or send them to an 
international organization that can act as an independent third-party verifier of information. 
Other international mechanisms such as the Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative—
which sets best practices for oil, gas, and mining governance—include this requirement. 
Apart from the gaps within the Santiago Principles, another concern is the legitimacy 
SWFs receive from being part of the IFSWF. Members are only required to carry out self-
assessments. For instance, Azerbaijan’s SOFAZ assesses itself as meeting the requirements 
under all relevant Santiago Principles, but there are real concerns about how projects 
through the fund are approved and how payments are made through the SOFAZ. 
Similarly, in its 2016 self-assessment, Angola’s Fundo Soberano de Angola (see chapter 4) 
stated that it was meeting most governance standards, but soon after, an exposé was published 
on the fund’s mismanagement and the conflicts of interest surrounding its fund manager. 
IFSWF members in theory support the idea of transparency, as it can enhance domestic 
legitimacy of the SWF, improve communication with relevant stakeholders, and have 
an overall positive impact on the SWF’s reputation.849 However, as laid out in chapter 2, 
“voluntary participants’ compliance with the Santiago Principles is still alarmingly low.” 
The IFSWF also lacks any legal authority to enforce its standards, and unlike with money 
laundering and tax evasion, international organizations and civil society have shied away 
from naming and shaming as a way of ensuring compliance. 
Self-regulation is ineffective because it is simply not in the interest of SWFs to critically 
examine their frameworks. Also, because the language of the Santiago Principles is broad, 
there is no effective way to determine whether the required disclosures meet a necessary 
standard to mitigate the risks of corruption and money laundering and foster good 
governance. A comparable example would be if countries were allowed to determine whether 
they adequately meet the international AML/CFT requirements of the Financial Action 
Task Force’s forty recommendations but without the assistance of guiding criteria on what 
constituted an effective beneficial ownership law or customer due diligence practice. This 
overhaul of international standards must involve greater dialogue and guidance from both 
the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) and IMF. Current 
language from the OECD entirely focuses on the national security prism; and the IMF, 
unlike its work on state-owned enterprises, couches best practices in terms of increasing 
legitimacy and does not outrightly refer to the problem of corruption.


146   |   Sovereign Wealth Funds: Corruption and Other Governance Risks
Therefore, SWF reform will not trickle down to the country level unless there are 
measurable international standards against which SWFs are compared. With this in mind, 
the following policy recommendations may help address the gaps. 
•	
The Santiago Principles should be revised to reflect current SWF practices and risks. 
Any such revision effort should seek input from a wide variety of stakeholders and 
specifically include civil society organizations. 
•	
The Santiago Principles should be revised to serve as both guiding principles and 
effective standards against which international organizations like the IMF can 
conduct assessments. There is precedent for this: countries allow their AML/CFT 
standards to be assessed by the Financial Action Task Force or its regional bodies, 
and the assessment is not perceived as impinging on states’ sovereignty.
•	
The OECD should move its focus beyond the narrow prism of security threats to 
investment jurisdictions and publish a comprehensive international best practices 
paper that addresses both the internal and external aspects of SWF corruption risk.
•	
SWFs that are at high risk for corruption and money laundering should be 
red-flagged.850
The intention of this compilation is not to undermine the tremendous value that a well-
governed SWF can provide for a country and its citizens for generations. Valuable lessons 
abound from the experiences of countries that have successfully transitioned from natural 
resource dependent economies to diversified economies. At the same time, this compilation 
and the reforms suggested serve to highlight the need for more critical study around 
the corruption, money laundering, and associated governance risks of SWFs. Failure to 
understand these risks will lead to SWFs failing to deliver on their promises of providing 
economic security and generational wealth for citizens.


147
 
About the Authors
Jodi Vittori is Professor of Practice and co-chair of the Global Politics and Security program 
at Georgetown University’s Walsh School of Foreign Service and a non-resident scholar with 
the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace.
Lakshmi Kumar is the former policy director at Global Financial Integrity and is an adjunct 
professor at Georgetown University. She has also been a senior fellow at George Mason 
University as well as a lawyer and policy professional in India, working with governments 
and regulatory agencies across South Asia, East Africa, and Eurasia to investigate money 
laundering and terrorist financing risks to their financial systems.
David Szakonyi is associate professor of political science at George Washington University 
and co-founder of the Anti-Corruption Data Collective. His academic research focuses on 
corruption, clientelism, and political economy in Russia, Western Europe, and the United 
States. His most recent book, Politics for Profit: Business, Elections, and Policymaking in Russia 
(Cambridge University Press, Cambridge Studies in Comparative Politics, 2020), examines 
why businesspeople run for political office and how their firms benefit. He has also led 
numerous investigations into political corruption and opacity in the private equity and real 
estate industries published in the Washington Post, Foreign Policy, the Daily Beast, and the 
Miami Herald, among other outlets. He received his PhD in political science from Columbia 
University and his BA from the University of Virginia.
Clare Rewcastle Brown is a British journalist and writer for the anti-corruption website 
Sarawak Report, which since 2015 has gained wide recognition for its original and early 
exposure of the 1Malaysia Development Berhad scandal.  
Caleb Diamond recently graduated from Georgetown University with an M.S. in foreign 
service. His professional experience includes stints at the United States Institute of Peace, 
Peacekeeping and Stability Operations Institute, United Nations Department of Peace 
Operations, and Center for Strategic and International Studies.


148   |   Sovereign Wealth Funds: Corruption and Other Governance Risks
Kristian Coates Ulrichsen is the fellow for the Middle East at Rice University’s Baker 
Institute for Public Policy. Prior to joining the Baker Institute in 2013, Coates Ulrichsen 
worked at the London School of Economics and also held an affiliation with the Royal 
Institute of International Affairs (Chatham House). Coates Ulrichsen is the author of six 
books about the political economy and international relations of the Gulf States, of which 
the most recent is Centers of Power in the Arab Gulf States (Hurst & Co., 2023).
Aykan Erdemir was the senior director of the Turkey program at the Foundation for 
Defense of Democracies when this chapter was researched and written. Erdemir was a law-
maker in the Turkish Parliament between 2011 and 2015 and served in the EU-Turkey Joint 
Parliamentary Committee, EU Harmonization Committee, and the Ad Hoc Parliamentary 
Committee on the IT Sector and the Internet.
Nate Sibley is a research fellow at Hudson Institute’s Kleptocracy Initiative, where he 
conducts policy research on countering authoritarian corruption. He works closely with the 
U.S. government and has been published in the Wall Street Journal, Washington Post, and 
Foreign Policy.
Acknowledgments
A special thank you to Michael Blaesing for his extraordinary assistance in researching the 
Sputnik V case in chapter 7.


149
﻿Appendices
Appendix A: Sovereign Wealth Fund Definitions
As noted in chapter 1, this compilation uses the Santiago Principles’ definition of SWFs 
but also examines other funds that are in practice regularly treated as SWFs. Other 
organizations use more expansive definitions of SWFs. The Sovereign Wealth Fund Institute, 
a globally recognized subscription-based research platform, states that SWFs include a wide 
variety of state-owned investment vehicles, and it makes no restrictions based on where 
the investment is deployed. This definition is in line with the one used by the International 
Forum of Sovereign Wealth Funds (IFSWF), a leading voluntary organization of SWFs that 
aims to help SWFs implement the Santiago Principles.851 Similarly, the United States and 
the European Union (EU), respectively, define SWFs as “government investment funds, 
funded by foreign currency reserves but managed separately from official currency reserves” 
and as “state-owned investment vehicles, which manage a diversified portfolio of domestic 
and international financial assets, and generally accept a high level of risk in search of higher 
returns.”852 Table 1 lists the most common SWF definitions.


Table 1. Sovereign Wealth Fund Definitions
No
Institution
Definition
1
Santiago  
Principles853
“SWFs are defined as special purpose investment funds or 
arrangements, owned by the general government. Created by the 
general government for macroeconomic purposes, SWFs hold, 
manage, or administer assets to achieve financial objectives, and 
employ a set of investment strategies which include investing in 
foreign financial assets. The SWFs are commonly established out of 
balance-of-payments surpluses, official foreign currency operations, 
the proceeds of privatizations, fiscal surpluses, and/or receipts 
resulting from commodity exports.”
“Three key elements define an SWF: 
1.	
Ownership: SWFs are owned by the general government, which 
includes both central government and subnational governments.
2.	
Investments: The investment strategies include investments in 
foreign financial assets, so the definition excludes those funds that 
solely invest in domestic assets.
3.	
Purposes and Objectives: Established by the general government 
for macroeconomic purposes, SWFs are created to invest 
government funds to achieve financial objectives, and (may) have 
liabilities that are only broadly defined, thus allowing SWFs to 
employ a wide range of investment strategies with a medium- to 
long-term timescale.”
2
U.S.  
Treasury854
SWF funds are government investment funds, funded by foreign 
currency reserves but managed separately from official currency 
reserves.
3
IE University 
Spain855
Government-owned investment funds that pursue a long-term 
investment strategy and have no obligation to pay pensions. The 
distinction between SWFs and pension funds is a key element of the 
definition. SWFs, by definition, are free from the characteristic liability 
of public pension funds: obligations to pensioners. SWF investment 
policies are clearly influenced by this lack of obligations to third 
parties. Unlike pension funds, SWFs are not responsible for any regular 
payments and thus have no periodic liquidity needs. In addition, 
the focus on long-term investment distinguishes SWFs from private 
equity, which has defined investment horizons, and from hedge funds, 
which are often opportunistic.
4
Government 
of Singapore 
Investment 
Corporation 
(GIC),  
Singapore856
“The essence of a SWF is that it is state-owned and 
mandated to invest the public funds under its charge.”


Carnegie Endowment for International Peace   |   151
5
Sovereign 
Wealth Fund 
Institute857
“A Sovereign Wealth Fund (SWF) is a state-owned investment fund or 
entity that is commonly established from:
•	
Balance of payments surpluses
•	
Official foreign currency operations
•	
The proceeds of privatizations, 
•	
Governmental transfer payments, 
•	
Fiscal surpluses 
•	
And/or receipts resulting from resource exports. 
The definition of sovereign wealth fund excludes, among other things: 
•	
Foreign currency reserve assets held by monetary authorities for 
the traditional balance of payments or monetary policy purposes, 
•	
State-owned enterprises (SOEs) in the traditional sense
•	
Government-employee pension funds (funded by employee/
employer contributions)
•	
Or assets managed for the benefit of individuals.”
6
International 
Monetary 
Fund858
“SWFs are government investment funds established for various 
macroeconomic purposes. They are commonly funded by the transfer 
of foreign exchange assets that are invested long term, overseas.”
7
European 
Union859
“Sovereign Wealth Funds (SWFs) are state-owned investment 
vehicles, which manage a diversified portfolio of domestic and 
international financial assets, and generally accept a high level of risk 
in search of higher returns.”
Appendix B: Defining Corruption
There is no universal definition of corruption, and what constitutes corruption is 
controversial.860  For the purposes of this compilation, the authors use the definition proffered by 
Transparency International, which is “the abuse of entrusted power for private gain.”861  
Many organizations, including the World Bank, Organisation for Economic Co-operation 
and Development, the International Monetary Fund (IMF), and Basel Institute on 
Governance use variations of this definition.  The World Bank and IMF, for example, define 
corruption as “the abuse of public office for private gain,”862 while the Basel Institute on 
Governance uses the very similar “abuse of public office for personal gain.”863
No
Institution
Definition


152   |   Sovereign Wealth Funds: Corruption and Other Governance Risks
The Transparency International definition has been chosen by the compilation’s editors 
because of the role of “entrusted power” in corruption and other governance lapses 
associated with sovereign wealth funds. Some of the issues highlighted in this compilation 
that raise red flags for potential corruption were not undertaken explicitly by those in an 
official capacity as part of a public office but instead were private enterprises and individuals 
that had been designated or delegated various authorities by governments. For instance, in 
some cases, private investment funds undertook investments of sovereign wealth resources 
on behalf of governments that could be perceived as a potential conflict of interest, such 
as investing funds in projects owned by those running the private investment fund. While 
these private firms are not “public offices,” they are acting with “entrusted power” on behalf 
of governments, hence the applicability of the Transparency International definition.
Transparency International is the oldest global anti-corruption civil society organization, 
and its Corruption Perceptions Index is considered the gold standard of corruption-
associated indices (though it has gaps in methodology). Transparency International’s 
corruption definition is thus considered an authoritative one by good governance scholars, 
civil society, and governments.


153
﻿Notes
  
Summary
1 
“U.S. Seeks to Recover $1 Billion in Largest Kleptocracy Case to Date,” press release, Federal 
Bureau of Investigation, accessed February 6, 2022, https://www.fbi.gov/news/stories/
us-seeks-to-recover-1-billion-in-largest-kleptocracy-case-to-date.
2 
“United States Seeks to Recover More Than $1 Billion Obtained From Corruption Involving Malaysian 
Sovereign Wealth Fund” (The United States Department of Justice, July 20, 2016), https://www.justice.gov/
opa/pr/united-states-seeks-recover-more-1-billion-obtained-corruption-involving-malaysian-sovereign.
3 
“United States Seeks to Recover More Than $1 Billion Obtained from Corruption Involving Malaysian 
Sovereign Wealth Fund.”
4 
“Treasury Prohibits Transactions With Central Bank of Russia and Imposes Sanctions on Key Sources of 
Russia’s Wealth,” press release, U.S. Department of the Treasury, February 28, 2022, https://home.treasury.
gov/news/press-releases/jy0612. 
5 
Mustafa Sonmez, “Under Financial Strains, Turkey Designs ‘Parallel Budget’,” Al-Monitor, November 10, 
2016, https://www.al-monitor.com/originals/2016/11/turkey-financial-strains-designs-parallel-budget.
html. 
6 
Wendy Wu, “China’s Financial Giants Hammered in Discipline Review,” South China Morning 
Post, February 5, 2016, https://www.scmp.com/news/china/policies-politics/article/1909938/
chinas-financial-giants-hammered-corruption-review.
7 
Anna Gelpern, Sebastian Horn, Scott Morris, Brad Parks, and Christoph Trebesch, “How China Lends: 
A Rare Look Into 100 Debt Contracts with Foreign Governments,” Peterson Institute for International 
Economics, May 2021, 5, https://www.piie.com/sites/default/files/documents/wp21-7.pdf.
8 
Luca Ranieri, “The Malta Connection: A Corrupting Island in a ‘Corrupting Sea’?,” The European Review of 
Organized Crime 5, no. 1 (2019): 10–35; 1.
9 
Ranieri, “The Malta Connection,” 2.
10	 Christopher Giles, “Malta’s ‘Golden Passports’: Why Do the Super-Rich Want Them?,” BBC News, 
December 4, 2019, https://www.bbc.com/news/world-europe-50633820. 
11 Adam D. Dixon and Imogen T. Liu, “Santiago Principles 2.0: Advancing the Agenda,” International 
Forum of Sovereign Wealth Funds, https://archive.ifswfreview.org/2018/our-partners/
santiago-principles-20-advancing-agenda.


154   |   Sovereign Wealth Funds: Corruption and Other Governance Risks
12 However, this process should ensure that developing country SWFs are not unfairly targeted, as this has 
potential consequences for de-risking. There has been criticism around global listing processes. For more 
information, see “When Banks Leave: The Impacts of De-Risking on the Caribbean and Strategies for 
Ensuring Financial Access,” Statement of The Honorable Mia Amor Mottley, Prime Minister of Barbados, 
Minister of Finance, Economic Affairs and Investment and Minister of National Security and Civil Service 
at the Hearing of the United States Representatives Committee on Financial Services, September 14, 2022, 
https://democrats-financialservices.house.gov/uploadedfiles/hmtg-117-ba00-wstate-mottleym-20220914.pdf.
Chapter 1﻿
13 Udaibir S. Das, Adnan Mazarei, and Han van der Hoorn (eds.), “Economics of Sovereign 
Wealth Funds: Issues for Policymakers,” International Monetary Fund, 2010, https://www.imf.org/external/
pubs/nft/books/2010/swfext.pdf. 
14	 The concern was that SWFs were becoming security threats by looking to advance their home country’s po-
litical goals rather than seeking to maximize their profits. See inter alia Mark A. Clodfelter and Francesca M. 
S. Guerrero, “National Security and Foreign Government Ownership Restrictions on Foreign Investment: 
Predictability for Investors at the National Level,” in Sovereign Investment: Concerns and Policy Reactions, 
eds. Karl P
. Sauvant, Lisa E. Sachs, and Wouter P
.F. Schmit Jongbloed (New York: Oxford University Press, 
2012); Alan P
. Larson, David N. Fagan, Alexander A. Berengaut, and Mark E. Plotkin, “Lessons From 
CFIUS for National Security Reviews of Foreign Investment,” in Sovereign Investment: Concerns and Policy 
Reactions, eds. Karl P
. Sauvant, Lisa E. Sachs, and Wouter P
.F. Schmit Jongbloed (Oxford: Oxford University 
Press, 2012); Fabio Bassan, The Law of Sovereign Wealth Funds (Cheltenham, UK, and Northampton, MA: 
Edward Elgar Publishing, 2011); and Angela Cummine, Citizens’ Wealth: Why (and How) Sovereign Wealth 
Funds Should Be Managed by the People for the People (New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 2016), 3–5. 
Interestingly, earlier incidences where national security concerns were raised often resulted from state-owned 
enterprise investments rather than SWF investments (for example, the Dubai Ports controversy).
15  Simon Johnson, “The Rise of Sovereign Wealth Funds,” International Monetary Fund, September 2007, 
https://www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/fandd/2007/09/pdf/straight.pdf.
16 “Sovereign Wealth Funds in Motion,” Preqin, May 26, 2021, 9, https://www.preqin.com/insights/research/
reports/sovereign-wealth-funds-in-motion; and Claire Milhench, “Global Sovereign Fund Assets Jump 
to $7.45 Trillion: Preqin,” Reuters, April 12, 2018,https://www.reuters.com/article/us-global-swf-assets/
global-sovereign-fund-assets-jump-to-7-45-trillion-preqin-idUSKBN1HJ2DG.
17 Prequin and IFSWF self-assesment reports accessed by the author.
18 “Sovereign Wealth Funds: Publically Available Data on Sizes and Investments for Some Funds Are Limited,” 
United States Government Accountability Office, October 6, 2008, 44, https://www.gao.gov/products/gao-
08-946. It notes that “[i]n 2007 and early 2008, SWFs, in conjunction with other investors, supplied almost 
$43 billion of capital to major financial firms in the United States. Citigroup was the major recipient of 
capital, receiving $20 billion in late 2007 and early 2008. The other recipients were Merrill Lynch, Morgan 
Stanley, the Blackstone Group, and the Carlyle Group.” 
19 Thomas A. Hemphill, “Sovereign Wealth Funds: National Security Risks in a Global Free Trade 
Environment,” Thunderbird International Business Review 51, no. 6 (2009): 551–566, https://deepblue.lib.
umich.edu/bitstream/handle/2027.42/64327/20299_ftp.pdf?sequence=1.
20 “Explainer: Malaysia’s Ex-PM Najib and the Multi-billion Dollar 1MDB 
Scandal,” Reuters, August 23, 2022, https://www.reuters.com/world/asia-pacific/
malaysias-ex-pm-najib-multi-billion-dollar-1mdb-scandal-2022-08-23. 
21 Long before the KIA was established, individual U.S. states had set up precursors to today’s SWFs. Texas set 
up the Texas Permanent School Fund in 1854; see Texas Education Agency, “Texas Permanent School Fund,” 
https://tea.texas.gov/Finance_and_Grants/Texas_Permanent_School_Fund.
22	 Andrew Rozanov, “Who Holds the Wealth of Nations?,” Central Banking Journal 15, no.4 (2005): 52–57. 
23	 Rozanov, “Who Holds the Wealth of Nations?”


Carnegie Endowment for International Peace   |   155
24 Cummine, Citizens’ Wealth, 39–43; and see appendix 2 for a discussion on the lack of a standard definition 
of the term “SWF.”
25 “Sovereign Wealth Funds: Generally Accepted Principles and Practices—‘Santiago Principles’,” International 
Working Group of SWFs, October 2008, 3, https://www.ifswf.org/sites/default/files/santiagoprinci-
ples_0_0.pdf.
26 “Sovereign Wealth Funds in 2021: Changes and Challenges Accelerated by the Covid-19 Pandemic,” IE 
University Center for the Governance of Change, 2021, 26–27, https://docs.ie.edu/cgc/SWF%202021%20
IE%20SWR%20CGC%20-%20ICEX-Invest%20in%20Spain.pdf.
27 “Sovereign Wealth Funds in 2021,” IE University Center for the Governance of Change.
28	 “State Oil Fund of the Republic of Azerbaijan,” https://www.oilfund.az/en/report-and-statistics/
recent-figures. 
29	 “Our Work in Azerbaijan,” Transparency International, https://www.transparency.org/en/countries/azerbai�
-
jan; and “Rule of Law—Country Rankings,” The Global Economy.com, https://www.theglobaleconomy.
com/rankings/wb_ruleoflaw.
30 “Fund for Future Generations: Sovereign Wealth Fund in Equatorial Guinea, Africa,” Sovereign Wealth 
Fund Institute, https://www.swfinstitute.org/profile/598cdaa50124e9fd2d05b002. 
31	 “Our Work in Equatorial Guinea,” Transparency International, https://www.transparency.org/en/countries/
equatorial-guinea; and “Rule of Law—Country Rankings,” The Global Economy.com. 
32 Countries with lower rankings have stronger rule-of-law environments.
33	 Carson Ezell, “Middle Eastern SWFs,” Harvard College Economics Review, October 23, 2021, https://
www.economicsreview.org/post/middle-eastern-swfs. 
34	 “Investor Profile: RERF (Kiribati),” SWF Academy, https://globalswf.com/fund/RERF.
35	 “Sovereign Investors 2020: A Growing Force,” PwC, 2020, 5, https://www.pwc.com/gx/en/sover-
eign-wealth-investment-funds/publications/assets/sovereign-investors-2020.pdf. 
36 “Frequently Asked Questions,” GIC, https://www.gic.com.sg/who-we-are/faqs; and “Santiago Principles 
Self-Assessment,” IFWSF, https://www.ifswf.org/assessment/bpi-france.  
37 “Oil Revenues Stabilization Fund of Mexico: Overview,” PitchBook, https://pitchbook.com/profiles/
limited-partner/52308-28.
38 “Mubadala Capital,” https://www.mubadala.com/en/what-we-do/mubadala-capital; and 
“Real Estate & Infrastructure Investments,” https://www.mubadala.com/en/what-we-do/
real-estate-infrastructure-investments.    
39 “Sovereign Investors 2020: A Growing Force,” PwC, 2020, 11, https://www.pwc.com/gx/en/sover-
eign-wealth-investment-funds/publications/assets/sovereign-investors-2020.pdf.
40	 “About PIF,” https://www.pif.gov.sa:443/en/Pages/AboutPIF.aspx.
41 David D. Kirkpatrick and Kate Kelly, “Before Giving Billions to Jared Kushner, Saudi Investment Fund Had 
Big Doubts,” New York Times, April 10, 2022, https://www.nytimes.com/2022/04/10/us/jared-kushner-sau-
di-investment-fund.html?referringSource=articleShare. 
42 “Sovereign Wealth Funds Turning to Private Capital: Are They Competing or Playing alongside GPs?,” 
IQEQ, June 30, 2021, https://iqeq.com/insights/sovereign-wealth-funds-turning-private-capital-are-they-
competing-or-playing-alongside-gps.sovereign wealth funds (SWFs
43 “Sovereign Wealth Funds in Motion,” Preqin, 11.
44 “Qataris Buy Remaining 30 Pct of Paris St Germain,” Reuters, March 6, 2012, https://www.reuters.com/
article/france-psg-qatar/qataris-buy-remaining-30-pct-of-paris-st-germain-idUSL5E8E69CP20120306; 
and “Sovereign Wealth Funds Triple Their Investments to 450 in 2021, According to IE University and 
ICEX-Invest in Spain Report,” IE University, March 9, 2022, https://www.ie.edu/university/news-events/
news/sovereign-wealth-funds-triple-their-investments-to-450-in-2021-according-to-ie-university-and-icex-
invest-in-spain-report. Direct investment strategies benefit SWFs by giving them greater control over their 
assets and allowing them to bypass additional fee structures when investing through a private equity fund.


156   |   Sovereign Wealth Funds: Corruption and Other Governance Risks
45 In co-investing, an SWF invests alongside a partner such as another SWF, private equity fund, or 
venture capital fund pension fund. Co-investing helps the SWF reduce its risk exposure, while al-
lowing for more flexibility in portfolio construction. Neil Buckley, “Glencore-QIA Deal for Rosneft 
Stake Starts to Lose Its Lustre,” Financial Times, January 18, 2017, https://www.ft.com/content/
c735dc00-dccf-11e6-86ac-f253db7791c6.
46	 Tim Logan, “How Eight Fancy Boston Condos Figure Into a Fight Over the Saudi Throne,” 
Boston Globe, March 30, 2021, https://www.bostonglobe.com/2021/03/30/business/
how-eight-fancy-boston-condos-figure-into-fight-over-saudi-throne. 
47 Cory Bennett, “How China Acquires ‘the Crown Jewels’ of U.S. Technology,” Politico, May 22, 2018, 
https://www.politico.com/story/2018/05/22/china-us-tech-companies-cfius-572413; and Erica Hanichak, 
Lakshmi Kumar, and Gary Kalman, “Private Investments, Public Harm: How the Opacity of the Massive 
U.S. Private Investment Industry Fuels Corruption and Threatens National Security,” Transparency 
International, December 2021, 23, https://secureservercdn.net/166.62.106.54/34n.8bd.myftpupload.
com/wp-content/uploads/2021/12/Private-Investments-Public-Harm-How-the-Massive-and-Opaque-US-
Private-Equity-Industry-Fuels-Corruption-and-Threatens-National-Security.pdf?time=1664249759.  
48 Hanichak, Kumar, and Kalman, “Private Investments, Public Harm,” 23. 
49 Jack Farchy and Neil Hume, “Glencore and Qatar Take 19.5% Stake in Rosneft,” Financial Times, December 
10, 2016, https://www.ft.com/content/d3923b08-bf09-11e6-9bca-2b93a6856354.
50 One particularly interesting facet of the deal was that “Glencore’s actual equity stake in Rosneft was only 
about 0.5% and Qatar’s just under 5%.” See Farchy and Hume, “Glencore and Qatar Take 19.5% Stake in 
Rosneft.”.
51 Scott Patterson and James Marson, “Glencore, Qatar Sell Rosneft Stake to Chinese Firm 
in $9 Billion Deal,” Wall Street Journal, September 8, 2017, https://www.wsj.com/articles/
glencore-qatar-sell-14-stake-in-rosneft-to-chinese-energy-company-1504881233.
52 Stephen Blank, “Kremlin Ties Rosneft Closer to China,” Jamestown Foundation, November 8, 2017, 
https://jamestown.org/program/kremlin-ties-rosneft-closer-to-china.
53 Vneshtorgbank (VTB) is one of Russia’s largest state-owned banks. It is subject to a variety of sanctions, 
including full blocking sanctions by the U.S. Treasury Department in response to Russia’s 2022 invasion of 
Ukraine. See “U.S. Treasury Announces Unprecedented & Expansive Sanctions Against Russia, Imposing 
Swift and Severe Economic Costs,” U.S. Department of the Treasury, February 24, 2022, https://home.
treasury.gov/news/press-releases/jy0608.and in Show of Unity Against Invasion of a Sovereign State Top Ten 
Russian Financial Institutions Now Under U.S Restrictions; U.S. Ready to Impose Additional Major Costs 
WASHINGTON – The United States took significant and unprecedented action to respond to Russia’s 
further invasion of Ukraine by imposing severe economic costs that will have both immediate and long-
term effects on the Russian economy and financial system. The U.S. Department of the Treasury’s Office of 
Foreign Assets Control (OFAC 
54	 “About Us,” Norges Bank Investment Management, accessed June 28, 2023, https://www.nbim.no/en/
organisation/about-us. 
55	 David Pegg, “Angola Sovereign Wealth Fund’s Manager Used Its Cash for His Own 
Projects,” Guardian, November 7, 2017, https://www.theguardian.com/world/2017/nov/07/
angola-sovereign-wealth-fund-jean-claude-bastos-de-morais-paradise-papers. 
56 Michael Stothard and Jane Croft, “SocGen Agrees €963m Settlement With Libyan Investment Authority,” 
Financial Times, May 4, 2017, https://www.ft.com/content/7dc88450-3094-11e7-9555-23ef563ecf9a.
57 “Sovereign Wealth Funds 2021,” IE University Center for the Governance of Change, 24–25.
58 “IFSWF Members’ Experiences in the Application of the Santiago Principles,” Report Prepared by IFSWF 
Sub-Committee 1 and the Secretariat in Collaboration With the Members of the IFSWF, IFSWF, July 7, 
2011, 40, https://www.ifswf.org/sites/default/files/Publications/stp070711_0.pdf. 
59 “Santiago Principles,” International Forum of Sovereign Wealth Funds.
60 “OECD Guidance on Sovereign Wealth Funds,” Organisation of Economic Co-operation and Development 
(OECD), accessed July 29, 2019, https://www.oecd.org/daf/inv/investment-policy/oecdguidanceonsover-
eignwealthfunds.htm.


Carnegie Endowment for International Peace   |   157
61 “OECD Guidance on Sovereign Wealth Funds,” OECD. 
62 “OECD Guidance on Sovereign Wealth Funds,” OECD.
63 “State-Owned Enterprises and Corruption: What Are the Risks and What Can Be Done?,” OECD, August 
27, 2018, http://www.oecd.org/fr/corruption/state-owned-enterprises-and-corruption-9789264303058-en.
htm; “Anti-Corruption and Integrity in State-Owned Enterprises,” OECD, https://www.oecd.org/corrup-
tion/anti-corruption-integrity-guidelines-for-soes.htm; and Rajni Bajpai and Bernard C. Myyers, “Chapter 
3: State-Owned Enterprises,” in “Enhancing Government Effectiveness and Transparency: The Fight Against 
Corruption,” World Bank, September 2020, 94–121, https://documents.worldbank.org/en/publication/
documents-reports/documentdetail/235541600116631094/enhancing-government-effectiveness-and-trans-
parency-the-fight-against-corruption?cid=gov_tt_gov_en_ext. 
64 “Sovereign Wealth Funds,” United States Government Accountability Office; and “Assessing the Economic 
and National Security Implications of Sovereign Wealth Funds and Foreign Acquisition,” Committee on 
Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs, U.S. Senate Hearing, November 14, 2007, https://www.govinfo.gov/
content/pkg/CHRG-110shrg50364/html/CHRG-110shrg50364.htm. 
65 “Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative,” EITI, https://eiti.org; and “Open Contracting Partnership,” 
Open Contracting Partnership, https://www.open-contracting.org.
66 “About Us,” International Forum of Sovereign Wealth Funds, https://www.ifswf.org/about-us.
67	 Pjotr Sauer, Jake Cordell, and Felix Light, “A Royal Mark Up: How an Emirati Sheikh Resells Millions of 
Russian Vaccines to the Developing World,” Moscow Times, July 10, 2021, https://www.themoscowtimes.
com/2021/07/09/a-royal-mark-up-how-an-emirati-sheikh-resells-millions-of-russian-vaccines-to-the-
developing-world-a74461; and Rolf J. Wideroe and Markus Tobiassen, “Sputnik for Sale,” VG Nett, June 3, 
2021, https://www.vg.no/spesial/2021/sputnik/index-en.html.
Chapter 2
68 William Megginson, Asif Malik, and Xin Yue Zhou, “Sovereign Wealth Funds in the Post-pandemic Era,” 
Journal of International Business Policy 6 (April 2023): 1–23, https://doi.org/10.1057/s42214-023-00155-2. 
69 Veljko Fotak, Bernardo Bortolotti, William Megginson, and William Miracky, “The Financial Impact of 
Sovereign Wealth Fund Investments in Listed Companies,” unpublished working paper, University of 
Oklahoma and Università di Torino (2008).
70 Richard A. Epstein and Amanda M. Rose, “The Regulation of Sovereign Wealth Funds: The Virtues of 
Going Slow,” University of Chicago Law Review, March 3, 2009, 111–34.
71 Cyril Monnet and Erwan Quintin, “Rational Opacity,” Review of Financial Studies 30, no. 12 (2017): 
4317–4348, https://doi.org/10.1093/rfs/hhx034. 
72 Shai Bernstein, Josh Lerner, and Antoinette Schoar, “The Investment Strategies of Sovereign Wealth Funds,” 
Journal of Economic Perspectives 27, no. 2 (2013): 227, https://doi.org/10.1257/jep.27.2.219.
73 William L. Megginson, Diego Lopez, and Asif I. Malik, “The Rise of State-Owned Investors: Sovereign 
Wealth Funds and Public Pension Funds,” Annual Review of Financial Economics 13, no. 1 (2021): 
247–270, https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-financial-110420-090352. 
74 “The Sovereign Fund of Egypt,” International Forum of Sovereign Wealth Funds, n.d., https://www.ifswf.
org/members/sovereign-fund-egypt. 
75 Edwin M. Truman, “Sovereign Wealth Fund Transparency and Accountability Explored,” Wake Forest Law 
Review 52 (2017): 997.
76 Greg Golding, “Australia’s Experience with Foreign Direct Investment by State Controlled Entities: A Move 
Towards Xenophobia or Greater Openness,” Seattle University Law Review 37, no. 2 (2014): 533.
77 Enrico Ginevra and Chiara Presciani, “Sovereign Wealth Fund Transparency and the European Rules on 
Institutional Investor Disclosure,” Wake Forest Law Review 52, no. 4 (2017): 815–835.
78 Joe Marsh, “Why Norway’s $1.3trn Wealth Fund Prizes Transparency So Highly,” Capital 


158   |   Sovereign Wealth Funds: Corruption and Other Governance Risks
Monitor (blog), June 22, 2021, https://capitalmonitor.ai/institution/asset-owners/
why-norways-1-3trn-wealth-fund-prizes-transparency-so-highly. 
79 Sven Behrendt, “Sovereign Wealth Funds in Nondemocratic Countries: Financing Entrenchment or 
Change?,” Journal of International Affairs 65, no. 1 (2011): 65–78.
80 Bernstein, Lerner, and Schoar, “The Investment Strategies of Sovereign Wealth Funds,” 234.
81 Truman, “Sovereign Wealth Fund Transparency and Accountability Explored.”
82 Di Wang and Quan Li, “Democracy, Veto Player, and Institutionalization of Sovereign Wealth Funds,” 
International Interactions 42, no. 3 (2016): 390, https://doi.org/10.1080/03050629.2016.1130313.
83 Veljko Fotak, Xuechen Gao, and William L. Megginson, A Financial Force to Be Reckoned With? An 
Overview of Sovereign Wealth Funds (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2016).
84 Caroline E. Nowacki, Ashley Monk, and Bertrand Decoster, “Who Do Sovereign Wealth Funds Say They 
Are? Using Structural Topic Modeling to Delineate Variegated Capitalism in Their Official Reports,” 
Environment and Planning A: Economy and Space 53, no. 4 (2021): 828–857.
85 David Pegg, “Head of Angola’s Wealth Fund Fired after Paradise Papers Revelations,” 
Guardian, January 11, 2018, https://www.theguardian.com/news/2018/jan/11/
head-angola-wealth-fund-fired-paradise-papers-revelations. 
86 Chris Newlands, “Low Tax and High Fees Consume Future Fund,” Financial Times, July 11, 2015, https://
www.ft.com/content/dbf7f11e-2632-11e5-bd83-71cb60e8f08c. 
87 Fotak, Gao, and Megginson, A Financial Force to Be Reckoned With?
88 Victoria Barbary and Bernardo Bortolotti, “Sovereign Wealth Funds and Political Risk: New Challenges 
in the Regulation of Foreign Investment,” World Scientific Studies in International Economics 21 (2013): 
307–339, https://doi.org/10.1142/9789814390842_0009. 
89 Paul Calluzzo, G Nathan Dong, and David Godsell, “Sovereign Wealth Fund Investments and the US 
Political Process,” Journal of International Business Studies 48, no. 2 (2017): 222–243.
90 Victoria Clare Barbary and Bernardo Bortolotti, “Taming Leviathan: Foreign Investment, Political Risk 
and a Regulatory Framework for Sovereign Wealth Funds,” Social Science Research Network, July 1, 2011, 
https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=1878373. 
91 Kyle Hatton and Katharina Pistor, “Maximizing Autonomy in the Shadow of Great Powers: The Political 
Economy of Sovereign Wealth Funds,” Columbia Journal of Transnational Law 50 (2011): 1; Rawi 
Abdelal, “Sovereign Wealth in Abu Dhabi,” Geopolitics 14, no. 2 (2009): 317–327; Larissa Nawo et 
al., “Unofficial Sovereign Wealth Funds and Duration in Power in Africa,” United Nations University–
World Institute for Development Economics Research, September 17, 2019, https://doi.org/10.35188/
UNU-WIDER/2019/691-3. 
92 Behrendt, “Sovereign Wealth Funds in Nondemocratic Countries.”
93 Robert O’Harrow Jr and James V. Grimaldi, “Libyan Gold Rush Followed End to Sanctions,” Washington 
Post, May 25, 2011, https://www.washingtonpost.com/world/middle-east/libyan-gold-rush-followed-end-
to-sanctions/2011/05/25/AGGgbVBH_story.html. 
94 Behrendt, “Sovereign Wealth Funds in Nondemocratic Countries.”
95 Sarah Townsend, “Fifth of Libya’s Wealth Fund Untraced Since Gaddafi,” Arabian 
Business, July 29, 2015, https://www.arabianbusiness.com/politics-economics/
fifth-of-libya-s-wealth-fund-untraced-since-gaddafi-600913. 
96 Jill Treanor, “Société Générale to Pay £815m to Settle Libyan Lawsuit,” Guardian, May 5, 2017, https://
www.theguardian.com/business/2017/may/04/societe-generale-libyan-investment-authority. 
97 Tim Eaton, “Libya: Investing in the Wealth of a Nation,” Chatham House, February 24, 2021, https://
www.chathamhouse.org/2021/02/libya-investing-wealth-nation. 
98 Nawo et al., “Unofficial Sovereign Wealth Funds and Duration in Power in Africa.”
99 Randeep Ramesh, “1MDB: The inside Story of the World’s Biggest Financial 


Carnegie Endowment for International Peace   |   159
Scandal,” Guardian, July 28, 2016, https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/
jul/28/1mdb-inside-story-worlds-biggest-financial-scandal-malaysia. 
100 “Millions From Uzbek Wealth Fund Paid to President’s Relative, Investigation Shows,” Radio Free Europe/
Radio Liberty’s Uzbek Service, September 15, 2021, https://www.rferl.org/a/uzbekistan-mirziyoev-family-
enrichment/31461801.html. 
101 Jason Kotter and Ugur Lel, “Friends or Foes? Target Selection Decisions of Sovereign Wealth Funds and 
Their Consequences,” Journal of Financial Economics 101, no. 2 (2011): 360–381.
102 Bernardo Bortolotti, Veljko Fotak, and William L. Megginson, “The Sovereign Wealth Fund Discount: 
Evidence from Public Equity Investments,” Review of Financial Studies 28, no. 11 (2015): 2993–3035.
103 Abeer Abu Omar, “Biggest Gulf Wealth Funds Are Faulted for Lagging on Governance,” 
Bloomberg, July 4, 2021, https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2021-07-04/
biggest-gulf-wealth-funds-are-faulted-for-lagging-on-governance. 
Chapter 3
104 “U.S. Seeks to Recover $1 Billion in Largest Kleptocracy Case to Date,” Press Release, 
Federal Bureau of Investigation, July 20, 2016, https://www.fbi.gov/news/stories/
us-seeks-to-recover-1-billion-in-largest-kleptocracy-case-to-date.
105 “United States Seeks to Recover More Than $1 Billion Obtained From Corruption Involving Malaysian 
Sovereign Wealth Fund,” United States Department of Justice, July 20, 2016, https://www.justice.gov/opa/
pr/united-states-seeks-recover-more-1-billion-obtained-corruption-involving-malaysian-sovereign.
106 “Malaysia’s 1MDB State Fund Still $7.8 Billion in Debt—Government Report,” Reuters, November 6, 
2020, https://www.reuters.com/article/malaysia-politics-1mdb-idUSKBN27M0VQ.
107 “United States Seeks to Recover More Than $1 Billion Obtained from Corruption Involving Malaysian 
Sovereign Wealth Fund,” United States Department of Justice.
108 Agence France-Presse, “Malaysian Taskforce Investigates Allegations $700m Paid to PM 
Najib,” Guardian, July 6, 2015, https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jul/06/
malaysian-task-force-investigates-allegations-700m-paid-to-pm-najib.
109 “TIA Was Jho Low’s Idea and Najib’s ‘Baby’, Court Told,” Borneo Post Online, September 4, 2019, https://
www.theborneopost.com/2019/09/04/tia-was-jho-lows-idea-and-najibs-baby-court-told/.
110 Rozanna Latif, “Explainer: How Malaysia is seeking to recover billions of dollars missing 
from 1MDB,” Reuters, May 11, 2021, https://www.reuters.com/world/asia-pacific/
how-malaysia-is-seeking-recover-billions-dollars-missing-1mdb-2021-05-11/.
111 “I Fear They Want to Make Me the Fall Guy! Hamad Al Wazzan,” Sarawak Report, July 11, 2020, https://
www.sarawakreport.org/2020/07/i-fear-they-want-to-make-me-the-fall-guy-hamad-al-wazzan-exclusive-
interview/.
112 “Siapa Sebenarnya Low Hock Peng, Bapa Jho Low?,” Astro Awani, August 24, 2018, https://www.
astroawani.com/berita-malaysia/siapa-sebenarnya-low-hock-peng-bapa-jho-low-183829.
113 Hafidz Baharom, “Just Who Is Jho Low,” Focus Malaysia, August 24–30, 2013, https://politikus.
sinarproject.org/persons/low-taek-jho/257068179.pdf.
114 “Low Dispels Talk He Received RM500mil Airbase Job,” Star, July 30, 2010, https://www.thestar.com.my/
news/nation/2010/07/30/low-dispels-talk-he-received-rm500mil-airbase-job.


160   |   Sovereign Wealth Funds: Corruption and Other Governance Risks
115 “Investigative Report on 1MDB: Jho Low Uses Bearer Share Firms and Those With Sovereign Names to 
Mislead,” Edge Malaysia, April 10, 2017, http://www.theedgemarkets.com/article/investigative-report-
1mdb-jho-low-uses-bearer-share-firms-and-those-sovereign-names-mislead; “United States of America v. 
All Funds Held in Escrow by Clyde & Co. in the United Kingdom as Damages or Restitution in PetroSaudi 
V. PDVSA UNCITRAL Arbitration, No. CV 2:20-cv-8466,” United States District Court for the Central 
District of California, September 16, 2020, https://www.justice.gov/opa/press-release/file/1317321/
download. On page 71: “The practice of utilizing a bank account held by an entity with a name that 
mimics a well-known commercial enterprise is a technique commonly employed to lend the appearance of 
legitimacy to transactions that might otherwise be subject to additional scrutiny by the financial institutions 
involved, for example, because of the size of the transaction or because of the role of a politically-exposed 
person or entity in the transaction.”  
116 “Billion Ringgit Question for Boustead and UMNO’s Defence Ministers,” 
Sarawak Report, January 26, 2022, https://www.sarawakreport.org/2022/01/
billion-ringgit-question-for-boustead-and-umnos-defence-ministers/.
117 “Low Dispels Talk He Received RM500mil Airbase Job,” Star.
118 “More Leaks—How Business Flourished With Otaiba as Jho Low ‘Re-Branded’ From Party Boy to 
‘Philanthropist’......,” Sarawak Report, August 8, 2017, http://www.sarawakreport.org/2017/08/
more-leaks-how-business-flourished-with-otaiba-as-jho-low-re-branded-from-party-boy-to-philanthropist/.
119 Gurmeet Kaur and Cecilia Kok, “Early Business Dealings,” Star, November 1, 2014, https://www.
pressreader.com/malaysia/the-star-malaysia-starbiz/20141101/281784217367156.
120 “More Leaks—How Business Flourished With Otaiba as Jho Low ‘Re-Branded’ From Party Boy to 
‘Philanthropist’......”; and “Why Did Jho Low’s Company Good Star Pay Aabar’s Top Executive Khadem al-
Qubaisi USD$20.75 Million?,” Sarawak Report, March 20, 2015, http://www.sarawakreport.org/2015/03/
why-did-jho-lows-company-good-star-limited-pay-aabars-top-executive-khadem-al-qubaisi-usd20-75-
million/.
121 Bradley Hope and Tom Wright, “U.A.E.’s Ambassador to U.S. Linked to 
1MDB Scandal,” Wall Street Journal, June 30, 2017, https://www.wsj.com/
articles/u-a-e-s-ambassador-to-u-s-linked-to-1mdb-scandal-1498864605.
122 “Low Dispels Talk He Received RM500mil Airbase Job,” Star.
123 “Jho Low Made RM400 Million by Quick Flip of Iskandar Land Deal,” Edge Malaysia, April 3, 2015, 
http://www.theedgemarkets.com/article/jho-low-made-rm400-million-quick-flip-iskandar-land-deal.
124 Kaur and Kok, “Early Business Dealings.”
125 “‘Project Uganda’—Why Was a UBG Bank Executive Employed as 1MDB’s Investment Manager 
During PetroSaudi’s Loan and Buy Out Negotiations?,” Sarawak Report, March 3, 2015, http://www.
sarawakreport.org/2015/03/project-uganda-why-was-a-ubg-executive-employed-as-1mdbs-investment-
manager-during-petrosaudis-loan-and-buy-out-negotiations/.
126 “United States v. Ng Chong Hwa, No. 18-CR-00538,” United States District Court Eastern District of New 
York, April 8, 2022, https://www.justice.gov/criminal-fraud/fcpa/cases/ng-chong-hwa.
127 “Low Dispels Talk He Received RM500mil Airbase Job,” Star.
128 Ben Shane Lim, “Trouble at 1MDB From Day One,” Edge Malaysia, April 8, 2016, http://www.
theedgemarkets.com/article/trouble-1mdb-day-one.
129 “TIA Was Jho Low’s Idea and Najib’s ‘Baby’, Court Told,” Borneo Post Online.
130 “Jho Low Made Key Decisions in TIA Even before It Became 1MDB, US Court Told,” Free Malaysia Today, 
February 23, 2022, https://www.freemalaysiatoday.com/category/nation/2022/02/23/jho-low-made-key-
decisions-in-tia-even-before-it-became-1mdb-us-court-told/; and Exhibit A, “Fulton County Employees’ 
Retirement System v. Goldman Sachs Group, Inc., No. 1:19-cv-01562-VSB,” United States District Court 
Southern District of New York, filed November 13, 2020, https://www.saxenawhite.com/wp-content/
uploads/2020/11/Second-Amended-Complaint.pdf. 
131 Shane Lim, “Trouble at 1MDB From Day One.”


Carnegie Endowment for International Peace   |   161
132 “Malaysia Probes How Jho Low May Have Gained From Pre-1MDB Deal,” 
Straits Times, January 24, 2019, https://www.straitstimes.com/asia/se-asia/
malaysia-probes-how-jho-low-may-have-gained-from-pre-1mdb-deal.
133 “More Questions Over Goldman’s Former Asia Boss,” Sarawak Report, April 24, 2016, http://www.
sarawakreport.org/2016/04/more-questions-over-goldmans-former-asia-boss/. The Sarawak Report 
explains, “1MDB has a stringent risk management control function, with the Board of Directors holding 
ultimate accountability for the risk and related control environment and being responsible for approving 
and reviewing risk policies and methodologies. The Board of Directors is supported in this task by board 
delegated committees for reviewing and challenging risk information, which in turn are supported by a 
Risk Management Department, along with strategic business and support units. 1MDB also has stringent 
‘Chinese wall’ and whistle-blower policies in light of the sensitivity of its projects and investments.”
134 ““PROJECT UGANDA” - Why Was A UBG Bank Executive Employed As 1MDB’s Investment Manager 
During PetroSaudi’s Loan And Buy Out Negotiations?,” Sarawak Report, March 3, 2015, https://www.
sarawakreport.org/2015/03/project-uganda-why-was-a-ubg-executive-employed-as-1mdbs-investment-
manager-during-petrosaudis-loan-and-buy-out-negotiations/.
135 “What Bakke Salleh Told the Authorities,” Sarawak Report, October 8, 2020, https://www.sarawakreport.
org/2020/10/what-bakke-salleh-told-the-authorities-swiss-scoop-exclusive/.
136 “The Financial Imbroglio of Prime Minister Najib Razak, Where ‘Friends 
& Associates Rule,’” C4 Center (blog), May 17, 2015, https://c4center.org/
financial-imbroglio-prime-minister-najib-razak-where-friends-associates-rule-0/.
137 “Directors Rated PetroSaudi Project As Being Worth ‘Zero’!,” Sarawak Report, January 11, 2016, http://
www.sarawakreport.org/2016/01/tarek-rated-petrosaudi-project-as-being-worth-zero/.
138 “Malaysia, Saudi Arabia Form US$2.5b Joint Venture,” Star, September 30, 2009, https://www.thestar.com.
my/business/business-news/2009/09/30/malaysia-saudi-arabia-form-us25b-joint-venture.
139 “The PetroSaudi Files—Fact or ‘Fraud’?,” Sarawak Report, March 4, 2016, http://www.sarawakreport.
org/2016/03/the-petrosaudi-files-fact-or-fraud/.
140 “The PetroSaudi Files—Fact or ‘Fraud’?,” Sarawak Report.
141 “The PetroSaudi Files—Fact or ‘Fraud’?,” Sarawak Report.
142 “Malaysia Gets $1.5bln Saudi Investment,” Reuters, September 30, 2009, https://www.reuters.com/
article/malaysia-saudi-fund-idINKLA01042620090930; and “United States of America v. All Funds Held 
in Escrow by Clyde & Co. in the United Kingdom as Damages or Restitution in PetroSaudi V. PDVSA 
UNCITRAL Arbitration,” United States District Court for the Central District of California, 22.
143 White & Case, “JV Structure Steps Plan,” downloadable at https://www.sarawakreport.org/files/2015/06/
Web-version-POWER-POINT-2-Petro-Saudi-JV-Structure-Steps-Plan-3.ppt. 
144 Sharanjit Singh, “Ex-1MDB Board Member Says Najib Pushed for JV With PetroSaudi After Jho 
Low Handed Him Phone,” New Straits Times, April 1, 2022, https://www.nst.com.my/news/
crime-courts/2022/04/785187/ex-1mdb-board-member-says-najib-pushed-jv-petrosaudi-after-jho-low.
145 “United States of America v. All Funds Held in Escrow by Clyde & Co. in the United Kingdom as Damages 
or Restitution in PetroSaudi V. PDVSA UNCITRAL Arbitration,” United States District Court for the 
Central District of California, 23–32.
146 “Project Uganda,” Sarawak Report; “Were 1MDB Auditors “Complicit”? Queries DAP
,” Sarawak Report, 
March 5, 2015, https://sarawakreport.org/2015/03/were-1mdb-auditors-complicit-queries-dap; “Further 
USD$330 Million Went Straight to Jho Low’s Good Star Limited From 1MDB! New Exclusive,” Sarawak 
Report, April 25, 2015, https://sarawakreport.org/2015/04/further-usd330-million-went-straight-to-jho-
lows-good-star-from-1mdb-new-exclusive; and “Raking in the Profits from Malaysia!,” Sarawak Report, 
October 12, 2015, https://sarawakreport.org/2015/10/raking-in-the-profits-from-malaysia.
147 “PetroSaudi’s 1MDB-Financed Venezuelan Gamble and the Money It Didn’t Make,” Sarawak Report, 
January 15, 2017, http://www.sarawakreport.org/2017/01/petrosaudis-1mdb-financed-venezuelan-
adventure-and-the-money-it-didnt-make; and Harry Davies, “$340m in London law firm’s account 
suspected of 1MDB connection,” The Guardian, August 3, 2020, https://www.theguardian.com/
world/2020/aug/03/340m-in-london-law-firms-account-suspected-of-1mdb-connection.


162   |   Sovereign Wealth Funds: Corruption and Other Governance Risks
148 They were not explicitly named in the Swiss indictment, but the description of the roles and payouts of 
the unnamed indictees matches exactly those of Turki and Mahoney. See “Finally—Swiss Prosecutors 
Indict the PetroSaudi Boys!,” Sarawak Report, April 25, 2023, https://www.sarawakreport.org/2023/04/
swiss-indict-the-petrosaudi-boys/. 
149 “‘Project Uganda’—Why Was a UBG Bank Executive Employed as 1MDB’s Investment Manager During 
PetroSaudi’s Loan and Buy Out Negotiations?,” Sarawak Report.
150 “PetroSaudi Raises Stake in UBG to 89.8%,” Star, January 12, 2010, https://www.thestar.com.my/business/
business-news/2010/01/12/petrosaudi-raises-stake-in-ubg-to-898; and “Anwar Warns Najib’s RM15 
Bil 1MDB Could Sink Malaysia,” Malaysia Today, September 20, 2010, https://www.malaysia-today.
net/2010/09/20/anwar-warns-najibs-rm15-bil-1mdb-could-sink-malaysia/.
151 Brian Niemietz and Jennifer Gould, “Big-Spending Malaysian Is the Mystery Man of 
City Club Scene,” New York Post, November 8, 2009, https://nypost.com/2009/11/08/
big-spending-malaysian-is-the-mystery-man-of-city-club-scene/.
152 Carmela Chirinos, “Meet Jho Low, the Fugitive 1MDB Financier Who Paid to Party 
With Leonardo DiCaprio,” Fortune, March 7, 2022, https://fortune.com/2022/03/07/
jho-low-fugitive-1mdb-financier-biography/.
153 Tarani Palani, “Roger Ng Fraud Trial in New York: Jho Low Raised ‘Host of Red Flags’ in Goldman’s 
Compliance Checks in 2010,” Edge Malaysia, March 23, 2022, http://www.theedgemarkets.com/article/
roger-ng-fraud-trial-new-york-jho-low-raised-host-red-flags-goldmans-compliance-checks-2010.
154 Patricia Hurtado, “Senior Goldman Staff Knew About Jho Low, 1MDB, Leissner Says,” 
Bloomberg, February 16, 2022, https://www.bloomberg.com/press-releases/2022-02-16/
ex-goldman-banker-tim-leissner-to-take-stand-in-1mdb-case.
155 Patricia Hurtado and Greg Farrell, “Blankfein Meeting Was to Get Najib Kids Goldman Jobs, 1MDB 
Jury Told,” Bloomberg, February 22, 2022, https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2022-02-22/
goldman-ex-banker-leissner-reveals-code-names-from-1mdb-scandal.
156 “‘King Khadem’ and His Sovereign Wealth!,” Sarawak Report, September 26, 2015, http://www.
sarawakreport.org/2015/09/king-khadem-and-his-sovereign-wealth-in-depth-investigation/.
157 “More on the Massive US Investment Portfolio of Disgraced Ex-Falcon Bank Boss Khadem 
Al Qubaisi,” Sarawak Report, December 4, 2015, http://www.sarawakreport.org/2015/12/
more-on-the-massive-us-investment-portfolio-of-disgraced-ex-falcon-bank-boss-khadem-al-qubaisi/.
158 “The Real Wolves of Wall Street! The Boys From Aabar and Their Friends From Malaysia,” Sarawak 
Report, September 22, 2015, http://www.sarawakreport.org/2015/09/the-real-wolves-of-wall-street-the-
boys-from-aabar-and-their-friends-from-malaysia-exclusive-investigation/; and “Jho Low Denies 1MBD 
link, Frustrated London Hotel Buy,” MalayMail, May 5, 2014, https://www.malaymail.com/news/
malaysia/2014/05/05/jho-low-denies-1mbd-link-frustrated-london-hotel-buy/663441.
159 “Jho Low—How PM ‘Agreed’ Plans to Make USD500M (‘Minimum’) Profit From Insider Deal Against 
CIMB/Maybank,” Sarawak Report, May 17, 2015, http://www.sarawakreport.org/2015/05/jho-low-how-
pm-agreed-plans-to-make-usd500m-minimum-profit-from-insider-deal-against-cimbmaybank-exclusive/.
160 Daniel Stacey, Bradley Hope, and Tom Wright, “Hunt for Billions Invested by 1MDB 
Points to Australia,” Wall Street Journal, November 3, 2015, https://www.wsj.com/articles/
hunt-for-billions-invested-by-1mdb-points-to-australia-1446528646.
161 “Ex-1MDB CFO: Jho Low Told Najib Not to Say Much to KPMG, Gave Instructions on What to 
Say,” Malay Mail, November 16, 2021, https://www.malaymail.com/news/malaysia/2021/11/16/
ex-1mdb-cfo-jho-low-told-najib-not-to-say-much-to-kpmg-gave-instructions-on/2021273.
162 “Goldman Sachs’ US$200million Charge for 1MDB Bond Issue!,” Sarawak Report, July 8, 2013, http://
www.sarawakreport.org/2013/07/goldman-sachs-us200million-charge-for-1mdb-bond-issue; and Rozanna 
Latiff, “Understanding Goldman Sachs’ Role in Malaysia’s 1MDB Mega Scandal,” Reuters, October 22, 
2020, https://www.reuters.com/article/us-goldman-sachs-1mdb-settlement-explain-idUKKBN2772HC. 


Carnegie Endowment for International Peace   |   163
163 “Sheikh Wouldn’t ‘Get Out of Bed’ for Less Than 100 Million Dollars, Leissner Tells Court,” New 
Straits Times, February 25, 2022, https://www.nst.com.my/news/crime-courts/2022/02/774528/
sheikh-wouldnt-get-out-bed-less-100-million-dollars-leissner-tells.
164 “Prosecution Tells Jury to Follow the Money, Return Guilty Verdict as Roger Ng and Co-Conspirators Stole 
Billions of Dollars from People of Malaysia,” Edge Malaysia, April 6, 2022, http://www.theedgemarkets.
com/article/prosecution-tells-jury-follow-money-return-guilty-verdict-roger-ng-and-coconspirators-stole.
165 “Another Swiss Banker Charged With Laundering 1MDB Millions,” Sarawak Report, June 9, 2023, https://
www.sarawakreport.org/2023/06/another-swiss-bank-charged-with-laundering-1mdb-millions/.
166 “Goldman Sachs’ Statements Relating to 1MDB Government and Regulatory Settlements,” press release, 
October 22, 2020, https://www.goldmansachs.com/media-relations/press-releases/current/goldman-
sachs-2020-10-22.html.
167 Hugh Son, “As Goldman’s 1MDB Scandal Deepens, Insiders Doubt the Firm’s Rogue Banker Defense,” 
CNBC, December 18, 2018, https://www.cnbc.com/2018/12/17/as-goldmans-1mdb-mess-deepens-
insiders-doubt-the-firms-rogue-banker-defense.html.
168 “Prosecution Tells Jury to Follow the Money, Return Guilty Verdict as Roger Ng and Co-Conspirators Stole 
Billions of Dollars from People of Malaysia,” Edge Malaysia.
169 “Offering Circular,” 1Malaysia Development Berhad and International Petroleum Investment Company 
PJSC, May 18, 2012, 37, https://www.sarawakreport.org/pdf/ProjectMagnolia.pdf. “Abu Dhabi 
and 1MDB Guarantor (Malaysian Government) share a history of successful cooperation. . . . and in 
consideration for the Nominated Subsidiary procuring the Guarantee from IPIC Guarantor in connection 
with the Notes, 1MDB Energy will grant a call option in favour of the NS or its subsidiaries in relation to 
certain of the shares the Issuer holds in 1MDB Energy” . . . The Acquisition could potentially lead to further 
collaborations.”
170 “Ng Was Guilty, but the Buck Does Not Stop There,” Sarawak Report, April 10, 2022, https://www.
sarawakreport.org/2022/04/ng-was-guilty-but-the-buck-does-not-stop-there/.
171 “Ex-BSI Banker: Tim Leissner Dismissed Due Diligence Questions,” finews.asia, March 17, 2022, https://
www.finews.asia/finance/36535-ex-bsi-banker-said-tim-leissner-dismissed-due-diligence-questions.
172 “Half a Billion USD Was Transferred From Good Star to Jho Low’s BSI Singapore 
Account!,” Sarawak Report, April 23, 2015, http://www.sarawakreport.org/2015/04/
half-a-billion-usd-was-transferred-from-good-star-to-jho-lows-bsi-singapore-account-major-exclusive/.
173 Leslie Shaffer, “Singapore’s MAS Shuts 1MDB-Linked BSI Bank Over Gross Misconduct,” CNBC, May 
25, 2016, https://www.cnbc.com/2016/05/24/singapores-mas-shuts-1mdb-linked-bsi-bank-over-gross-
misconduct.html.
174 “Ng Was Guilty, But The Buck Does Not Stop There,” Sarawak Report, April 10, 2022, https://www.
sarawakreport.org/2022/04/ng-was-guilty-but-the-buck-does-not-stop-there/.
175 “United States of America v. All Funds Held in Escrow By Clyde & Co. in the United Kingdom as Damages 
or Restitution in PetroSaudi V. PDVSA UNCITRAL Arbitration at 87–106,” United States District Court 
for the Central District of California.
176 “Sensational Findings!—Prime Minister Najib Razak’s Personal Accounts Linked to 1MDB Money Trail,” 
Sarawak Report, July 2, 2015, https://sarawakreport.org/2015/07/sensational-findings-prime-minister-
najib-razaks-personal-accounts-linked-to-1mdb-money-trail-malaysia-exclusive/.
177 “United States of America v. All Funds Held in Escrow by Clyde & Co. in the United Kingdom as Damages 
or Restitution in PetroSaudi V. PDVSA UNCITRAL Arbitration at 92,” United States District Court for the 
Central District of California, 97.
178 “United States of America v. All Funds Held in Escrow by Clyde & Co. in the United Kingdom as Damages 
or Restitution in PetroSaudi V. PDVSA UNCITRAL Arbitration at 87–106,” United States District Court 
for the Central District of California.
179 “Jho Low Got Rosmah a US$23 mil Pink Diamond Necklace, NY Court Hears,” 
The Vibes, March 24, 2022, https://www.thevibes.com/articles/news/57015/
jho-low-got-rosmah-a-us23-mil-pink-diamond-necklace-new-york-court-hears.


164   |   Sovereign Wealth Funds: Corruption and Other Governance Risks
180 Michael Shields and John Revill, “Ex-CEO of Swiss Bank Falcon Acquitted in Money-
Laundering Trial,” Reuters, December 15, 2021, https://www.reuters.com/markets/europe/
ex-ceo-swiss-bank-falcon-acquitted-money-laundering-trial-2021-12-15/.
181 “Now Deutsche Bank Under DOJ’s Microscope Over 1MDB,” Malaysiakini, July 11, 2019, https://www.
malaysiakini.com/news/483335.
182 “Malaysian State Investor 1MDB Sinks to a Loss on Borrowing Costs,” Reuters, November 6, 2014, https://
www.reuters.com/article/1mdb-results-idINL4N0SW4BK20141106.
183 “United States of America v. All Funds Held in Escrow by Clyde & Co. in the United Kingdom as Damages 
or Restitution in PetroSaudi V. PDVSA UNCITRAL Arbitration at 192,” United States District Court for 
the Central District of California.
184 “United States of America v. All Funds Held in Escrow by Clyde & Co. in the United Kingdom as Damages 
or Restitution in PetroSaudi V. PDVSA UNCITRAL Arbitration at 110,” United States District Court for 
the Central District of California, 111.
185 Lee Long Hui, “‘Stolen’ 1MDB Funds: The DOJ Lawsuit Revisited,” Malaysiakini, March 31, 2018, https://
pages.malaysiakini.com/1mdb/en/.
186 “United States of America v. All Funds Held in Escrow by Clyde & Co. in the United Kingdom as Damages 
or Restitution in PetroSaudi V. PDVSA UNCITRAL Arbitration at 131,” United States District Court for 
the Central District of California.
187 “New 1MDB Bombshell—Second Jho Low Company Paid Hundreds of Millions to both Najib Razak and 
Khadem al Qubaisi—Exclusive,” Sarawak Report, January 21, 2016, https://sarawakreport.org/2016/01/
new-1mdb-bombshell-second-jho-low-company-paid-hundreds-of-millions-to-both-najib-razak-and-
khadem-al-qubaisi-exclusive/ 
188 “Half A Billion USD Was Transferred From Good Star To Jho Low’s BSI Singapore Account!,” Sarawak 
Report.
189 Joseph Sipalan, Praveen Menon, and Simon Cameron-Moore, “Malaysia’s Najib Pushes to 
Outlaw ‘Fake News’ Before Election,” Reuters, March 5, 2018, https://www.reuters.com/article/
us-malaysia-politics-idUSKBN1GH1HV.
190 Rozanna Latiff and Joseph Sipalan, “Malaysia Anti-Graft Body Says Audio Clips Show Najib 
Tried to Cover-up 1MDB Scandal,” Reuters, January 8, 2020, https://www.reuters.com/article/
uk-malaysia-politics-1mdb-recordings-idUKKBN1Z712T.
191 “Malaysia Challenges $8 Billion Settlement Between 1MDB and Abu Dhabi’s 
IPIC,” Straits Times, October 30, 2018, https://www.straitstimes.com/asia/se-asia/
malaysia-challenges-8-billion-settlement-between-1mdb-and-abu-dhabis-ipic.
192 “Outrage!—Najib’s Secret Deal With China to Pay Off 1MDB (And Jho Low’s) 
Debts!,” Sarawak Report, July 26, 2016, http://www.sarawakreport.org/2016/07/
outrage-najibs-secret-deal-with-china-to-pay-off-1mdb-and-jho-lows-debts-shock-exclusive/.
193 “Malaysia to Probe Najib Government’s $2-Billion Payments to Chinese Pipeline Firm,” Reuters, June 5, 
2018, https://www.reuters.com/article/uk-malaysia-politics-china-idUKKCN1J119G.
194 “World’s Biggest Bank—China’s ICBC—Now Has HUGE Questions to Answer Over 
1MDB,” Sarawak Report, June 23, 2020, https://www.sarawakreport.org/2020/06/
worlds-biggest-bank-chinas-icbc-now-has-huge-questions-to-answer-over-1mdb/.
195 “The Ten Billion Dollar Boys!,” Sarawak Report, June 2, 2020, https://www.sarawakreport.org/2020/06/
the-ten-billion-dollar-boys-sensational-new-kuwait-exclusive/.
196 Tara Francis Chan, “A Day Before His Arrest, Malaysia’s Former Prime Minister 
Swore That $680 Million Found in His Bank Account Is Actually a Donation From 
Saudi Arabia,” Business Insider, July 3, 2018, https://www.businessinsider.com/
malaysian-former-prime-minister-najib-razak-claims-missing-millions-donations-2018-7.
197 Melissa Zhu, “Najib Razak: Malaysia’s Ex-PM Starts Jail Term After Final Appeal Fails,” BBC, August 23, 
2022, https://www.bbc.com/news/world-asia-62642643.


Carnegie Endowment for International Peace   |   165
198 Patricia Hurtado, “Jho Low Stole $1.42 Billion From Goldman 1MDB Deals, FBI Agent 
Says,” Bloomberg, March 14, 2022, https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2022-03-14/
jho-low-stole-1-42-billion-from-goldman-1mdb-deals-agent-says.
199 Rahmat Khairulrijal, “Lawyers for Jho Low Associate Jasmine Loo Say She Will ‘Reveal the Facts’,” 
New Straits Ties, July 13, 2023, https://www.nst.com.my/news/crime-courts/2023/07/930590/
lawyers-jho-low-associate-jasmine-loo-say-she-will-reveal-facts.
200 Mary Ann Jolley, “How 1MDB Fugitive Jho Low Tried to Bargain for His Freedom,” 
Al Jazeera, accessed July 6, 2022, https://www.aljazeera.com/features/2020/11/16/
how-1mdb-fugitive-jho-low-tried-to-bargain-for-his-freedom.
201 Hurtado, “Jho Low Stole $1.42 Billion From Goldman 1MDB Deals, FBI Agent Says.”
202 Hurtado, “Jho Low Stole $1.42 Billion From Goldman 1MDB Deals, FBI Agent Says.”
203 Hurtado, “Jho Low Stole $1.42 Billion From Goldman 1MDB Deals, FBI Agent Says.”
204 Hurtado, “Jho Low Stole $1.42 Billion From Goldman 1MDB Deals, FBI Agent Says.”
205 Matthew Goldstein, “Former Goldman Banker Gets 10 Years in Prison in 1MDB Scandal,” New York 
Times, March 9, 2023, https://www.nytimes.com/2023/03/09/business/roger-ng-goldman-sachs-1mdb-
sentenced.html; Jacob Bogage, “Goldman Sachs Fined Record $2.9 Billion to Resolve 1MDB Bribery 
Scheme,” Washington Post, October 22, 2020, https://www.washingtonpost.com/business/2020/10/22/
goldman-sachs-1mdb-record-fine. 
Chapter 4
206 David Pegg, “Head of Angola’s Wealth Fund Fired After Paradise Papers Revelations,” 
Guardian, January 11, 2018, https://www.theguardian.com/news/2018/jan/11/
head-angola-wealth-fund-fired-paradise-papers-revelations. 
207 “Angola: Second Review of the Extended Arrangement Under the Extended Fund Facility, Requests 
for a Waiver of Nonobservance of Performance Criteria, Modifications of Performance Criteria, and 
Financing Assurances Review-Press Release; Staff Report; and Statement by the Executive Director for 
Angola,” International Monetary Fund, December 19, 2019, 43, https://www.elibrary.imf.org/view/
journals/002/2019/371/article-A000-en.xml. 
208 “Angola: Second Review of the Extended Arrangement Under the Extended Fund Facility,” International 
Monetary Fund, 43.
209 “Angola: Second Review of the Extended Arrangement Under the Extended Fund Facility,” International 
Monetary Fund, 43.
210 Alexandra Gillies, Crude Intentions: How Oil Corruption Contaminates the World (New York, NY: Oxford 
University Press, 2020), 102.
211 “Angola’s SWF Receives Transparency Rating,” Economist Intelligence Unit, February 17, 2015, https://
country.eiu.com/article.aspx?articleid=782842462&pid=53077589. 
212 David Pegg, “Head of Angola’s Wealth Fund Fired After Paradise Papers Revelations,” Guardian, January 
11, 2018, https://www.theguardian.com/news/2018/jan/11/head-angola-wealth-fund-fired-paradise-
papers-revelations; Anna Meisel and David Grossman, “Paradise Papers: Tycoon Made $41m From ‘People’s 
Fund’,” BBC, November 7, 2017, https://www.bbc.com/news/world-africa-41906123; and Gillies, Crude 
Intentions, 103.
213 Pegg, “Head of Angola’s Wealth Fund Fired After Paradise Papers Revelations.”
214 Pegg, “Head of Angola’s Wealth Fund Fired After Paradise Papers Revelations”; and “Angola’s SWF Receives 
Transparency Rating,” Economist Intelligence Unit.
215 Pegg, “Head of Angola’s Wealth Fund Fired After Paradise Papers Revelations.” At the time, Bastos told 
the Guardian in response to this article: “We do not view these investments as conflicted. We view these 
investments as having aligned interests. All shareholders’ interests are aligned for the growth and ultimate 
success of every investment.” Appleby did not comment on the article but sued the BBC and the Guardian 
over their reporting on the Paradise Papers.


166   |   Sovereign Wealth Funds: Corruption and Other Governance Risks
216 Gillies, Crude Intentions, 103; and “Angola: Second Review of the Extended Arrangement Under the 
Extended Fund Facility,” International Monetary Fund, 43.
217 Mujtaba Ali, “Millions Pocketed in Corrupt Angola Debt Deal,” Organized Crime and Corruption 
Reporting Project, April 17, 2013, https://www.occrp.org/en/investigations/1934-russia-angola-debt-deal. 
218 Gillies, Crude Intentions, 46–48, 127.
219 Alan Cowell, “José Eduardo Dos Santos, Longtime Angolan Ruler, Dies at 79,” New York Times, 
July 8, 2022, https://www.nytimes.com/2022/07/08/world/africa/jose-eduardo-dos-santos-dead.
html; and Miguel Ramalho, “Wanted by Interpol, Relaxing in Dubai: Geolocating Isabel Dos Santos’ 
Life of Luxury,” bellingcat, February 3, 2023, https://www.bellingcat.com/news/2023/02/03/
wanted-by-interpol-relaxing-in-dubai-geolocating-isabel-dos-santos-life-of-luxury/. 
220 Lourenço has had at least one brush with potential corruption as he prepared to take office. Lourenço 
worked with Elliott Broidy, the vice chairman of the finance committee for the 2017 inauguration of 
U.S. president Donald Trump, to receive an invitation to inauguration events. Per leaked documents, 
the Angolan government, through Lourenço, paid Broidy via his Circinus private security company. 
With the invitation for the inauguration was also a contract for Circinus for a project in Angola. The 
same day, $6 million was paid by Angola to Circinus and Lourenço met with senators Tom Cotton 
and Ron Johnson in meetings arranged by Broidy. The meeting also included two Angolan executives 
from Angolan oil services company Grupo Simples, a company that Broidy had been developing 
a deal with since 2015, though the deal eventually fell through. Broidy pled guilty in 2020 in the 
United States for conspiring to violate the Foreign Agents Registration Act but was pardoned shortly 
after by Trump. See Kenneth P
. Vogel and David D. Kirkpatrick, “Fund-Raiser Held Out Access to 
Trump as a Prize for Prospective Clients,” New York Times, March 25, 2018, https://www.nytimes.
com/2018/03/25/us/politics/elliott-broidy-trump-access-circinus-lobbying.html; Paul Duggan, 
“GOP Fundraiser Says He Got Millions to Illegally Lobby Trump Administration,” Washington 
Post, April 5, 2023, https://www.washingtonpost.com/dc-md-va/2023/04/04/broidy-testify-trump-
malaysia-fugees/; and David Corn, “Disgraced Trump Fundraiser Tried to Use GOP Contacts to Score 
‘Billions’ in Africa,” Mother Jones, December 2018, https://www.motherjones.com/politics/2018/12/
disgraced-trump-fundraiser-elliott-broidy-tried-to-use-gop-contacts-to-score-billions-in-africa/.
221 Pegg, “Head of Angola’s Wealth Fund Fired After Paradise Papers Revelations.”
222 As quoted in “Angola: Second Review of the Extended Arrangement Under the Extended Fund Facility,” 
International Monetary Fund, 44.
223 “Angola: Second Review of the Extended Arrangement Under the Extended Fund Facility,” International 
Monetary Fund, 44.
224 “Angola: Second Review of the Extended Arrangement Under the Extended Fund Facility,” International 
Monetary Fund, 44.
225 “Angola: Second Review of the Extended Arrangement Under the Extended Fund Facility,” International 
Monetary Fund, 44–45.
226 Gillies, Crude Intentions, 103; and Stephen Eisenhammer, “Alleged Angolan Fraud Scheme Aimed 
to Take $1.5 Billion—Finance Ministry,” Reuters, April 9, 2018, https://www.reuters.com/article/
idUSKBN1HG2NG. 
227 Gillies, Crude Intentions, 103.
228 Gillies, Crude Intentions, 103–104.
229 Gillies, Crude Intentions, 104; and Margot Patrick, Gabriele Steinhauser, and Patricia Kowsmann, “The 
$500 Million Central Bank Heist—and How It Was Foiled,” Wall Street Journal, October 3, 2018, https://
www.wsj.com/articles/the-500-million-central-bank-heistand-how-it-was-foiled-1538578897.
230 Gillies, Crude Intentions, 104.
231 Gillies, Crude Intentions, 104.
232 Gillies, Crude Intentions, 104; and Candido Mendes, “Angola Says It Recovers $3.35 Billion 
of Assets From Quantum,” Bloomberg, March 23, 2019, https://www.bnnbloomberg.ca/
angola-says-it-recovers-3-35-billion-of-assets-from-quantum-1.1233521. 


Carnegie Endowment for International Peace   |   167
233 “José Filomeno Dos Santos: Son of Angola’s Ex-Leader Jailed for Five Years,” BBC, August 14, 2020, https://
www.bbc.com/news/world-africa-53774288; Cowell, “José Eduardo Dos Santos, Longtime Angolan Ruler, 
Dies at 79”; AFP
, “Angola Sentences Ex-President’s Son to Five-Year Jail for Fraud,” Al Jazeera, August 14, 
2020, https://www.aljazeera.com/news/2020/8/14/angola-sentences-ex-presidents-son-to-five-year-jail-
for-fraud; and Manuel José, “Analistas e juristas divergem sobre afirmação de Zenu dos Santos de que foi 
condenado por ser filho do antigo PR,” Voice of America, February 16, 2023, https://www.voaportugues.
com/a/analistas-e-juristas-divergem-sobre-afirmação-de-zenu-dos-santos-de-que-foi-condenado-por-ser-
filho-do-antigo-pr/6966259.html. 
234 “Countries and Territories,” Freedom House, accessed September 8, 2023, https://freedomhouse.org/
countries/freedom-world/scores. 
235 “Angola,” Human Rights Watch, accessed September 9, 2023, https://www.hrw.org/africa/angola.
236 “Angola,” CIA World Factbook, accessed September 5, 2023, https://www.cia.gov/the-world-factbook/
countries/angola/.
237 Gillies, Crude Intentions, 108.
238 Gillies, Crude Intentions, 117.
239 Gillies, Crude Intentions, 108.
240 “Angola,” CIA World Factbook.
241 “Angola,” CIA World Factbook.
242 “Angola,” CIA World Factbook.
243 “Angola,” CIA World Factbook.
244 “Angola,” CIA World Factbook.
245 Allie E. Bagnall and Edwin M. Truman, “Progress on Sovereign Wealth Fund Transparency 
and Accountability: An Updated SWF Scoreboard,” Peterson Institute for International 
Economics Policy Brief, August 2013, 6, https://www.piie.com/publications/policy-briefs/
progress-sovereign-wealth-fund-transparency-and-accountability-updated. 
246 Sarah E. Stone and Edwin M. Truman, “Uneven Progress on Sovereign Wealth Fund Transparency and 
Accountability,” Peterson Institute for International Economics Policy Brief, October 2016, 6, https://www.
piie.com/sites/default/files/documents/pb16-18.pdf. 
247 “Angola’s SWF Receives Transparency Rating,” Economist Intelligence Unit.
248 “Angola’s SWF Receives Transparency Rating,” Economist Intelligence Unit. 
249 “Angola’s SWF Receives Transparency Rating,” Economist Intelligence Unit.
250 “Angola’s SWF Receives Transparency Rating,” Economist Intelligence Unit.
251 “Angola’s SWF Receives Transparency Rating,” Economist Intelligence Unit. 
252 Shrikesh Laxmidas, “Angolan Wealth Fund Buys Fixed Income but No Project Investments Yet,” Reuters, 
April 9, 2014, https://www.reuters.com/article/us-angola-fund-idUSBREA3819220140409. 
253 “WJP Rule of Law Index,” World Justice Project, accessed September 9, 2023, https://worldjusticeproject.
org/rule-of-law-index. 
254 “2022 Corruption Perceptions Index,” Transparency International, January 31, 2023, https://www.
transparency.org/en/cpi/2022. 
255 “2023 Investment Climate Statements: Angola,” U.S. Department of State, accessed November 17, 2023, 
https://www.state.gov/reports/2023-investment-climate-statements/angola/. 
256 “2023 Investment Climate Statements: Angola,” U.S. Department of State. 
257 Catarina Demony and Tim Cocks, “Joao Lourenco, Who Surprised Angola With Corruption 
Crackdown, Gets 2nd Term,” Reuters, August 29, 2022, https://www.reuters.com/world/africa/
joao-lourenco-who-surprised-angola-with-corruption-crackdown-gets-2nd-term-2022-08-29/.
258 “An Unofficial Tally Exposes Angola’s Dodgy Election,” Economist, September 8, 2022, https://www.
economist.com/middle-east-and-africa/2022/09/08/an-unofficial-tally-exposes-angolas-dodgy-election.


168   |   Sovereign Wealth Funds: Corruption and Other Governance Risks
259 Julien Maire, Adnan Mazarei, and Edwin M. Truman, “Sovereign Wealth Funds Are Growing More Slowly, 
and Governance Issues Remain,” Peterson Institute for International Economics, February 2021, 3–4, 
https://www.piie.com/sites/default/files/documents/pb21-3.pdf.
260 “Angola: Second Review of the Extended Arrangement Under the Extended Fund Facility,” International 
Monetary Fund, 45.
261 “Angola: Second Review of the Extended Arrangement Under the Extended Fund Facility,” 
International Monetary Fund, 45. Nematullah Ahmadi, “Raghistan Gold Mine Second 
Biggest Funding Source For Taliban,” TOLO News, October 22, 2016, https://tolonews.com/
afghanistan/27939-raghistan-gold-mine-second-biggest-funding-source-for-taliban. 
262 “Angola: Second Review of the Extended Arrangement Under the Extended Fund Facility,” International 
Monetary Fund, 46.
263 “Angola: Second Review of the Extended Arrangement Under the Extended Fund Facility,” International 
Monetary Fund, 46.
Chapter 5
264 “Angola: Second Review of the Extended Arrangement Under the Extended Fund Facility,” International 
Monetary Fund, 46–47.
265 “Republic of Equatorial Guinea: 2022 Article IV Consultation--Press Release; Staff Report; 
and Statement by the Executive Director for Republic of Equatorial Guinea,” International 
Monetary Fund, July 8, 2022, 8, https://www.imf.org/en/Publications/CR/Issues/2022/08/03/
Republic-of-Equatorial-Guinea-2022-Article-IV-Consultation-Press-Release-Staff-Report-And-521695. 
266 “Republic of Equatorial Guinea: First Review Under The Staff-Monitored Program—Press Release; and 
Staff Report,” International Monetary Fund, November 12, 2018, 37, https://www.elibrary.imf.org/view/
journals/002/2018/310/article-A001-en.xml.
267 “2023 Investment Climate Statements: Equatorial Guinea,” U.S. Department of State, accessed September 
9, 2023, https://www.state.gov/reports/2023-investment-climate-statements/equatorial-guinea/. 
268 Antony Goldman, “Poverty and Poor Governance in the Land of Plenty: Assessing an Oil Dividend in 
Equatorial Guinea,” Center for Global Development, December 2011, 3, https://www.cgdev.org/sites/
default/files/archive/doc/Initiatives/Oil2Cash/EG_Goldman_Formatted_Version_Final.pdf. 
269 “Equatorial Guinea Fonds de Réserves pour Générations Futures (Fund for Future Generations),” 
Sovereign Wealth Fund Institute, accessed November 15, 2022, https://www.swfinstitute.org/
profile/598cdaa50124e9fd2d05b002. 
270 Goldman, “Poverty and Poor Governance in the Land of Plenty,” 9.
271 Goldman, “Poverty and Poor Governance in the Land of Plenty,” 9.
272 Goldman, “Poverty and Poor Governance in the Land of Plenty,” 10.
273 Confirmed by the author on September 9, 2023, via the IFSWF website: https://www.ifswf.org/our-
members. The FFG had been previously associated with the IFSWF. Allie E. Bagnall and Edwin M. Truman, 
“Progress on Sovereign Wealth Fund Transparency and Accountability: An Updated SWF Scoreboard,” 
Peterson Institute for International Economics, 2013, 1, https://www.piie.com/publications/policy-briefs/
progress-sovereign-wealth-fund-transparency-and-accountability-updated. 
274 Julien Maire, Adnan Mazarei, and Edwin M. Truman, “Sovereign Wealth Funds Are 
Growing More Slowly, and Governance Issues Remain,” Peterson Institute for International 
Economics, August 2021, 6, https://www.piie.com/publications/policy-briefs/
sovereign-wealth-funds-are-growing-more-slowly-and-governance-issues. 
275 Maire, Mazarei, and Truman, “Sovereign Wealth Funds Are Growing More Slowly,” 3, 6.
276 “Republic of Equatorial Guinea: 2022 Article IV Consultation,” International Monetary Fund, 6.
277 “Republic of Equatorial Guinea,” 37.


Carnegie Endowment for International Peace   |   169
278 “Republic of Equatorial Guinea,” 21.
279 “Republic of Equatorial Guinea,” 72.
280 “Rankings,” International Budget Partnership, accessed September 8, 2023, https://internationalbudget.org/
open-budget-survey/rankings. 
281 “2022 Corruption Perceptions Index,” Transparency International, January 31, 2023, https://www.
transparency.org/en/cpi/2022. 
282 “Equatorial Guinea,” CIA World Factbook, accessed September 5, 2023, https://www.cia.gov/
the-world-factbook/countries/equatorial-guinea/. 
283 “Countries and Territories,” Freedom House, accessed September 8, 2023, https://freedomhouse.org/
countries/freedom-world/scores 
284 He is also called Teodorin.
285 “Equatorial Guinea,” CIA World Factbook.
286 Goldman, “Poverty and Poor Governance in the Land of Plenty,” 7.
287 Tutu Alicante, “To Catch a Kleptocrat: Lessons Learned from the Biens Mal Acquis Trials in France,” 
National Endowment for Democracy, June 2019, 5, https://www.ned.org/wp-content/uploads/2019/06/
To-Catch-A-Kleptocrat.pdf. 
288 Alicante, “To Catch a Kleptocrat,” 5.
289 Alicante, “To Catch a Kleptocrat,” 5.
290 Alicante, “To Catch a Kleptocrat,” 5–10.
291 Alicante, “To Catch a Kleptocrat,” 5; and Des Sellmeyer, “11 Supercars of Teodoro Obiang 
Nguema Mbasogo Seized by French Police,” GTspirit, September 29, 2011, https://gtspirit.
com/2011/09/29/11-supercars-of-teodoro-obiang-nguema-mbasogo-seized-by-french-police. 
292 Alicante, “To Catch a Kleptocrat.”
293 Alicante, “To Catch a Kleptocrat,” 9–10.
294 Delfin Mocache Massoko et al., “Equatorial Guinea’s Oil Minister Allegedly Siphoned Off Millions 
From Public Construction Project,” OCCRP
, January 8, 2021, https://www.occrp.org/en/investigations/
equatorial-guineas-oil-minister-allegedly-siphoned-off-millions-from-public-construction-project. 
295 Massoko et al., “Equatorial Guinea’s Oil Minister Allegedly Siphoned Off Millions.” One of the firms 
associated with alleged kickbacks, Centurion Law Group, responded to OCCRP by releasing a statement 
accusing one of the reporters on the story of extortion and saying that the firm would file charges against the 
reporter; the OCCRP stated that it stands behind its story. 
296 Delfin Mocache Massoko, Stelios Orphanides, and Pete Jones, “Petroleum Profits and Expensive Estates: 
Equatorial Guinea Oil Chief’s Wealth Revealed,” OCCRP
, July 15, 2021, https://www.occrp.org/en/
investigations/petroleum-profits-and-expensive-estates-equatorial-guinea-oil-chiefs-wealth-revealed.
297 Massoko, Orphanides, and Jones, “Petroleum Profits and Expensive Estates.”
298 Massoko, Orphanides, and Jones, “Petroleum Profits and Expensive Estates.”
299 Massoko, Orphanides, and Jones, “Petroleum Profits and Expensive Estates.” The same report notes that 
Oburu had also previously purchased Belize citizenship.
300 “Equatorial Guinea,” CIA World Factbook. 
301 Goldman, “Poverty and Poor Governance in the Land of Plenty,” 3.
302 “Equatorial Guinea,” CIA World Factbook.
303 “Equatorial Guinea,” CIA World Factbook.
304 “Equatorial Guinea,” CIA World Factbook.
305 “Equatorial Guinea,” CIA World Factbook.
306  “Equatorial Guinea,” CIA World Factbook.


170   |   Sovereign Wealth Funds: Corruption and Other Governance Risks
307 “Equatorial Guinea: Authorities Announce Closure of Air Borders Nov. 20-21 Amid Nov. 20 General 
Elections; Land Borders Closed/Update 2,” Crisis24, November 17, 2022, https://crisis24.garda.com/
alerts/2022/11/equatorial-guinea-authorities-announce-closure-of-air-borders-nov-20-21-amid-nov-20-
general-elections-land-borders-closed-update-2. 
308 Alicante, “To Catch a Kleptocrat,” 11.
309 “Joint NGO Letter to IMF Executive Board: Delay Vote on Equatorial Guinean Loan,” Natural 
Resource Governance Institute, November 21, 2019, http://resourcegovernance.org/articles/
joint-ngo-letter-imf-executive-board-delay-vote-equatorial-guinean-loan-0. 
310 “Republic of Equatorial Guinea: 2022 Article IV Consultation,” International Monetary Fund, Key Issues.
311 Estimated wealth based on $70 per barrel of crude oil and $110 per barrel of oil equivalent of natural gas. 
Equatorial Guinea has an estimated 1.1 billion barrels of proven liquid hydrocarbon reserves, plus 0.26 
billion barrels of oil equivalent of proven gas reserves in 2020. See “Republic of Equatorial Guinea: 2022 
Article IV Consultation,” International Monetary Fund, 54.﻿
 
Chapter 6 
312 In addition to the 80 percent stake acquired by the PIF in Newcastle United Limited and Newcastle United 
Football Club Limited, PCP Capital Partners (led by Amanda Staveley) and RB Sports & Media (led by 
David and Simon Reuben) each took 10 percent stakes. Yasir bin Othman al-Rumayyan, the PIF governor 
(and chairman of Saudi Aramco) became the nonexecutive chairman of Newcastle United upon the 
completion of the deal on October 7, 2021. The price paid for Newcastle was listed as £305 million ($409 
million). Jeff Tracy, “Newcastle United Sold to Saudi Wealth Fund,” Axios, October 8, 2021, https://www.
axios.com/2021/10/08/newcastle-sold-saudi-wealth-fund-premier-league. 
313 “Newcastle United Takeover: Joyous Scenes as Fans Celebrate New Era,” BBC News, October 8, 2021, 
https://www.bbc.com/news/uk-england-tyne-58841152. 
314 Samuel Meade, “Protestors Against Newcastle Takeover Unveil Jamal Khashoggi Billboard at St 
James’ Park,” Daily Mirror, October 18, 2021, https://www.mirror.co.uk/sport/football/news/
newcastle-owners-protests-jamal-khashoggi-25238858. 
315 Samuel Agini, “English Premier League’s Top Clubs Post Biggest Collective Loss in History,” Financial 
Times, June 14, 2021, https://www.ft.com/content/93ad309a-a02f-4ba9-8b38-8e694cbdc2cc. 
Given that the value of Chelsea Football Club rose from £140 million ($225 million) when it was 
acquired by Roman Abramovich in 2003 to £2.5 billion ($3.1 billion) when it was sold to a U.S.-
led consortium in 2022, investors such as the PIF may realize value from an appreciating asset at 
a later point in time. See “Sale of Sanctioned Oligarch’s Chelsea Football Club Approved by U.K. 
Government,” Associated Press, May 25, 2022, https://www.npr.org/2022/05/25/1101141199/
sale-of-sanctioned-oligarchs-chelsea-football-club-approved-by-u-k-government. 
316 Simon Chadwick and Paul Widdop, “Playing for Power: A Deep Dive into Saudi Arabia’s Global 
Sports Ambitions,” Near East Policy Forum, July 20, 2023, https://nepf.org.au/index.php/
playing-for-power-a-deep-dive-into-saudi-arabias-global-sports-ambitions/. 
317 Jacob Whitehead and Stuart James, “Saudi Arabia, Football’s Big Disruptors. The Story of the Money, the 
Motive and the Hidden Disputes,” Athletic, June 11, 2023, https://theathletic.com/4600483/2023/06/12/
saudi-benzema-kante-transfers; and Tariq Panja, “Saudi Arabia Confirmed as Sole Bidder for 2034 World 
Cup,” New York Times, October 31, 2023, https://www.nytimes.com/2023/10/31/world/middleeast/saudi-
arabia-world-cup-2034.html. 
318 “Saudi Arabia to Host the 2029 Asian Winter Games at NEOM,” Arab News, October 5, 2022, https://
www.arabnews.com/node/2174656/sport. 
319 David Kirkpatrick and Kate Kelly, “Before Giving Billions to Jared Kushner, Saudi Investment Fund Had 
Big Doubts,” New York Times, April 10, 2022, https://www.nytimes.com/2022/04/10/us/jared-kushner-
saudi-investment-fund.html. 


Carnegie Endowment for International Peace   |   171
320 Alexis Montambault Trudelle, “The Public Investment Fund and Salman’s State: The Political Drivers of 
Sovereign Wealth Management in Saudi Arabia,” Review of International Political Economy 30, no. 2 (May 
2022), 2–3, https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/full/10.1080/09692290.2022.2069143. 
321 Oliver McPherson-Smith, “Diversification, Khashoggi, and Saudi Arabia’s Public Investment Fund,” Global 
Policy 12, no. 2 (2021), 194–195. 
322 Jean-Francois Seznec, “The Gulf Sovereign Wealth Funds: Myths and Reality,” Middle East 
Policy 15, no. 2 (2008): 104. Karen Young makes the point that “the earliest externally focused 
sovereign wealth fund in Saudi Arabia was established in 2008, the Sanabil Al Saudia, with just 
$5.3 billion in assets”; see Karen Young, “What’s Yours Is Mine: Gulf SWFs as a Barometer 
of State-Society Relations,” POMEPS (blog), accessed October 3, 2023, https://pomeps.org/
whats-yours-is-mine-gulf-swfs-as-a-barometer-of-state-society-relations. 
323 David Rundell, Vision or Mirage: Saudi Arabia at a Crossroads (London: I.B. Tauris, 2020), 215. 
324 Mark Mazzetti and Ben Hubbard, “Rise of Saudi Prince Shatters Decades of Royal Tradition,” New York 
Times, October 15, 2016, https://www.nytimes.com/2016/10/16/world/rise-of-saudi-prince-shatters-
decades-of-royal-tradition.html. 
325 After the death of Saudi Arabia’s founder, King Abdulaziz bin Abdulrahman Al Saud, in November 1953, 
decisionmaking authority was shared among multiple circles of powerful princes who constituted an 
informal yet effective system of checks and balances that fell away between 2010 and 2015 as long-serving 
princes aged and died. 
326 Joseph Kéchichian, “Saudi Arabia’s Succession Shakeup and the Rise of Mohammed bin Salman,” 
Middle East Institute, May 20, 2015, https://www.mei.edu/publications/saudi-arabias-succession-
shakeup-and-rise-mohammed-bin-salman; see also “Saudi Aramco Gets New Supreme Council 
Headed by Deputy Crown Prince: Statement,” Reuters, May 1, 2015, https://www.reuters.com/article/
saudi-oil-aramco/saudi-aramco-gets-new-supreme-council-headed-by-deputy-crown-prince-statement-
idUSL5N0XS0LR20150501. 
327 “Vision 2030,” Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, 2016, 7, 42, https://www.vision2030.gov.sa/v2030/overview/. In 
2019, the leadership of PIF and Saudi Aramco was brought still closer when PIF Governor al-Rumayyan was 
appointed chairman of Saudi Aramco. 
328 Stephan Roll, “A Sovereign Wealth Fund for the Prince: Economic Reforms and Power Consolidation in 
Saudi Arabia,” German Institute for International and Security Affairs, SWP Research Paper 8, July 2019, 
18–19, https://www.swp-berlin.org/publications/products/research_papers/2019RP08_rll_Web.pdf.
329 Rory Jones, Summer Said, and Stephen Kalin, “Saudi Crown Prince’s Vision for Neom, a Desert City-State, 
Tests His Builders,” Wall Street Journal, May 1, 2021, https://www.wsj.com/articles/saudi-crown-princes-
vision-for-neom-a-desert-city-state-tests-his-builders-11619870401; and Rory Jones, “Expatriate Executives 
Flee Saudi Arabia’s Bad Bosses,” Wall Street Journal, May 31, 2022, https://www.wsj.com/articles/expatriate-
executives-flee-saudi-arabias-bad-bosses-crown-prince-mohammed-mbs-neom-nasr-11654008823. 
330 Jon Gambrell, “Saudi Prince Gives 4% Aramco Stake to Public Investment Firm,” Associated Press, April 16, 
2023, https://apnews.com/article/saudi-aramco-investment-fund-bin-salman-588c181870b7818e3468eb7e
d18ef091.  
331 In February 2021, a summary of findings into Khashoggi’s killing was released by the Office of the Director 
of National Intelligence, which determined “that Saudi Arabia’s Crown Prince Muhammad bin Salman 
approved an operation in Istanbul, Türkiye to capture or kill Saudi journalist Jamal Khashoggi.” Office 
of the Director of National Intelligence, “Assessing the Saudi Government’s Role in the Killing of Jamal 
Khashoggi,” February 11, 2021, https://www.dni.gov/files/ODNI/documents/assessments/Assessment-
Saudi-Gov-Role-in-JK-Death-20210226v2.pdf. 
332 Joshua Robinson, “The Saudi Power Broker of Spanish Soccer’s Second 
Division,” Wall Street Journal, July 27, 2020, https://www.wsj.com/articles/
the-saudi-power-broker-of-spanish-soccers-second-division-11595851200.
333 Joseph Currier, “Preview and Predictions for WWE’s ‘Crown Jewel’ in Saudi Arabia,” 
Sports Illustrated, October 20, 2021, https://www.si.com/wrestling/2022/11/04/
wwe-crown-jewel-preview-predictions-full-match-card. 


172   |   Sovereign Wealth Funds: Corruption and Other Governance Risks
334 Ruth Michaelson, “Saudi Arabia Has Spent at Least $1.5 Billion on ‘Sportswashing,’ Report Reveals,” 
Guardian, March 28, 2021, https://www.theguardian.com/world/2021/mar/28/saudi-arabia-has-spent-
at-least-15bn-on-sportswashing-report-reveals. In March 2022, the second Saudi Arabian Grand Prix was 
disrupted by a drone and missile attack by Houthi militants in Yemen on a Saudi Aramco depot located 
ten miles from the Jeddah Corniche Circuit, during one of the two practice sessions before the race, which 
was held without incident. Giles Richards, “Saudi Arabian Grand Prix To Go Ahead as Planned Despite 
Houthi Missile Attack,” Guardian, March 26, 2022, https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2022/mar/25/
saudi-arabian-grand-prix-at-risk-of-cancellation-after-houthi-missile-attack. 
335 Sussan Saikali, “A New Virtual Reality: The Growth of Esports and Gaming in Saudi Arabia,” Arab Gulf 
States Institute in Washington, March 17, 2022, https://agsiw.org/a-new-virtual-reality-the-growth-of-
esports-and-gaming-in-saudi-arabia/; and Ian Oxborrow, “Saudi Arabia’s PIF Acquires $1bn Stake in 
Sweden’s Embracer Gaming Group,” National News, June 8, 2022, https://www.thenationalnews.com/
business/technology/2022/06/08/saudi-arabias-pif-acquires-1bn-stake-in-swedens-embracer-gaming-
group/. Mohammed bin Salman is an avid gamer according to media reports. “With a Gamer Prince 
and Oil Billions, Saudi Turns to eSports,” AFP, September 22, 2022, https://www.france24.com/en/
live-news/20220922-with-a-gamer-prince-and-oil-billions-saudi-turns-to-esports. 
336 Murad Ahmed, “How a Saudi-Led Consortium Won Control of Newcastle United,” Financial Times, 
October 8, 2021, https://www.ft.com/content/ed0d401a-ff9b-4199-9f5f-7a2a3e5727ca. 
337 Joey D’Urso, “Newcastle Takeover: Why PIF and the Saudi State Are the Same Thing,” 
The Athletic, October 13, 2021, https://theathletic.com/2886837/2021/10/14/
newcastle-takeover-why-pif-and-the-saudi-state-are-the-same-thing/. 
338 Simone Foxman and Bryce Baschuk, “WTO Ruling Against Saudis Clouds Prospects for U.K. 
Soccer Deal,” Bloomberg, June 16, 2020, https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2020-06-16/
ruling-against-saudi-clouds-prospects-for-newcastle-soccer-deal#xj4y7vzkg. 
339 beIN had been blocked from Saudi Arabia during the blockade of Qatar, which began on June 5, 
2017, and ended on January 5, 2021; however, agreement to restore beIN’s access to Saudi Arabia 
took nine more months to reach. Matt Slater, “Newcastle Takeover: Why BeIN Digital Piracy Battle 
Was Always the Key,” Athletic, October 7, 2021, https://theathletic.com/2874292/2021/10/08/
newcastle-takeover-why-bein-digital-piracy-battle-was-always-the-key/. 
340 George Caulkin, “Newcastle’s Saudi Arabia-backed Takeover Completed to End Ashley’s 
14-Year Reign,” Athletic, October 10, 2021, https://theathletic.com/4195673/2021/10/06/
newcastles-saudi-arabia-backed-takeover-completed-to-end-ashleys-14-year-reign/. 
341 Chris Waugh, “We Need to Talk About Newcastle United and Saudi Arabia,” Athletic, June 28, 2022, 
https://theathletic.com/3387217/2022/06/29/newcastle-united-saudi-arabia-kit/. The jersey in question was 
Newcastle’s third strip rather than the famous black-and-white home jersey or the alternate away strip. 
342 Simon Chadwick, “Sport-washing, Soft Power and Scrubbing the Stains,” Asia & the Pacific Policy Society, 
Policy Forum, August 24, 2018, https://www.policyforum.net/sport-washing-soft-power-and-scrubbing-
the-stains/. Notably, the term “sports-washing” did not exist in 2008, when the Summer Olympics took 
place in Beijing and when Manchester City in the EPL was acquired by the Abu Dhabi United Group and 
Sheikh Mansour bin Zayed Al Nayhan, the minister of presidential affairs in the UAE, or in 2010, when 
Qatar was awarded the hosting rights for the 2022 FIFA World Cup. More recently, the sponsorship of 
professional cycling teams by Bahrain and the UAE has been seen to fall under the umbrella of “sports-
washing,” as has the hosting of the 2018 FIFA World Cup in Russia and the 2022 Winter Olympics in 
Beijing.
343 Owen Poindexter, “LIV Golf Announces $2B Investment, Expanded Schedule for 
2023–2025,” Front Office Sports, May 10, 2022, https://frontofficesports.com/
liv-golf-announces-2b-investment-expanded-schedule-for-2023-2025/. 
344 Rawan Radwan, “Mohammed bin Salman Announces New 5-Year Strategy for Saudi Arabia’s Economy,” 
Arab News, January 24, 2021, https://www.arabnews.com/node/1797696/saudi-arabia. 
345 Marco Ferrari, “Saudi Government Orders Up to 100,000 Electric Vehicles from PIF-owned 
Lucid,” Al Arabiya, April 27, 2022, https://english.alarabiya.net/News/gulf/2022/04/27/
Saudi-government-orders-up-to-100-000-electric-vehicles-from-PIF-owned-Lucid. 


Carnegie Endowment for International Peace   |   173
346 See “Public Investment Fund Strategy 2021-2025,” Public Investment Fund, accessed October 3, 2023, 9, 
https://www.pif.gov.sa/en/Pages/VRP2021-2025.aspx. 
347 The Neom/McLaren agreement is therefore a combination of soft power and branding and an example of an 
investment by the PIF to contribute to the development of research and investment capacity in Saudi Arabia. 
See “McLaren Racing and Neom Announce Strategic Title Partnership to Drive Innovation and Talent 
Development in Electric Motorsport,” McLaren Group, press release, June 27, 2022, https://www.neom.
com/en-us/newsroom/neom-mclaren-racing-partnership. 
348 As of 2022, the Newcastle shirt sponsor is Fun88, a Chinese sports betting company, although media 
reporting has suggested that the agreement may be terminated in 2023 and that the replacement may be a 
Saudi entity. In June 2022, the club announced that Noon.com, a Dubai-based e-commerce platform in 
which the PIF has invested $2 billion, will sponsor the sleeves of the Newcastle jersey in a deal said to be 
worth more than $400 million. See “Report: Newcastle Cutting Short Fun88 Sponsorship to Free Up Shirt 
Inventory,” Sports Pro Media, June 9, 2022, https://www.sportspromedia.com/news/newcastle-united-
shirt-sponsor-fun88-saudi-arabia-pif/; and Ian Oxborrow, “Noon.com to Sponsor Newcastle United Shirts 
in New Premier League Season,” National News, June 28, 2022, https://www.thenationalnews.com/
business/2022/06/28/nooncom-to-sponsor-newcastle-united-shirts-in-new-premier-league-season/. 
349 Eman Alhussein, “Saudi Arabia’s Nation-Branding Strategy,” Arab Gulf States Institute in Washington, June 
9, 2022, 9–10, https://agsiw.org/saudi-arabias-nation-branding-strategy/. 
350 Jack Bezants, “Meet Yasir al-Rumayyan, the Golf Lover Set to Become Newcastle’s New Chairman Who 
Plans to Increase Saudi Arabia’s Unimaginable Wealth into the TRILLIONS . . . And He Has Colossal 
Ambitions for His New Football Club Too,” Daily Mail, April 24, 2020, https://www.dailymail.co.uk/
sport/football/article-8245677/Meet-Yasir-Al-Rumayyan-golf-lover-set-Newcastles-new-chairman.html. 
351 An analogy would be Saudi Arabia and/or the PIF setting up a rival soccer league or motor racing 
championship and incentivizing teams to jump ship. 
352 Vivian Nereim and Ahmed Al Omran, “Saudi Arabia Relishes a Triumph That Transcends Sports,” New York 
Times, June 7, 2023, https://www.nytimes.com/2023/06/07/world/middleeast/us-saudi-arabia-liv-golf.
html. 
353 Kirkpatrick and Kelly, “Saudi Investment Fund Had Big Doubts.” The LIV Golf Invitational Bedminster in 
July 2022 and the season-ending LIV Golf Invitational Miami in October 2022 took place at courses owned 
by Donald Trump—the latter with an expanded prize money pot of $30 million (compared to the $20 
million pots at each of the other seven LIV tournaments for the 2022 season). 
354 “Crown Prince Expects Saudi Arabia’s Population to Reach 50-60 Million by 2030,” Argaam, July 26, 2022, 
https://www.argaam.com/en/article/articledetail/id/1576399. 
355 Central Intelligence Agency, “Saudi Arabia,” World Factbook, accessed October 3, 2023, https://www.cia.
gov/the-world-factbook/countries/saudi-arabia/#people-and-society. 
356 Matt Slater, “Soccer, Golf, F1, Cycling and More. Saudi Arabia is Buying Sport – This is Why,” Athletic, July 
10, 2023, https://theathletic.com/4671408/2023/07/11/saudi-arabia-sport-investment-pif/. 
357 “PIF Establishes SRJ Sports Investments Company to Elevate Sports Sector in Saudi Arabia and MENA,” 
Public Investment Fund, August 6, 2023, https://www.pif.gov.sa/en/Pages/NewsDetails.aspx?NewsId-254/
PIF-Establishes-SRJ-Sports-Investments-Company-to-Elevate-Sports-Sector-in-Saudi-Arabia-and-MENA. 
358 Gulf airlines such as Emirates, Etihad, and Qatar Airways have been prominent sponsors of soccer teams 
around the world, and the first instance of a Gulf airline being featured on a European soccer jersey came 
in 1983 when Bahrain’s Gulf Air became the first-ever commercial sponsor of Chelsea Football Club in 
London. 
359 Tariq Panja, “In P
.S.G. Case, Documents Show UEFA Surrendered Without a Fight,” New York 
Times, July 24, 2019, https://www.nytimes.com/2019/07/24/sports/psg-uefa-ffp.html; and 
Rafael Buschmann, Nicola Naber, and Christoph Winterbach, “Sponsorship Money—Paid 
For by the State,” Der Spiegel, April 7, 2022, https://www.spiegel.de/international/europe/
sponsorship-money-paid-for-by-the-state-a-2ad5b586-1d82-4a21-8065-f3c081cd91a4.


174   |   Sovereign Wealth Funds: Corruption and Other Governance Risks
Chapter 7
360 “Report of the Ad Hoc Committee to Investigate the Procurement Contract Between the Government of the 
Republic of Ghana and His Highness Sheikh Ahmed Dalmook al Maktoum and S.L. Global for the Supply 
of Sputnik-V Covid-19 Vaccines,” Parliament of Ghana, August 2021, 9–10, https://citinewsroom.com/
wp-content/uploads/2021/08/REPORT-OF-AD-HOC-COMMITTE-FINAL.pdf.
361 Rolf J. Wideroe and Markus Tobiassen, “Sputnik for Sale,” VG Nett, June 3, 2021, https://www.vg.no/
spesial/2021/sputnik/index-en.html.
362 The Sputnik V website translates this as Gamaleya National Center of Epidemiology and Microbiology. 
363 Parliament of Ghana, “Report of the Ad Hoc Committee,” 10–24.
364 Parliament of Ghana, “Report of the Ad Hoc Committee,” 17–19.
365 “Treasury Prohibits Transactions With Central Bank of Russia and Imposes Sanctions on Key Sources of 
Russia’s Wealth,” U.S. Department of the Treasury, press release, February 28, 2022, https://home.treasury.
gov/news/press-releases/jy0612.
366 Joshua Yaffa, “The Sputnik V Vaccine and Russia’s Race to Immunity,” New Yorker, February 8, 2021, 18, 
https://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2021/02/08/the-sputnik-v-vaccine-and-russias-race-to-immunity.
367 Vera Michlin-Shapir and Olga Khvostunova, “The Rise and Fall of Sputnik V,” Institute of 
Modern Russia, October 2021, 13, 30, https://imrussia.org/images/stories/Reports/Sputnik-V/
IMR_Sputnik_eng_final_web_v2.pdf.
368 Paul Stronski, “Russian COVID-19 Diplomacy in Africa: A Mixed Bag,” Carnegie Endowment for 
International Peace, December 10, 2021, https://carnegieendowment.org/2021/12/10/russian-covid-
19-diplomacy-in-africa-mixed-bag-pub-85971. Sputnik V is a vector vaccine like those developed by 
AstraZeneca and Johnson & Johnson. It uses disabled viruses to implant genetic material into human cells to 
cause an immune response. Sputnik V is different from these vaccines, however, in that it uses two different 
types of so-called adenoviruses to implant that genetic material. Each is delivered through a different 
vaccine shot, so two rounds using different shots are required, which makes administering the vaccine more 
complicated. See also Michlin-Shapir and Khvostunova, “The Rise and Fall of Sputnik V,” 19.
369 Yaffa, “The Sputnik V Vaccine and Russia’s Race to Immunity,” 18–19.
370 Yaffa, “The Sputnik V Vaccine and Russia’s Race to Immunity,” 19.
371 Michlin-Shapir and Khvostunova, “The Rise and Fall of Sputnik V,” 7.
372 Michlin-Shapir and Khvostunova, “The Rise and Fall of Sputnik V,” 11.
373 Michlin-Shapir and Khvostunova, “The Rise and Fall of Sputnik V,” 16.
374 Michlin-Shapir and Khvostunova, “The Rise and Fall of Sputnik V,” 27.
375 Stronski, “Russian COVID-19 Diplomacy in Africa: A Mixed Bag.”
376 Stronski, “Russian COVID-19 Diplomacy in Africa: A Mixed Bag.”
377 Michlin-Shapir and Khvostunova, “The Rise and Fall of Sputnik V,” 19–20.
378 Michlin-Shapir and Khvostunova, “The Rise and Fall of Sputnik V,” 22–24.
379 Michlin-Shapir and Khvostunova, “The Rise and Fall of Sputnik V,” 27.
380 John Hyatt, “How Putin Used Russia’s Sovereign Wealth Fund to Create a ‘State-Sponsored 
Oligarchy,’” Forbes, March 8, 2022, https://www.forbes.com/sites/johnhyatt/2022/03/08/
sanctions-on-russian-fund-show-dashed-hope-of-moscows-cooperation-with-democracies/.
381 Hyatt, “How Putin Used Russia’s Sovereign Wealth Fund to Create a ‘State-Sponsored Oligarchy.’”


Carnegie Endowment for International Peace   |   175
382 Hyatt, “How Putin Used Russia’s Sovereign Wealth Fund to Create a ‘State-Sponsored Oligarchy,’”; 
Dylan Tokar and Kristin Broughton, “Russian Fund Behind Coronavirus Aid Shipment Is on U.S. 
Lending Blacklist,” Wall Street Journal, April 3, 2020, https://www.wsj.com/articles/russian-fund-behind-
coronavirus-aid-shipment-is-on-u-s-lending-blacklist-11585873617. Links between former U.S. president 
Donald Trump’s administration and the RDIF have been controversial. Most notable was the January 11, 
2017, meeting between Erik Prince (founder of the Blackwater private military company and the brother of 
Trump’s education secretary Betsy DeVos), Kirill Dmitriev (chief executive officer of the RDIF), and then 
UAE Crown Prince Mohamed bin Zayed in the Seychelles reportedly held in order to create a backchannel 
between Trump and Putin that became part of the basis for special prosecutor Robert Mueller’s investigation 
on interference in the 2016 U.S. presidential election. Dmitriev also met with Rick Gerson, a hedge fund 
manager and friend of Trump’s son-in-law and adviser Jared Kushner. Gerson had worked with Dmitriev 
on a proposal that he believed had Putin’s blessing, which was presented to Kushner and passed on to then. 
secretary of state Rex Tillerson before the 2017 presidential inauguration. See Shane Harris and Karoun 
Demirjian, “Congressional Democrats Examine Erik Prince’s Statements on 2017 Seychelles Meeting for 
Possible Perjury,” Washington Post, April 19, 2019, https://www.washingtonpost.com/world/national-
security/congressional-democrats-examine-eriks-prince-statements-on-2017-seychelles-meeting-for-
possible-perjury/2019/04/19/b7f888da-62cb-11e9-9412-daf3d2e67c6d_story.html.
383 Tokar and Broughton, “Russian Fund Behind Coronavirus Aid Shipment Is on U.S. Lending Blacklist.”
384 U.S. Department of the Treasury, “Treasury Prohibits Transactions With Central Bank 
of Russia”; and “RDIF Shrugs Off Geopolitical Risks and Co-Investment Partners Are 
Undeterred (GlobalSWF),” Global SWF, February 4, 2022, https://globalswf.com/news/
rdif-shrugs-off-geopolitical-risks-and-co-investment-partners-are-undeterred.
385 Hyatt, “How Putin Used Russia’s Sovereign Wealth Fund.”
386 “Russian Direct Investment Fund and Mubadala Establish Co-Investment Program,” Mubadala, 
press release, June 21, 2013, https://www.mubadala.com/en/news/russian-direct-investment-
fund-and-mubadala-establish-co-investment-fund; and “Abu Dhabi Sovereign Fund Pausing 
Russia Investments, CEO Says,” Reuters, March 28, 2022, https://www.reuters.com/business/
abu-dhabi-sovereign-fund-mubadala-must-pause-russia-investments-ceo-says-2022-03-28/.
387 Hyatt, “How Putin Used Russia’s Sovereign Wealth Fund.”
388 Yaffa, “The Sputnik V Vaccine and Russia’s Race to Immunity,” 18.
389 Michlin-Shapir and Khvostunova, “The Rise and Fall of Sputnik V,” 27–28.
390 Hyatt, “How Putin Used Russia’s Sovereign Wealth Fund.”
391 It was presumably Tikhonova who was the daughter that was vaccinated after Dmietriev’s wife received a 
dose. Yaffa, “The Sputnik V Vaccine and Russia’s Race to Immunity,” 21; and Isabelle Khurshudyan and 
Mary Ilyushina, “Putin’s Daugher Steps Into the Spotlight. But No One Will Acknowledge She’s Putin’s 
Daughter,” Washington Post, June 5, 2021, https://www.washingtonpost.com/world/europe/putin-daughter-
russia-secret/2021/06/05/a5524c98-c2eb-11eb-89a4-b7ae22aa193e_story.html 
392 Michlin-Shapir and Khvostunova, “The Rise and Fall of Sputnik V,” 13.
393 Michlin-Shapir and Khvostunova, “The Rise and Fall of Sputnik V,” 13.
394 Human Vaccine sold Sputnik V to Hungary and Slovakia for the normal price, $10 per dose, according to 
the published contracts. See Wideroe and Tobiassen, “Sputnik for Sale.”
395 Pjotr Sauer, Jake Cordell, and Felix Light, “A Royal Mark Up: How an Emirati Sheikh Resells Millions of 
Russian Vaccines to the Developing World,” Moscow Times, July 10, 2021, https://www.themoscowtimes.
com/2021/07/09/a-royal-mark-up-how-an-emirati-sheikh-resells-millions-of-russian-vaccines-to-the-
developing-world-a74461. Per contract documents, Human Vaccine’s general manager is Alexander 
Chistyakov. According to a profile of him by the Organized Crime and Corruption Reporting Project 
(OCCRP), Chistyakov was an investment manager at Menatep Bank, which was involved in the loans-for-
shares program as part of the post-Soviet privatization of state-owned assets, and later became an executive 
board member at the Russian state electricity company. Chistyakov and an offshore company he owns 
in the British Virgin Islands have featured prominently in the networks associated with various Russian 
“Laundromat” money laundering schemes. See “Alexander Chistyakov,” OCCRP
, accessed May 17, 2022, 
https://www.occrp.org/en/troikalaundromat/profiles/alexander-chistyakov.


176   |   Sovereign Wealth Funds: Corruption and Other Governance Risks
396 Wideroe and Tobiassen, “Sputnik for Sale.”
397 Sauer, Cordell, and Light, “A Royal Mark Up.”
398 Sauer, Cordell, and Light, “A Royal Mark Up.”
399 Sauer, Cordell, and Light, “A Royal Mark Up”; and Patrick Greenfield and Lorenzo 
Tondo, “Who Is the UAE Sheikh Behind Deals to Manage Vast Areas of African Forest?,” 
Guardian, November 30, 2023, https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2023/nov/30/
who-is-the-uae-sheikh-behind-deals-to-manage-vast-areas-of-african-forest. 
400 Sauer, Cordell, and Light, “A Royal Mark Up.”
401 Sauer, Cordell, and Light, “A Royal Mark Up.”
402 Jake Cordell and Pjotr Sauer, “Kenya’s Failed Sputnik V Deal Used Emirati Resale 
Scheme,” Moscow Times, July 19, 2021, https://www.themoscowtimes.com/2021/07/19/
kenyas-failed-sputnik-v-deal-used-emirati-resale-scheme-a74554.
403 Sauer, Cordell, and Light, “A Royal Mark Up.”
404 Sauer, Cordell, and Light, “A Royal Mark Up.”
405 In addition to being the national security adviser, Sheikh Tahnoon bin Zayed al-Nahyan also chairs the 
UAE’s state holding company, ADQ, as well as First Abu Dhabi Bank (the largest lender in the UAE), 
International Holding Group (IHC), the Abu Dhabi Investment Authority sovereign wealth fund, and G42 
(an artificial intelligence and cloud computing company). Royal Group controls 62 percent of IHC. As a 
signal of his influence, in May 2022, al-Nahyan greeted a U.S. delegation arriving at the airport—including 
U.S. Vice President Kamala Harris, the secretaries of state and defense, and the director of the Central 
Intelligence Agency—for the funeral of former Emirati Emir Sheikh Khalifa bin Zayed al-Nahyan. Isabel 
Debre and Jon Gambrell, “US Vice President, Top Officials Visit UAE to Pay Respects,” Associated Press, 
May 16, 2022, accessed July 30, 223, https://apnews.com/article/russia-ukraine-boris-johnson-dubai-
kamala-harris-1e5dd077073d1ba96c1473a42586adc8; Bobby Ghosh and James Hertling, “Meet the UAE’s 
Royal Troubleshooter—and Maybe Next Big Boss,” Bloomberg, October 21, 2021, https://www.bloomberg.
com/opinion/articles/2021-10-21/meet-uae-leader-sheikh-mohammed-s-new-royal-troubleshooter; Simeon 
Kerr, “Sheikh Tahnoon Named Chair of $790bn Abu Dhabi Sovereign Wealth Fund,” Financial Times, 
March 9, 2023, https://www.ft.com/content/9f965e4f-2447-4f28-8b18-75ddeee36c3e; and Simeon Kerr 
and Andrew England, “The UAE Business That Went From Obscurity to a $240bn Valuation in 3 Years,” 
Financial Times, January 8, 2023, https://www.ft.com/content/3690cc04-ff12-42f5-aa8d-26b5c185e99d.
406 Sauer, Cordell, and Light, “A Royal Mark Up.”
407 Sauer, Cordell, and Light, “A Royal Mark Up.”
408 “Chimera Investment—Crunchbase Investor Profile & Investments,” Crunchbase, accessed May 18, 2022, 
https://www.crunchbase.com/organization/chimera-investment.
409 Yousef Saba, “Abu Dhabi’s Chimera Closes Second Venture Capital Fund at 
$10 Bln,” Reuters, January 25, 2022,  https://www.reuters.com/markets/funds/
abu-dhabis-chimera-closes-second-venture-capital-fund-10-bln-2022-01-25/.
410 Mubadala, “Russian Direct Investment Fund and Mubadala Establish Co-Investment Program.”
411 SberInvest is a wholly owned subsidiary of Russia’s largest bank, PJSC Sberbank. “Mubadala, 
RDIF, and SberInvest Back Russian Data Center Operator IXcellerate,” Sovereign 
Wealth Fund Institute, January 25, 2022, https://www.swfinstitute.org/news/90911/
mubadala-rdif-and-sberinvest-back-russian-data-center-operator-ixcellerate.
412 Reuters, “Abu Dhabi Sovereign Fund Pausing Russia Investments, CEO Says.”
413 “Guyana Seeking to Be UAE Hub—President,” Stabroek News, October 21, 2021, https://www.
stabroeknews.com/2021/10/21/news/guyana/guyana-seeking-to-be-uae-hub-president/.
414 Wideroe and Tobiassen, “Sputnik for Sale.”
415 Sauer, Cordell, and Light, “A Royal Mark Up.”
416 Michlin-Shapir and Khvostunova, “The Rise and Fall of Sputnik V,” 10.


Carnegie Endowment for International Peace   |   177
417 Amund Bakke Foss, Rolf J. Wideroe, and Harald Henden, “Ghana’s Minister of Power Signed Deal With 
a Man From Oslo Wanted for Fraud and Organized Crime. The Deal Is Worth 510 Million Dollars.,” VG, 
August 29, 2016, https://www.vg.no/i/Xynyb.
418 Foss, Wideroe, and Henden, “Ghana’s Minister of Power Signed Deal With a Man From Oslo Wanted for 
Fraud and Organized Crime.” According to his official “private office” website, al-Maktoum touts various 
projects and relationships with high government officials from a wide variety of countries including Angola, 
Australia, Azerbaijan, Bangladesh, Burkina Faso, Cambodia, China, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, 
Equatorial Guinea, Gabon, Gambia, Guinea, Liberia, Mali, Mauritius Seychelles, Nigeria, Pakistan, the 
Republic of the Congo, Rwanda, Russia, and Somalia. Al-Maktoum’s website also notes meetings and 
partnerships with Fortescue Future Industries (also referred to as Fortescue Metals Group), an Australian 
mining company that signed a highly controversial mining deal with Afghanistan’s government in September 
2020. The website does not mention Ameri Group or Umar Farooq Zahoor, however. Ahmad Sohaib 
Hasrat, “Govt-Fortescue Mining Agreement Sparks Concerns,” Pajhwok Afghan News, March 10, 2021, 
https://pajhwok.com/2021/03/10/govt-fortescue-mining-agreement-sparks-concerns/; and “Sheikh Ahmed 
Dalmook Al Maktoum,” accessed March 12, 2022, https://admoffice.ae/news?page=1. 
419 The deal also involved an extra $16 million per year for five years to be paid to the Ameri Group, and Ghana 
would pay for the gas that would power the turbines. If purchased directly from General Electric, each 
turbine would have cost $22 million. Foss, Wideroe, and Henden, “Ghana’s Minister of Power Signed Deal 
With a Man From Oslo Wanted for Fraud and Organized Crime.”
420 Fredrik Grønningsæter, “Finanscowboyen og sjeikens London-eventyr [The 
Financial Cowboy and the Sheik’s London Adventure],” Kapital, October 
7, 2020, https://kapital.no/reportasjer/avsloring/2020/10/07/7571388/
finanscowboy-per-morten-hansen-og-dubai-sjeik-tjener-ratt-pa-london-borsen.
421 Wideroe and Tobiassen, “Sputnik for Sale”; Grønningsæter, “The Financial Cowboy and the Sheik’s 
London Adventure”; Fredrik Grønningsæter, “Finanscowboyens Diamantfeber [The Financial Cowboy’s 
Diamond Fever],” Kapital, June 2, 2020, https://kapital.no/reportasjer/avsloring/2020/06/02/7519083/
finanscowboyens-diamantfeber.
422 “Abramovich Family Rumoured to Be Eyeing FC Copenhagen,” Copenhagen Post, December 17, 2010, 
https://web.archive.org/web/20101217091801/http://www.cphpost.dk/sport/sport/50589-abramovich-
family-rumoured-to-be-eyeing-fc-copenhagen.html; and Wideroe and Tobiassen, “Sputnik for Sale.”
423 Wideroe and Tobiassen, “Sputnik for Sale;” and “Sentenced to Prison for Serious Money Laundering,” 
Norway Posts English, March 9, 2023, https://norway.postsen.com/local/97901/Sentenced-to-prison-for-
serious-money-laundering.html.
424 Zahoor’s partner in the crime has admitted to her involvement and said that Zahoor was her accomplice. See 
Foss, Wideroe, and Henden, “Ghana’s Minister of Power Signed Deal With a Man From Oslo Wanted for 
Fraud and Organized Crime.”
425 Wideroe and Tobiassen, “Sputnik for Sale.”
426 Foss, Wideroe, and Henden, “Ghana’s Minister of Power Signed Deal With a Man From Oslo Wanted 
for Fraud and Organized Crime”; Wideroe and Tobiassen, “Sputnik for Sale.” In May 2023, Zahoor was 
acquitted in both cases by a Pakistani court. This is partly due to Zahoor having diplomatic immunity 
because he is Liberia’s “Ambassador at Large.” “Umar Farooq Zahoor Acquitted in Two Fabricated Money-
Laundering Cases Made by Shahzad Akbar, Sophia Mirza,” Pakistan Observer, May 13, 2023, https://
pakobserver.net/umar-farooq-zahoor-acquitted-in-two-fabricated-money-laundering-cases-made-by-
shahzad-akbar-sophia-mirza/; Murtaza Ali Shah, “Fallen Marriage, Interpol, and Red Notices: How 
Businessman Umar Farooq Zahoor Became Entangled with FIA over Ex-Wife’s Complaint?,” June 26, 
2022, https://www.geo.tv/latest/424629-fallen-marriage-interpol-and-red-notices-how-businessman-
umar-farooq-zahoor-became-entangled-with-fia-over-ex-wifes-complaint; and Murtaza Ali Shah, 
“Judge Throws Out FIA’s Case Against Umar Farooq Zahoor,” February 25, 2023, https://www.geo.tv/
latest/472803-judge-throws-out-fias-case-against-umar-farooq-zahoor.


178   |   Sovereign Wealth Funds: Corruption and Other Governance Risks
427 Zahoor’s LinkedIn page states that from November 2016 to present, he has been the “Former Director, 
Ameri Group UAE.” His LinkedIn page also says that “Mr. Umar Farooq Zahoor has won so many awards 
over the years for being the best Norwaiagn-Pakistani [sic] businessman.” “Liberia: New Dubai Billionaire 
Investor Has ‘Controversial Past’ in Ghana,” West African Journal Magazine, March 13, 2019, https://
westafricanjournalmagazine.wordpress.com/2019/03/12/2749/; and Umar Farooq Zahoor, “Umar Farooq 
Zahoor,” LinkedIn, accessed March 12, 2022, https://www.linkedin.com/in/umar-farooq-zahoor/.
428 Wideroe and Tobiassen, “Sputnik for Sale.”
429 Shah, “Fallen Marriage, Interpol, and Red Notices”; Pakistan Observer, “Umar Farooq Zahoor Acquitted in 
Two Fabricated Money-Laundering Cases Made by Shahzad Akbar, Sophia Mirza.”
430 The lawyer represents Morten, Seagal, and Zahoor in this matter. See Wideroe and Tobiassen, “Sputnik for 
Sale.” 
431 Grønningsæter, “The Financial Cowboy and the Sheik’s London Adventure.”
432 Wideroe and Tobiassen, “Sputnik for Sale.”
433 Wideroe and Tobiassen, “Sputnik for Sale”; and H.H. Ahmed Bin Dalmook Bin Juma Al Maktoum, 
“UPDATE: Ameri Group Llc Rejects False and Malicious Claim Made by Vg of Norway,” Open 
Source Investigations (blog), December 17, 2015, https://www.opensourceinvestigations.com/ghana/
update-ameri-group-llc-rejects-false-and-malicious-claim-made-by-vg-of-norway/.
434 Sauer, Cordell, and Light, “A Royal Mark Up.”
435 Wideroe and Tobiassen, “Sputnik for Sale.”
436 Wideroe and Tobiassen, “Sputnik for Sale.”
437 Wideroe and Tobiassen, “Sputnik for Sale.”
438 Stronski, “Russian COVID-19 Diplomacy in Africa: A Mixed Bag.”
439 Michlin-Shapir and Khvostunova, “The Rise and Fall of Sputnik V,” 33.
440 “Covid: Stalled Russian Vaccines Cause Global Anger,” BBC News, July 29, 2021, https://www.bbc.com/
news/world-europe-58003893.
441 Michlin-Shapir and Khvostunova, “The Rise and Fall of Sputnik V,” 34.
442 BBC News, “Covid”; and “Guatemala Asks Russia to Return Money Over Failure to Deliver Sputnik 
Covid-19 Vaccine,” Reuters, June 29, 2021, https://www.reuters.com/business/healthcare-pharmaceuticals/
guatemala-asks-russia-return-money-over-failure-deliver-sputnik-covid-19-vaccine-2021-06-29/. 
443 BBC News, “Covid”; and Danny Ramos, “Bolivia’s Arce to Take Russia’s 
Sputnik V Vaccine in Show of Confidence,” Reuters, January 14, 2021, 
https://www.reuters.com/article/us-health-coronavirus-russia-bolivia-vac/
bolivias-arce-to-take-russias-sputnik-v-vaccine-in-show-of-confidence-idUSKBN29J2XQ. 
444 BBC News, “Covid.”
445 BBC News, “Covid.”
446 “Ghana: Sheikh Al Maktoum Refunds U.S.$2.4 Million to Ghana After Botched Sputnik V Deal,” 
AllAfrica, August 12, 2021, https://allafrica.com/stories/202108130673.html.
447 AllAfrica, “Ghana”; Stronski, “Russian COVID-19 Diplomacy in Africa: A Mixed Bag.”
448 Stronski, “Russian COVID-19 Diplomacy in Africa: A Mixed Bag.”


Carnegie Endowment for International Peace   |   179
449 There are varying explanations for what happened to the contract. In response to Forbes, the RDIF stated 
that it never had a contract with the San Juan province of Argentina. In contrast, a third-level intermediary 
in the vaccine deal, Panamanian company PMB Negocios SA, said RuL AG had guaranteed that the 
doses made by Russian pharmaceutical company Pharmstandard existed and that Pharmstandard had the 
authorization from the Gamaleya Research Institute to provide the vaccine and that Pharmstandard had only 
been waiting for the San Juan province to send the planes and proper documentation in order to export the 
vaccines. This provincial contract was separate from a contract for Sputnik V made by the Argentine federal 
government. See Agustino Fontevecchia, “Vaccine Mercenaries: One Million Doses of Sputnik V and 18 
Million Euros,” Forbes, August 10, 2021, https://www.forbes.com/sites/afontevecchia/2021/08/10/one-
million-doses-of-sputnik-v-and-18-million-euros/; and Brenda Funes, “Dejaron a San Juan Sin un Millon 
de Sputnik V y Ahora la Provincia Quiere Recuperar 18 Millones de Euros [They Left San Juan Missing a 
Million Doses of Sputnik V and Now the Province Wants to Recover 18 Million Euros],” Perfil, July 30, 
2021, https://www.perfil.com/noticias/politica/san-juan-se-perdio-un-millon-de-sputnik-v-y-quiere-
recuperar-18-millones-de-euros.phtml.
450 Agustino Fontevecchia, “Vaccine Mercenaries.”
451 Agustino Fontevecchia, “Vaccine Mercenaries.”
452 Stronski, “Russian COVID-19 Diplomacy in Africa: A Mixed Bag”; Manuela Andreoni and Bryan Pietsch, 
“Brazil’s Health Authority Rejects Importing Russia’s Sputnik V Vaccine,” New York Times, April 26, 2021, 
https://www.nytimes.com/2021/04/26/world/covid-vaccine-brazil-russia-sputnik.html; and Maayan 
Hoffman, “How Russia’s Ukraine Invasion Doomed the Sputnik V Coronavirus Vaccine,” Washington Post, 
April 9, 2022, https://www.washingtonpost.com/health/2022/04/09/russia-sputnik-vaccine-rejected/.
453 Hoffman, “How Russia’s Ukraine Invasion Doomed the Sputnik V Coronavirus Vaccine.”
454 U.S. Department of the Treasury, “Treasury Prohibits Transactions with Central Bank of Russia.”
455 “RDIF Statement,” Sputnik V, accessed May 2, 2022, https://sputnikvaccine.com/newsroom/pressreleases/
rdif-statement-28/.
456 Sputnik V, “RDIF Statement.”.
457 Paul Webster, “Russian COVID-19 Vaccine in Jeopardy After Ukraine Invasion,” Nature Medicine, March 
15, 2022, https://doi.org/10.1038/d41591-022-00042-y.
458 Hoffman, “How Russia’s Ukraine Invasion Doomed the Sputnik V Coronavirus Vaccine.”
Chapter 8
459 Mustafa Sonmez, “Under Financial Strains, Turkey Designs ‘Parallel Budget’,” Al-Monitor, November 10, 
2016, https://www.al-monitor.com/originals/2016/11/turkey-financial-strains-designs-parallel-budget.
html. 
460 “Sıra Sayısı: 413 Adalet ve Kalkınma Partisi Grup Başkanvekili Kayseri Milletvekili Mustafa Elitaş ve Isparta 
Milletvekili Süreyya Sadi Bilgiç ile 14 Milletvekilinin Türkiye Varlık Fonu Kurulması ile Katma Değer 
Vergisi Kanunda Değişiklik Yapılmasına Dair Kanun Teklifi (2/1319) ile Plan ve Bütçe Komisyonu Raporu 
[Ordinal Number: 413 Justice and Development Party Group Deputy Chairman and Kayseri Member 
of Parliament Mustafa Elitaş and Isparta Member of Parliament Süreyya Sadi Bilgiç With 14 Members of 
Parliament and the Establishment of Turkey Sovereign Wealth Fund With the Law Related to the Value-
Added Tax Proposal (2/1319) Plan and Budget Commission Report],” Grand National Assembly of Türkiye, 
accessed January 26, 2022, https://www5.tbmm.gov.tr/sirasayi/donem26/yil01/ss413.pdf. 
461 Ned Levin, “Turkey Declares Coup Attempt Over as Crackdown Widens,” Wall Street Journal, July 17, 
2016, https://www.wsj.com/articles/turkey-widens-crackdown-after-coup-attempt-1468761724. 
462 Aykan Erdemir, “Erdogan Builds a Parallel Budget,” Foundation for Defense of Democracies, February 10, 
2017, https://www.fdd.org/analysis/2017/02/10/erdogan-builds-a-parallel-budget/. 


180   |   Sovereign Wealth Funds: Corruption and Other Governance Risks
463 Sonmez, “Under Financial Strains, Turkey Designs ‘Parallel Budget’”; “Sıra Sayısı: 413 Adalet ve Kalkınma 
Partisi Grup Başkanvekili Kayseri Milletvekili Mustafa Elitaş ve Isparta Milletvekili Süreyya Sadi Bilgiç 
ile 14 Milletvekilinin Türkiye Varlık Fonu Kurulması ile Katma Değer Vergisi Kanunda Değişiklik 
Yapılmasına Dair Kanun Teklifi (2/1319) ile Plan ve Bütçe Komisyonu Raporu [Ordinal Number: 413 
Justice and Development Party Group Deputy Chairman and Kayseri Member of Parliament Mustafa 
Elitaş and Isparta Member of Parliament Süreyya Sadi Bilgiç With 14 Members of Parliament and the 
Establishment of Turkey Sovereign Wealth Fund With the Law Related to the Value-Added Tax Proposal 
(2/1319) Plan and Budget Commission Report]”; “Türkiye Varlık Fonu Yönetimi Anonim Şirketinin 
Kurulması İle Bazı Kanunlarda Değişiklik Yapılmasına Dair Kanun [The Law on the Amendment of 
Certain Laws with the Establishment of the Turkey Wealth Fund Management Corporation],” Grand 
National Assembly of Türkiye, August 19, 2016, https://www5.tbmm.gov.tr/kanunlar/k6741.html; 
“Kanun: Türkiye Varlık Fonu Yönetimi Anonim Şirketinin Kurulması İle Bazı Kanunlarda Değişiklik 
Yapılmasına Dair Kanun [Law: The Law on the Amendment of Certain Laws with the Establishment 
of the Turkey Wealth Fund Management Corporation],” Official Gazette, August 26, 2016, https://
www.resmigazete.gov.tr/eskiler/2016/08/20160826-1.htm; “License for Games of Chance Transferred 
to Wealth Fund,” Daily Sabah, January 9, 2017, https://www.dailysabah.com/business/2017/01/09/
license-for-games-of-chance-transferred-to-wealth-fund; Ercon Ersoy, “Turkey Plans Massive Transfer 
of Assets to State Wealth Fund,” Bloomberg, February 6, 2017, https://www.bloomberg.com/news/
articles/2017-02-06/turkey-plans-massive-transfer-of-assets-to-sovereign-wealth-fund; Onur Ant, “Erdogan 
Names Himself Turkey Wealth Fund Chairman in Shakeup,” Bloomberg, September 12, 2018, https://
www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2018-09-12/erdogan-names-himself-chairman-of-turkey-wealth-
fund-in-overhaul; Ebru Tuncay, Ceyda Caglayan, and Daren Butler, “Turkish Insurance Shares Jump 
After Wealth Fund Takeover,” Reuters, April 24, 2020, https://www.reuters.com/article/turkey-insurance/
turkish-insurance-shares-jump-after-wealth-fund-takeover-idUSL5N2CC2X4; “Turkey Wealth Fund: 
Sovereign Wealth Fund in Turkey, Middle East,” Sovereign Wealth Fund Institute, accessed August 1, 
2023, https://www.swfinstitute.org/profile/598cdaa60124e9fd2d05c184; “Turkey Wealth Fund Receives 
EUR 1 Billion Syndication Loan,” Turkey Wealth Fund, March 7, 2019, https://www.tvf.com.tr/en/
contact/disclosures/2019/turkey-wealth-fund-receives-eur-1-billion-syndication-loan; Kerim Karakaya 
and Asli Kandemir, “Turkey Wealth Fund Hires HSBC, Citi, ICBC for Debut Eurobond,” Bloomberg, 
September 30, 2020, https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2020-09-30/hsbc-icbc-citi-hired-for-
turkish-wealth-fund-s-debut-eurobond; Kerim Karakaya and Cagan Koc, “Turkey Set to Borrow Around 
$1.6 Billion for Turk Telekom Buyout,” Bloomberg, March 9, 2022, https://www.bloomberg.com/news/
articles/2022-03-09/turkey-set-to-borrow-around-1-6-billion-for-turk-telekom-buyout; Türkiye Wealth 
Fund Receives EUR 1.25 Billion Syndicated Loan,” Turkey Wealth Fund, March 24, 2021, https://
www.tvf.com.tr/en/contact/disclosures/2021/turkiye-wealth-fund-receives-eur-125-billion-syndicated-
loan; Aykan Erdemir and Umut Can Fidan, “Turkey’s Ziraat Bank Under Scrutiny – Irregularities 
Point to Erdoğan’s Manipulation of Financial System to Consolidate Power,” Foundation for Defense 
of Democracies, February 26, 2021, https://www.fdd.org/analysis/memos/2021/02/26/turkeys-ziraat-
bank-under-scrutiny; Laura Pitel, “Erdogan Takes Control of Turkey’s Sovereign Wealth Fund,” Financial 
Times, September 12, 2018, https://www.ft.com/content/8fe07c16-b693-11e8-bbc3-ccd7de085ffe; 
“Erdogan’s Son-in-Law Leaves Sovereign Wealth Fund,” Arab News, November 27, 2020, https://www.
arabnews.com/node/1769276/middle-east; Veli Toprak, “Varlık Fonu’ndaki Giz! Muhalefet Tepki Gösterdi 
[The Secret in the Wealth Fund! The Opposition Pushes Back],” Sözcü, January 28, 2021, https://www.
sozcu.com.tr/2021/ekonomi/varlik-fonundaki-giz-muhalefet-tepki-gosterdi-6232495; Daniel Dombey, 
“Karamehmet: No Longer the Richest,” Financial Times, February 28, 2012, https://www.ft.com/
content/22a0c616-9927-3a0d-81dc-03d7a793fcae; “Guide to Major Turkish Daily Newspapers 2008,” 
U.S. Office of the Director of National Intelligence, Open Source Center, October 7, 2008, https://
fas.org/irp/dni/osc/turkish-news.pdf; Soner Cagaptay, “Turkey’s Republic of Fear,” Wall Street Journal, 
March 4, 2010, https://www.wsj.com/articles/SB10001424052748704187204575101820058883004; 
Aykan Erdemir and Varsha Koduvayur, “Brothers in Arms: The Consolidation of the Turkey-Qatar Axis,” 
Foundation for Defense of Democracies, December 11, 2019, https://www.fdd.org/analysis/2019/12/11/
brothers-in-arms; and Zülfikar Doğan, “Erdoğan Becomes Boss of Turkey’s Largest GSM Operator, 
Internet and Digital Platforms,” Ahval News, October 27, 2020, https://ahvalnews.com/turkcell/
erdogan-becomes-boss-turkeys-largest-gsm-operator-internet-and-digital-platforms.”


Carnegie Endowment for International Peace   |   181
464 “Sıra Sayısı: 411 Türkiye Varlık Fonu Kurulması ile Bazı Kanun ve Kanun Hükmünde Kararnamelerde 
Değişiklik Yapılmasına Dair Kanun Tasarısı (1/750) ve İstanbul Milletvekili Mehmet Akif Hamzaçebi’nin; 
19.4.2021 Tarihli ve 6292 Sayılı Orman Köylülerinin Kalkınmalarının Desteklenmesi ve Hazine Adına 
Orman Sınırları Dışına Çıkarılan Yerlerin Değerlendirilmesi ile Hazineye Ait Tarım Arazilerinin Satışı 
Hakkında Kanunda Değişiklik Yapılması Hakkında Kanun Teklifi (2/571) ile Plan ve Bütçe Komisyonu 
Raporu, [Ordinal Number: 411 The Establishment of Turkey Wealth Fund With Certain Laws and 
Statutory Decision Changes Relevant Draft (1/750) and Istanbul Member of Parliament Mehmet Akif 
Hamzaçebi’s 4/19/2021-Dated and 6292-Numbered Support for Forest Villages’ Development and Law 
Proposal on the Evaluation of the Areas Taken Out of the Forest on Behalf of the Treasury and Amendment 
to the Law on the Sale of Agricultural Lands Owned by the Treasury (2/571) Plan and Budget Commission 
Report],” Grand National Assembly of Türkiye, accessed January 26, 2022, https://www5.tbmm.gov.tr/
sirasayi/donem26/yil01/ss411.pdf. 
465 “Sıra Sayısı: 413 Adalet ve Kalkınma Partisi Grup Başkanvekili Kayseri Milletvekili Mustafa Elitaş ve Isparta 
Milletvekili Süreyya Sadi Bilgiç ile 14 Milletvekilinin Türkiye Varlık Fonu Kurulması ile Katma Değer 
Vergisi Kanunda Değişiklik Yapılmasına Dair Kanun Teklifi (2/1319) ile Plan ve Bütçe Komisyonu Raporu, 
[Ordinal Number: 413 Justice and Development Party Group Deputy Chairman and Kayseri Member 
of Parliament Mustafa Elitaş and Isparta Member of Parliament Süreyya Sadi Bilgiç With 14 Members of 
Parliament and the Establishment of Turkey Sovereign Wealth Fund With the Law Related to the Value-
Added Tax Proposal (2/1319) Plan and Budget Commission Report],” Grand National Assembly of Türkiye.
466 “Sıra Sayısı: 413 Adalet ve Kalkınma Partisi Grup Başkanvekili Kayseri Milletvekili Mustafa Elitaş ve 
Isparta Milletvekili Süreyya Sadi Bilgiç ile 14 Milletvekilinin Türkiye Varlık Fonu Kurulması ile Katma 
Değer Vergisi Kanunda Değişiklik Yapılmasına Dair Kanun Teklifi (2/1319) ile Plan ve Bütçe Komisyonu 
Raporu, [Ordinal Number: 413 Justice and Development Party Group Deputy Chairman and Kayseri 
Member of Parliament Mustafa Elitaş and Isparta Member of Parliament Süreyya Sadi Bilgiç With 14 
Members of Parliament and the Establishment of Turkey Sovereign Wealth Fund With the Law Related to 
the Value-Added Tax Proposal (2/1319) Plan and Budget Commission Report]”; and “Türkiye Varlık Fonu 
Yönetimi Anonim Şirketinin Kurulması İle Bazı Kanunlarda Değişiklik Yapılmasına Dair Kanun” [The 
Law on the Amendment of Certain Laws with the Establishment of the Turkey Wealth Fund Management 
Corporation], Grand National Assembly of Türkiye. 
467 “Kanun: Türkiye Varlık Fonu Yönetimi Anonim Şirketinin Kurulması İle Bazı Kanunlarda Değişiklik 
Yapılmasına Dair Kanun [Law: The Law on the Amendment of Certain Laws with the Establishment of the 
Turkey Wealth Fund Management Corporation],” Official Gazette. 
468 Asli Kandemir and David Dolan, “Turkey Seeks to Manage $200 Bln in Sovereign Fund Soon—
Minister,” Reuters, August 26, 2016, https://www.reuters.com/article/turkey-economy-swf/
turkey-seeks-to-manage-200-bln-in-sovereign-fund-soon-minister-idUSI7N1A302I. 
469 “Turkey 2021 Energy Policy Review,” International Energy Agency, March 2021, https://www.iea.org/
reports/turkey-2021. 
470 “Cumhuriyet Tarihinin Bütçe Analizi, [Budget Analysis of the Republic’s History],” Mynet, January 25, 
2011, https://finans.mynet.com/haber/detay/ekonomi/cumhuriyet-tarihinin-butce-analizi/957/; and 
“Bütçe 2021’de 192,2 milyar TL açık Verdi,” [The budget deficit reached 192.2 billion liras in 2021], 
Bloomberg HT, January 17, 2022, https://www.bloomberght.com/butce-2021-de-acik-yazdi-2296726.  
471 “License for Games of Chance Transferred to Wealth Fund,” Daily Sabah. 
472 Ercan Ersoy, “Turkey Plans Massive Transfer of Assets to State Wealth Fund.”.
473 Ant, “Erdogan Names Himself Turkey Wealth Fund Chairman in Shakeup.”.
474 Orhan Coskun, “Turkey Transfers Billions in Major Company Stakes to Sovereign Wealth Fund,” Reuters, 
February 6, 2017, https://www.reuters.com/article/us-turkey-economy-fund-idUSKBN15L1PG. 
475 The insurance companies included Güneş Sigorta, Halk Sigorta, Ziraat Sigorta, Vakıf Emeklilik ve Hayat, 
Halk Hayat ve Emeklilik, and Ziraat Hayat ve Emeklilik. See Tuncay, Caglayan, and Butler, “Turkish 
Insurance Shares Jump After Wealth Fund Takeover.”. 
476 Presidency of the Republic of Turkey, “Our Portfolio,” Turkey Wealth Fund, accessed August 2, 2023, 
https://www.tvf.com.tr/en/our-portfolio. 


182   |   Sovereign Wealth Funds: Corruption and Other Governance Risks
477 Can Sezer, Ebru Tuncay, and Jonathan Spicer, “CEO Sets Turkey’s Wealth Fund on Foreign 
Growth Path,” Reuters, October 8, 2020, https://www.reuters.com/article/turkey-fund-int/
ceo-sets-turkeys-wealth-fund-on-foreign-growth-path-idUSKBN26T16Z. 
478 “Turkey Wealth Fund: Sovereign Wealth Fund in Turkey, Middle East,” Sovereign Wealth Fund Institute, 
accessed August 1, 2023, https://www.swfinstitute.org/profile/598cdaa60124e9fd2d05c184. 
479 Yunus Girgin, “Turkey’s External Gross Debt Stock at $448.4B in Q1 of 2021,” Anadolu Agency, June 
30, 2021, https://www.aa.com.tr/en/economy/turkeys-external-gross-debt-stock-at-4484b-in-q1-
of-2021/2289831; Laura Pitel, “Turkey Spent at Least $7.3bn Propping Up Lira in December,” Financial 
Times, January 7, 2022, https://www.ft.com/content/0fb17405-4b34-445c-ac90-8522f2c2d2d3. 
480 Kerim Karakaya and Ercan Ersoy, “Turkey Wealth Fund Shows Signs of Life as It Seeks Foreign 
Loan,” Bloomberg, October 20, 2017, https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2017-10-20/
turkey-wealth-fund-said-to-be-seeking-loan-from-a-foreign-bank.
481 The consortium brought together eight banks from Asia, Europe, the Middle East, and North America. 
“Turkey Wealth Fund Receives EUR 1 Billion Syndication Loan,” Turkey Wealth Fund.. 
482 The banks that received the mandate were Bank of America-Merrill Lynch, Citi Bank, HSBC, and the 
Industrial and Commercial Bank of China. Karakaya and Kandemir, “Turkey Wealth Fund Hires HSBC, 
Citi, ICBC for Debut Eurobond.”. 
483 Kerim Karakaya and Cagan Koc, “Turkey Wealth Fund Seeks to Refinance Loan in Test After Shakeup,” 
Bloomberg, March 10, 2021, https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2021-03-10/turkey-wealth-
fund-seeks-to-refinance-loan-in-test-after-shakeup; and “Türkiye Wealth Fund Receives EUR 1.25 Billion 
Syndicated Loan,” Turkey Wealth Fund. 
484 “Sıra Sayısı: 411 Türkiye Varlık Fonu Kurulması ile Bazı Kanun ve Kanun Hükmünde Kararnamelerde 
Değişiklik Yapılmasına Dair Kanun Tasarısı (1/750) ve İstanbul Milletvekili Mehmet Akif Hamzaçebi’nin; 
19.4.2021 Tarihli ve 6292 Sayılı Orman Köylülerinin Kalkınmalarının Desteklenmesi ve Hazine Adına 
Orman Sınırları Dışına Çıkarılan Yerlerin Değerlendirilmesi ile Hazineye Ait Tarım Arazilerinin Satışı 
Hakkında Kanunda Değişiklik Yapılması Hakkında Kanun Teklifi (2/571) ile Plan ve Bütçe Komisyonu 
Raporu, [Ordinal Number: 411 The Establishment of the Turkish Wealth Fund With Certain Laws and 
Statutory Decision Changes Relevant Draft (1/750) and Istanbul Member of Parliament Mehmet Akif 
Hamzaçebi’s 4/19/2021-Dated and 6292-Numbered Support for Forest Villages’ Development and Law 
Proposal on the Evaluation of the Areas Taken Out of the Forest on Behalf of the Treasury and Amendment 
to the Law on the Sale of Agricultural Lands Owned by the Treasury (2/571) Plan and Budget Commission 
Report],” Grand National Assembly of Türkiye.
485 Taylan Buyuksahin, “Varlık fonu borç fonuna döndü,” [The Wealth Fund Turned Into a Debt Fund], Sözcü, 
January 12, 2021, https://www.sozcu.com.tr/2021/ekonomi/varlik-fonu-borc-fonuna-dondu-6207375/. 
486 Ayla Jean Yackley, “Moody’s Cuts Turkey’s Credit Rating to ‘Junk’,” Reuters, 
September 24, 2016, https://www.reuters.com/article/turkey-economy-moodys/
moodys-cuts-turkeys-credit-rating-to-junk-idUSL8N1C006Z. 
487 Peter Wells, “Moody’s Cuts Turkey’s Credit Rating Deeper Into Junk Territory,” Financial Times, June 14, 
2019, https://www.ft.com/content/7199c006-8ee6-11e9-a1c1-51bf8f989972. 
488 “Fitch Revises Outlook on Turkey’s Wealth Fund to Negative on Sovereign Outlook Revision,” Fitch 
Ratings, December 13, 2021, https://www.fitchratings.com/research/international-public-finance/
fitch-revises-outlook-on-turkey-wealth-fund-to-negative-on-sovereign-outlook-revision-13-12-2021; and 
“Ratings Definitions,” Fitch Ratings, accessed January 26, 2022, https://www.fitchratings.com/products/
rating-definitions. 
489 Kerim Karakaya and Ercan Ersoy, “Turkey Wants Telecom Giant’s Shareholder Banks to Finance 
Buyout,” Bloomberg, January 27, 2022, https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2022-01-27/
turkey-wants-telecom-giant-s-shareholder-banks-to-finance-buyout.
490 Firat Kozok, Ercan Ersoy, and Asli Kandemir, “Turkey’s Wealth Fund Seeking Majority Stake in Telecom 
Giant,” Bloomberg, September 30, 2021, https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2021-09-30/
turkish-wealth-fund-said-to-seek-majority-stake-in-telecom-giant.


Carnegie Endowment for International Peace   |   183
491 Turk Telekom’s previous owner Ojer Telekomunikasyon AS, controlled by the Dubai-based Oger Telekom 
that Saudi Telecom Co. partly owned, defaulted on a $4.75 billion loan originally provided by this 
consortium of banks in 2013. Ugur Yilmaz, “Turkish Banks Take Over Largest Phone Operator After 
Default,” Bloomberg, December 22, 2018, https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2018-12-22/
turkish-banks-spv-takes-over-turkey-s-largest-phone-company.
492 The Turkish Treasury has a 25 percent stake and TWF has a 6.7 percent stake at the company. 
Lina Saigol and Selin Bucak, “Turk Telekom’s Biggest Stockholder Is Looking to Sell. Let 
the Intrigue Begin,” Barron’s, September 19, 2019, https://www.barrons.com/articles/
turk-telekom-stake-up-for-sale-by-biggest-stockholder-let-the-intrigue-begin-51568921250.
493 Karakaya and Ersoy, “Turkey Wants Telecom Giant’s Shareholder Banks to Finance Buyout.”
494 Karakaya and Koc, “Turkey Set to Borrow Around $1.6 Billion for Turk Telekom Buyout”; 
and Ali Kucukgocmen, “Turkey’s Wealth Fund Signs Deal to Purchase 55% of Turk 
Telekom Shares,” Reuters, March 10, 2022, https://www.reuters.com/world/middle-east/
turkeys-wealth-fund-signs-deal-purchase-55-turk-telekom-shares-2022-03-10/.
495 Karakaya and Koc, “Turkey Set to Borrow Around $1.6 Billion for Turk Telekom Buyout.”
496 “Turkey’s Sovereign Wealth Fund a member of Int’l Forum of SWFs,” Daily 
Sabah, May 17, 2017, https://www.dailysabah.com/economy/2017/05/17/
turkeys-sovereign-wealth-fund-a-member-of-intl-forum-of-swfs.
497 “Linaburg-Maduell Transparency Index (LMTI),” Sovereign Wealth Fund Institute, accessed July 11, 2023, 
https://www.swfinstitute.org/research/linaburg-maduell-transparency-index. 
498 Asli Kandemir and Ercan Ersoy, “Bankers Wanted for Turkey’s Planned $200 Billion Wealth 
Fund,” Bloomberg, February 7, 2017, https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2017-02-07/
bankers-wanted-to-run-turkey-s-planned-200-billion-wealth-fund. 
499 Daniel Dombey, “Erdogan’s Right-Hand Conspiracy Theorist: Why His Appointment Matters,” Financial 
Times, July 9, 2013, https://www.ft.com/content/4087026e-ec93-33d0-b080-501a654af11e. 
500 Fiachra Gibbons, “Erdoğan’s Chief Adviser Who Knows What’s Behind Turkey’s Protests—
Telekinesis,” Guardian, July 13, 2013, https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2013/jul/13/
erdogan-turkey-protests-telekinesis-conspiracy-theories. 
501 Ant, “Erdogan Names Himself Turkey Wealth Fund Chairman in Shakeup.” 
502 Pitel, “Erdogan Takes Control of Turkey’s Sovereign Wealth Fund.”.
503 “Yorum: Albayrak, Doktora, Ahlak [Commentary: Albayrak, PhD, Morality],” Deutsche Welle, December 
6, 2020, https://www.dw.com/tr/yorum-albayrak-doktora-ahlak/a-55838495. 
504 Pitel, “Erdogan Takes Control of Turkey’s Sovereign Wealth Fund.” 
505 Coskun, “Turkey Transfers Billions in Major Company Stakes to Sovereign Wealth Fund.” 
506 “Erdogan’s Son-in-Law Leaves Sovereign Wealth Fund,” Arab News. 
507 Toprak, “Varlık Fonu’ndaki Giz! Muhalefet Tepki Gösterdi [The Secret in the Wealth Fund! The Opposition 
Pushes Back].” 
508 Turkey’s opposition parties raised vocal concerns about the accountability deficit of TWF back in 2016 
during the deliberations of the draft bill to establish the fund—a prognosis that turned out to be accurate. 
“Sıra Sayısı: 413 Adalet ve Kalkınma Partisi Grup Başkanvekili Kayseri Milletvekili Mustafa Elitaş ve Isparta 
Milletvekili Süreyya Sadi Bilgiç ile 14 Milletvekilinin Türkiye Varlık Fonu Kurulması ile Katma Değer 
Vergisi Kanunda Değişiklik Yapılmasına Dair Kanun Teklifi (2/1319) ile Plan ve Bütçe Komisyonu Raporu 
[Ordinal Number: 413 Justice and Development Party Group Deputy Chairman and Kayseri Member 
of Parliament Mustafa Elitaş and Isparta Member of Parliament Süreyya Sadi Bilgiç With 14 Members of 
Parliament and the Establishment of Turkey Sovereign Wealth Fund With the Law Related to the Value-
Added Tax Proposal (2/1319) Plan and Budget Commission Report],” Grand National Assembly of Türkiye.
509 Kerim Karakaya, Onur Ant, and Benjamin Harvey, “Turkey’s $200 Billion Wealth Fund Paralyzed by 
Internal Strife,” Bloomberg, September 6, 2017, https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2017-09-07/
turkey-s-200-billion-wealth-fund-paralyzed-by-internal-strife. 


184   |   Sovereign Wealth Funds: Corruption and Other Governance Risks
510 İsmail Engin, “Türkiye Varlık Fonunun Riskleri [The Risks of Turkey Wealth Fund],” Ankara Hacı Bayram 
Veli Üniversitesi İktisadi ve İdari Bilimler Fakültesi Dergisi 24, no. 1 (2020): 141–170, https://dergipark.
org.tr/en/download/article-file/2091495.
511 Erdemir and Can Fidan, “Turkey’s Ziraat Bank Under Scrutiny.” .
512 “Mikhail Fridman (Co-founder, LetterOne),” LetterOne,  archived February 26, 2021, at the Wayback 
Machine, http://web.archive.org/web/20210226205259/https://www.letterone.com/about-us/
our-governance/board-members/mikhail-fridman. 
513 Dombey, “Karamehmet: No Longer the Richest”; “Guide to Major Turkish Daily Newspapers 2008,” U.S. 
Office of the Director of National Intelligence; and Cagaptay, “Turkey’s Republic of Fear.”
514 “Turkey Wealth Fund Agrees to Acquire Control of Turkcell,” PR Newswire, June 17, 2020, https://www.
prnewswire.com/news-releases/turkey-wealth-fund-agrees-to-acquire-control-of-turkcell-301079158.html; 
and “Telia Co AB,” Bloomberg, accessed January 26, 2021, https://www.bloomberg.com/profile/company/
TLSNF:US. 
515 Asli Kandemir, Ercan Ersoy, and Kerim Karakaya, “Sweden’s Telia in Talks With Turkish Sovereign 
Wealth Fund for Turkcell Stake,” Bloomberg, June 16, 2020, https://www.bloomberg.com/news/
articles/2020-06-16/telia-said-in-talks-to-sell-turkcell-stake-to-turkey-wealth-fund; “Telia Company 
Agrees to Divest Its Interest in Turkcell Holding,” Telia Company, June 17, 2020, https://www.
teliacompany.com/en/news/press-releases/2020/6/telia-company-agrees-to-divest-its-interest-in-
turkcell-holding; “White Paper on Turkcell,” Telia Company, March 19, 2019, previously accessible 
at https://www.teliacompany.com/globalassets/telia-company/documents/investors/white-papers/
turkcell_white_paper_20190319.pdf; and “Turkey Fund Says to Assume Cukurova Debt to Ziraat 
Bank,” Reuters, June 18, 2020, https://www.reuters.com/article/turkcell-telia-wealth-fund-cukurova/
turkey-fund-says-to-assume-cukurova-debt-to-ziraat-bank-idUSI7N2CT01V﻿
516 Kandemir, Ersoy, and Karakaya, “Sweden’s Telia in Talks with Turkish Sovereign Wealth Fund for Turkcell 
Stake”; and Daren Butler and Helena Soderpalm, “UPDATE 2-Telia Exits Turkish Markets With $530 Mln 
Sale of Turkcell Stake,” Reuters, June 17, 2020, https://www.reuters.com/article/turkcell-telia-wealth-fund/
update-2-telia-exits-turkish-markets-with-530-mln-sale-of-turkcell-stake-idINL8N2DU6UN.
517 “Cukurova Holding AS,” Bloomberg, accessed January 26, 2021, https://www.bloomberg.com/profile/
company/1047Z:TI.
518 Dombey, “Karamehmet”; “Guide to Major Turkish Daily Newspapers 2008,” U.S. Office of the Director of 
National Intelligence; and Cagaptay, “Turkey’s Republic of Fear.”
519 Marc Champion, “Turkey’s Richest Man Fights to Survive,” Wall Street Journal, November 22, 2011, 
https://www.wsj.com/articles/SB10001424052970203710704577051973722340202; Delphine Strauss, 
“Çukurova Owner Faces 11-Year Jail Term,” Financial Times, February 11, 2010, https://www.ft.com/
content/c54563ba-1748-11df-94f6-00144feab49a; and Nate Schenkkan, “Muzzling the Press: Turkey’s Long 
War Against the Media,” World Politics Review, January 5, 2016, https://www.worldpoliticsreview.com/
articles/17593/muzzling-the-press-turkey-s-long-war-against-the-media.
520 “2015 Billionaires Net Worth,” Forbes, March 2, 2015, https://www.forbes.com/profile/
mehmet-emin-karamehmet.
521 Doğan, “Erdoğan Becomes Boss of Turkey’s Largest GSM Operator, Internet and Digital Platforms.”.
522 “Turkey Fund Says to Assume Cukurova Debt to Ziraat Bank,” Reuters, June 18, 
2020, https://www.reuters.com/article/turkcell-telia-wealth-fund-cukurova/
turkey-fund-says-to-assume-cukurova-debt-to-ziraat-bank-idUSI7N2CT01V.
523 Mustafa Sonmez, “Is Turkey’s Wealth Fund Becoming a Crisis Shelter,” Al-Monitor, June 22, 2020, https://
www.al-monitor.com/pulse/originals/2020/06/turkey-wealth-fund-becoming-crisis-shelter-covid19-
turkcell.html.


Carnegie Endowment for International Peace   |   185
524 Mustafa Sonmez, “Turkey’s ‘Wealthless’ Wealth Fund a Tangle of Problems,” Al-Monitor, January 13, 
2021, https://www.al-monitor.com/pulse/originals/2021/01/turkey-economy-wealthless-wealth-
fund-a-tangle-of-problems.html; Firat Kozok and Tugce Ozsoy, “Qatar Inks Deal for Minority 
Stake in Turkish Stock Exchange,” Bloomberg, November 26, 2020, https://www.bloomberg.
com/news/articles/2020-11-26/turkey-signs-deal-to-sell-borsa-istanbul-minority-stake-to-qatar; 
“Turkey Sells 10% of Borsa Istanbul Shares to Qatar,” Reuters, November 30, 2020, https://
www.reuters.com/article/turkey-qatar-bourse-int/turkey-sells-10-of-borsa-istanbul-shares-to-
qatar-idUSKBN28A2N2; and Andrew Wilks, “Erdogan Accused of Selling Out Turkey’s Most 
Prized Assets to Qatar,” National, November 30, 2020, https://www.thenationalnews.com/world/
erdogan-accused-of-selling-out-turkey-s-most-prized-assets-to-qatar-1.1120691.
525 Erdemir and Koduvayur, “Brothers in Arms: The Consolidation of the Turkey-Qatar Axis.”.
526 “Turkish Wealth Fund to Inject 21 Bln Lira Capital to State Banks,” Reuters, 
May 11, 2020, https://www.reuters.com/article/turkey-banks-capital/
turkish-wealth-fund-to-inject-21-bln-lira-capital-to-state-banks-idUKL8N2CT71X.
527 “Core Capitals of State-Owned Banks Will Be Increased With a Total of TL 21 Billion,” 
TürkiyeWealth Fund, May 11, 2020, https://www.tvf.com.tr/en/contact/disclosures/2020/
core-capitals-of-state-owned-banks-will-be-increased-with-a-total-of-tl-21-billion.
528 Note that Cukurova Finance is a related but not identical entity to Çukurova Holding. Füsun S. Nebil, 
“Turkcell Hisseleri TVF’na Değil Haziran’da Kurulan Şirkete Aktarılıyor [Turkcell Shares Are Transferred 
to a Company Founded in June, Not to TWF],” Turk-Internet, September 26, 2020, https://turk-internet.
com/turkcell-hisseleri-tvfna-degil-haziranda-kurulan-sirkete-aktariliyor.
529 “Framework Agreement,” U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission, June 17, 2020, https://www.sec.
gov/Archives/edgar/data/1071321/000119312520172597/d945041dex99d.htm; “Özel Durum Açıklaması 
(Genel) [A Statement About a Special Case (General)],” Republic of Turkey Central Securities Depository, 
Public Disclosure Platform, September 11, 2020, https://www.kap.org.tr/tr/Bildirim/874621; “Turkcell 
Iletisim Hizmetleri AS [Turkcell Communications Services],” Bloomberg, accessed August 2, 2023, https://
www.bloomberg.com/quote/TKC:US.
530 “Turkcell for the Future: Corporate Governance Q&A,” Turkcell, archived December 17, 2021, at the 
Wayback Machine, http://web.archive.org/web/20211217163659/http://turkcellforthefuture.com/
document/Corporate_Governance_Q&A.pdf.
531 David Hellier, “Billionaire Mikhail Fridman Seeks Boardroom Clearout at Turkcell,” 
Bloomberg, January 4, 2022, https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2022-01-04/
billionaire-mikhail-fridman-seeks-boardroom-clearout-at-turkcell. 
532 Hellier, “Billionaire Mikhail Fridman Seeks Boardroom Clearout at Turkcell.”
533 Hellier, “Billionaire Mikhail Fridman Seeks Boardroom Clearout at Turkcell.”
534 Erdal Saglam, “Varlık Fonu Mu Darlık Fonu Mu? [Is it a Wealth Fund or a Poverty 
Fund?],” Hürriyet, February 7, 2017, https://www.hurriyet.com.tr/yazarlar/erdal-saglam/
varlik-fonu-mu-darlik-fonu-mu-40357684. 
535 The Connection Between Russian Sanctions and Bizarre Turkish Monetary Policy,” Economist, 
August 25, 2022, https://www.economist.com/finance-and-economics/2022/08/25/
the-connection-between-russian-sanctions-and-bizarre-turkish-monetary-policy.
536 Carlotta Gall, “Many Turks Can’t Afford Bread, and Bakers Can’t Afford to Make It,” New York Times, 
December 15, 2021, https://www.nytimes.com/2021/12/15/world/europe/turkey-bread-prices.html. 
537 Chris Giles, “Why Erdogan’s Unorthodox Turkish Economic Experiment Is Not Working,” Financial Times, 
December 21, 2021, https://www.ft.com/content/4a7303dc-9bf6-4a70-8078-13f98edc30b4.
538 Transparency International, “Corruption Perceptions Index,” accessed August 2, 2023, https://www.
transparency.org/en/cpi/2022. 


186   |   Sovereign Wealth Funds: Corruption and Other Governance Risks
539 Aykan Erdemir and John A. Lechner, “Why Erdogan Won’t Ask the IMF for Help,” Foreign Policy, June 1, 
2020, https://foreignpolicy.com/2020/06/01/why-erdogan-wont-ask-the-imf-for-help/; Ercan Ersoy and Asli 
Kandemir, “JPMorgan Calls Turnaround on Turkey as More Borrowers Return,” Bloomberg, October 20, 
2020, https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2020-10-20/jpmorgan-calls-turnaround-on-turkey-as-
markets-warm-to-borrowers; and Mustafa Sonmez, “Cash-Strapped Turkey Relies on Qatari Investments,” 
Al-Monitor, December 2, 2020, https://www.al-monitor.com/originals/2020/12/turkey-gulf-qatar-became-
second-biggest-foreign-investor.html. 
540 Charlie Robertson, Twitter post, October 21, 2021, 4:48 a.m., https://twitter.com/RencapMan/
status/1451153455704428550. 
541 Karin Strohecker, “‘Embarrassing’ Potential Ouster From MSCI Index Could Bruise Turkish 
Markets,” Reuters, June 25, 2020, https://www.reuters.com/article/us-turkey-stocks-index-analysis/
embarrassing-potential-ouster-from-msci-index-could-bruise-turkish-markets-idUSKBN23W1XG. 
Chapter 9
542 “Global Infrastructure Outlook: Infrastructure Investment Needs 50 Countries, 7 Sectors to 2040,” Global 
Infrastructure Hub, July 2017, https://outlook.gihub.org.
543 Sailendra Pattanayak and Concha Verdugo-Yepes, “Protecting Public Infrastructure from Vulnerabilities to 
Corruption: A Risk-Based Approach” in Well Spent: How Strong Infrastructure Governance Can End Waste in 
Public Investment, eds. Gerd Schwartz, Manal Fouad, Torben Hansen, and Genevieve Verdier (Washington, 
DC: International Monetary Fund, 2020), https://www.imf.org/en/Publications/Books/Issues/2020/09/03/
Well-Spent-How-Strong-Infrastructure-Governance-Can-End-Waste-in-Public-Investment-48603, 176.
544 “IMF’s Role in Infrastructure Governance,” International Monetary Fund, accessed July 12, 2023, https://
infrastructuregovern.imf.org/content/PIMA/Home/IMFs-Role.html.
545 See, for example, “What Are the Main Criticisms of the World Bank and the IMF?” 
Bretton Woods Project, June 4, 2019, https://www.brettonwoodsproject.org/2019/06/
what-are-the-main-criticisms-of-the-world-bank-and-the-imf/.
546 “Business and Finance Outlook 2018: The Belt and Road Initiative in the Global Trade, Investment and 
Finance Landscape,” Organisation of Economic Co-operation and Development, September 3, 2018, 
https://doi.org/10.1787/bus_fin_out-2018-6-en.
547 Chris Osborne, Nil Kalağoğlu, and Ömer Kama, “Project Financing Issues Along the BRI,” Commercial 
Dispute Resolution, September 21, 2021, https://iclg.com/cdr-essential-intelligence/1100-cdr-the-belt-and-
road-initiative-2021/6-project-financing-issues-and-complications-along-the-bri.
548 Alex He, “The Belt and Road Initiative: Motivations, Financing, Expansion and Challenges of Xi’s Ever-
Expanding Strategy,” Journal of Infrastructure, Policy and Development 4, no. 1 (2020): 140–143, https://
systems.enpress-publisher.com/index.php/jipd/article/view/1180.
549 He, “Belt and Road Initiative.”
550 China Power Team, “How Much Trade Transits the South China Sea?,” Center for Strategic and 
International Studies, January 25, 2021, https://chinapower.csis.org/much-trade-transits-south-china-sea/
551 Ammar Malik et al., “Banking on the Belt and Road: Insights From a New Global Dataset of 13,427 
Chinese Development Projects,” AidData, September 29, 2021, 22, https://www.aiddata.org/publications/
banking-on-the-belt-and-road.
552 “China Global Investment Tracker,” American Enterprise Institute, accessed August 2, 2023, https://www.
aei.org/china-global-investment-tracker/.
553 John Hurley, Scott Morris, and Gailyn Portelance, “Examining the Debt Implications of the Belt and Road 
Initiative From a Policy Perspective,” Center for Global Development, March 4, 2018, https://www.cgdev.
org/publication/examining-debt-implications-belt-and-road-initiative-a-policy-perspective.
554 “Total Reserves (Includes Gold, Current US$)—China,” World Bank, accessed May 16, 2022, https://data.
worldbank.org/indicator/FI.RES.TOTL.CD?locations=CN.


Carnegie Endowment for International Peace   |   187
555 Marina Rudyak and Yunnan Chen, “China’s Lending Landscape, Approach to Debt and 
the Common Framework,” ODI, October 21, 2021, https://odi.org/en/publications/
chinas-lending-landscape-and-approach-to-debt-relief/.
556 Malik et al., Banking on the Belt and Road, 24, 26, 124; and Jonathan Wheatley and James Kynge, “China 
Curtails Overseas Lending in Face of Geopolitical Backlash,” Financial Times, December 7, 2020, https://
www.ft.com/content/1cb3e33b-e2c2-4743-ae41-d3fffffa4259.
557 Malik et al., Banking on the Belt and Road, 124.
558 Malik et al., Banking on the Belt and Road, 26.
559 Malik et al., Banking on the Belt and Road, 24.
560 Wheatley and Kynge, “China Curtails Overseas Lending in Face of Geopolitical Backlash.”
561 Matt Schraeder and J. Michael Cole, “China Hasn’t Given Up on the Belt and Road,” Foreign Affairs, 
February 7, 2023, https://www.foreignaffairs.com/china/china-hasnt-given-belt-and-road.
562 Stephen Thomas and Ji Chen, “The Role of China’s Sovereign Wealth Funds in President Xi Jinping’s 
Ambitious Belt and Road Initiative,” in China’s Belt and Road Initiative: Changing the Rules of Globalization, 
eds. Wenxian Zhang, Ilan Alon, and Christoph Lattemann (London: Palgrave Macmillan Cham, 
2018): 300; Yuwei Hu, “Management of China’s Foreign Exchange Reserves: A Case Study on the State 
Administration of Foreign Exchange,” European Commission, January 2010, https://www.researchgate.net/
publication/46447662_Management_of_China%27s_foreign_exchange_reserves_a_case_study_on_the_
state_administration_of_foreign#pf9; and “About CIC,” China Investment Corporation, accessed May 16, 
2022, http://www.china-inv.cn/chinainven/About_CIC/Who_We_Are.shtml.
563 Thomas and Chen, “Role of China’s Sovereign Wealth Funds.”
564 Hu, “Management of China’s Foreign Exchange Reserves.”
565 William Norris, Chinese Economic Statecraft: Commercial Actors, Grand Strategy, and State Control (Ithaca, 
NY: Cornell University Press, 2016), 170.
566 “About CIC,” China Investment Corporation.
567 “CIC Released Annual Report 2020,” China Investment Corporation, August 27, 2021, http://www.china-
inv.cn/chinainven/Media/2021-08/1001969.shtml.
568 Hannah Reale, “China’s Trillion-Dollar Sovereign Wealth Fund,” Wire China, January 31, 2021, https://
www.thewirechina.com/2021/01/31/chinas-trillion-dollar-sovereign-wealth-fund/.
569 Erica Downs, “Inside China, Inc: China Development Bank’s Cross-Border Energy Deals,” Brookings 
Institution, March 2011, https://www.brookings.edu/wp-content/uploads/2016/06/0321_china_energy_
downs.pdf.
570 Thomas and Chen, “Role of China’s Sovereign Wealth Funds,” 292.
571 Allen T. Cheng, “China’s CIC Boosts Direct Investments in Search of Returns,” Institutional 
Investor, September 5, 2016, https://www.institutionalinvestor.com/article/b14z9n33yv5ysy/
chinas-cic-boosts-direct-investments-in-search-of-returns.
572 Zongyuan Zoe Liu, Sovereign Funds: How the Communist Party of China Finances Its Global Ambitions 
(Cambridge, Massachusetts: The Belknap Press of Harvard University Press, 2023), 124.
573 Liu, Sovereign Funds, 125.
574 Liu, Sovereign Funds, 126. 
575 Rob Davies, “China Owns Vast Network of UK Real Estate, Offshore Records Reveal,” 
Guardian, January 27, 2023, https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2023/jan/27/
china-owns-vast-offshore-network-uk-real-estate-records-reveal.
576 Liu, Sovereign Funds, 124.
577 Thomas and Chen, “Role of China’s Sovereign Wealth Funds,” 292.
578 “Xi Jinping Vows Transparency Over Belt and Road,” BBC News, April 26, 2019, https://www.bbc.com/
news/business-48061951.


188   |   Sovereign Wealth Funds: Corruption and Other Governance Risks
579 Yuen Yuen Ang, China’s Gilded Age: The Paradox of Economic Boom and Vast Corruption (Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press, 2020).
580 Rahul Karan Reddy, “China’s Anti-Corruption Campaign: Tigers, Flies, and 
Everything in Between,” Diplomat, May 12, 2022, https://thediplomat.com/2022/05/
chinas-anti-corruption-campaign-tigers-flies-and-everything-in-between/.
581 Wendy Wu, “China’s Financial Giants Hammered in Discipline Review,” South China Morning 
Post, February 5, 2016, https://www.scmp.com/news/china/policies-politics/article/1909938/
chinas-financial-giants-hammered-corruption-review.
582 “China’s Anti-Graft Body Criticizes Central Bank, Regulators,” Bloomberg, 
February 24, 2022, https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2022-02-24/
china-antigraft-body-says-financial-agencies-lack-risk-awareness.
583 World Bank, Belt and Road Economics: Opportunities and Risks of Transport Corridors (Washington, DC: 
World Bank, 2019), 4–5.
584 Jack Nolan and Wendy Leutert, “Signing Up or Standing Aside: Disaggregating Participation in China’s 
Belt and Road Initiative,” Brookings Institution, October 2020, https://www.brookings.edu/articles/
signing-up-or-standing-aside-disaggregating-participation-in-chinas-belt-and-road-initiative/.
585 Malik et al., Banking on the Belt and Road, 21.
586 Yang Yutong, “China-Africa Ties: ‘Five Nos’ and Eight Initiatives for the New Era,” CGTN, September 7, 
2018, https://news.cgtn.com/news/3d3d674d344d444d7a457a6333566d54/share_p.html.
587 Will Doig, “The Belt and Road Initiative Is a Corruption Bonanza,” Foreign Policy, January 15, 2019, 
https://foreignpolicy.com/2019/01/15/the-belt-and-road-initiative-is-a-corruption-bonanza/.
588 Malik et al., Banking on the Belt and Road, 56.
589 Anna Gelpern et al., “How China Lends: A Rare Look Into 100 Debt Contracts with Foreign 
Governments,” Peterson Institute for International Economics, May 2021, 5, https://www.piie.com/sites/
default/files/documents/wp21-7.pdf.
590 Shashank Bengali, “How an Island Nation’s New Leaders Are Trying to Unravel a Web of Secret Deals With 
China,” Los Angeles Times, November 6, 2018, https://www.latimes.com/world/asia/la-fg-maldives-china-
20181106-story.html.
591 Mercy A. Kuo, “China’s BRI Lending: $385 Billion in ‘Hidden Debts’,” Diplomat,November 29, 2021, 
https://thediplomat.com/2021/11/chinas-bri-lending-385-billion-in-hidden-debts/.
592 Jeremy Birch, Kyle Wombolt, and Tracy Cui, “In Brief: Foreign Bribery Laws in China,” Lexology, February 
19, 2021, https://www.lexology.com/library/detail.aspx?g=b26a3adf-2872-4d0f-87ae-996f3a6c5962.
593 Dipanjan Roy Chaudhury, “World Bank Bans Chinese Companies Again for Financial Crimes,” Economic 
Times, August 23, 2019, https://economictimes.indiatimes.com/news/international/business/world-bank-
bans-chinese-companies-again-for-financial-crimes/articleshow/70797062.cms.
594 Maria Abi-Habib, “How China Got Sri Lanka to Cough Up a Port,” New York Times, June 5, 2018, https://
www.nytimes.com/2018/06/25/world/asia/china-sri-lanka-port.html.
595 Lee Jones and Shahar Hameiri, “Debunking the Myth of ‘Debt-Trap Diplomacy: How Recipient 
Countries Shape China’s Belt and Road Initiative,” Chatham House, August 19, 2020, https://
www.chathamhouse.org/2020/08/debunking-myth-debt-trap-diplomacy/5-malaysia-and-bri; 
and Tom Wright and Bradley Hope, “China Offered to Bail Out Troubled Malaysian Fund 
in Return for Deals,” Wall Street Journal, January 7, 2019, https://www.wsj.com/articles/
how-china-flexes-its-political-muscle-to-expand-power-overseas-11546890449.
596 Pradumna B. Rana and Xianbai Ji, “Belt and Road Stakeholders Don’t Believe China Uses 
‘Debt-Trap Diplomacy’,” Diplomat, November 6, 2020, https://thediplomat.com/2020/11/
belt-and-road-stakeholders-dont-believe-china-uses-debt-trap-diplomacy/.
597 Megan Greene, “The G7 Is Right to Worry About Chinese Credit Terms,” Financial Times, June 17, 2021, 
https://www.ft.com/content/301dbc55-8a76-4ac3-bf06-0dce0527ce00.


Carnegie Endowment for International Peace   |   189
598 Jeremy Mark, “China’s Real ‘Debt Trap’ Threat,” Atlantic Council, December 13, 2021, https://www.
atlanticcouncil.org/blogs/new-atlanticist/chinas-real-debt-trap-threat/. 
599 Malik et al., Banking on the Belt and Road, 73.
600 Andrew Small, “The Backlash to Belt and Road,” Foreign Affairs, February 16, 2018, https://www.
foreignaffairs.com/articles/china/2018-02-16/backlash-belt-and-road; and Steve Holland and Guy 
Faulconbridge, “G7 Rivals China With Grand Infrastructure Plan,” Reuters, June 12, 2021, https://www.
reuters.com/world/g7-counter-chinas-belt-road-with-infrastructure-project-senior-us-official-2021-06-12/.
601 Jonathan E. Hillman, “Corruption Flows Along China’s Belt and Road,” Center for 
Strategic and International Studies, January 18, 2019, https://www.csis.org/analysis/
corruption-flows-along-chinas-belt-and-road.
Chapter 10
602 Svetlana Gorchakova, “EU Citizenship by Investment: Terms, Prices, Pitfalls,” Immigrant Invest, May 17, 
2021, https://immigrantinvest.com/blog/grazhdanstvo-es-za-investicii-en/.
603 “Annual Report 2020,” National Development and Social Fund, 2021,  https://ndsf.com.mt/wp-content/
uploads/2023/08/Annual-Report-2020.pdf. 
604 Luca Ranieri, “The Malta Connection: A Corrupting Island in a ‘Corrupting Sea’?,” European 
Review of Organized Crime 5, no. 1 (2019): 10–35, 1–2, https://www.academia.edu/38695979/
Raineri_The_Malta_Connection_A_Corrupting_Island_in_a_Corrupting_Sea_.
605 Ranieri, “Malta Connection,” 3.
606 Ranieri, “Malta Connection,” 8.
607 Cecilia Anesi, Lorenzo Bagnoli, and Giulio Rubino, “Malta, A Modern Smugglers’ Hideout,” Organized 
Crime and Corruption Reporting Project, October 10, 2018, https://www.occrp.org/en/thedaphneproject/
malta-a-modern-smugglers-hideout.
608 Stephen Grey, “Special Report—The Silencing of Malta’s Anti-Corruption Campaigner,” 
Reuters, April 17, 2018, https://www.reuters.com/article/uk-malta-daphne-specialreport-
idUKKBN1HO2QW; and Sophie Claudet and Everton Gayle, “Malta Is a Captured State, Say Sons 
of Daphne Caruana Galizia,” Euronews, May 31, 2018, https://www.euronews.com/2018/05/29/
malta-is-a-captured-state-say-sons-of-daphne-caruana-galizia.
609 “Malta Registers Insignificant Progress in Corruption Perception Index,” Malta Independent, 
accessed July 12, 2023, https://www.independent.com.mt/articles/2022-01-25/local-news/
Malta-registers-insignificant-progress-in-Corruption-Perception-Index-6736240067.
610 Darren Mara, “The Murder of a Top Investigative Journalist Rocked Malta. Reporters There Say 
They’re Still in Danger,” SBS News, March 22, 2022, https://www.sbs.com.au/news/dateline/article/
the-murder-of-a-top-investigative-journalist-rocked-malta-reporters-there-say-theyre-still-in-danger/
rkxseuoiw.
611 David Klein, “Amidst Corruption Probe, Police Raid Maltese Ex-PM’s Home,” Organized 
Crime and Corruption Reporting Project, January 21, 2022, https://www.occrp.org/en/
daily/15810-amidst-corruption-probe-police-raid-maltese-ex-pm-s-home.
612 Lorenzo Bagnoli, “Murdered Maltese Journalist Was Investigating Island’s Golden Visas,” Organized 
Crime and Corruption Reporting Project, April 18, 2018, https://www.occrp.org/en/thedaphneproject/
murdered-maltese-journalist-was-investigating-islands-golden-visas.
613 Ben Taub, “Murder in Malta,” New Yorker, December 14, 2020, https://www.newyorker.com/
magazine/2020/12/21/murder-in-malta.
614 Christopher Giles, “Malta’s ‘Golden Passports’: Why Do the Super-Rich Want Them?,” BBC News, 
December 4, 2019, https://www.bbc.com/news/world-europe-50633820.
615	 Giles, “Malta’s ‘Golden Passports.’
616	  Giles, “Malta’s ‘Golden Passports.’”


190   |   Sovereign Wealth Funds: Corruption and Other Governance Risks
617 Amandine Scherrer and Elodie Thirion, “Citizenship by Investment (CBI) and Residency by Investment 
(RBI) Schemes in the EU: State of Play, Issues and Impacts,” European Parliament, October 2018, https://
data.europa.eu/doi/10.2861/10673.
618 Anthony Van Fossen, “Passports of Convenience From the Pacific Islands,” Lowy Institute, December 21, 
2017, https://www.lowyinstitute.org/the-interpreter/passports-convenience-pacific-islands; Scherrer and 
Thirion, “Citizenship by Investment (CBI) and Residency by Investment (RBI) Schemes in the EU”; and 
Anthony Van Fossen, “Citizenship for Sale: Passports of Convenience From Pacific Island Tax Havens,” 
Commonwealth & Comparative Politics 45, no. 2 (2007): 141, https://doi.org/10.1080/14662040701317477.
619 Alan Gamlen, Chris Kutarna, and Ashby Monk, “Citizenship as Sovereign Wealth: Re-Thinking Investor 
Immigration,” Global Policy 10, no. 4 (2019): 527–541, https://doi.org/10.1111/1758-5899.12723; and 
“EB-5 Immigrant Investor Program,” U.S. Citizenship and Immigration Services, September 29, 2022, 
https://www.uscis.gov/working-in-the-united-states/permanent-workers/eb-5-immigrant-investor-program.
620 Scherrer and Thirion, “Citizenship by Investment (CBI) and Residency by Investment (RBI) Schemes in the 
EU.”
621 Laure Brillaud and Maíra Martini, “European Getaway: Inside the Murky World of Golden Visas,” 
Transparency International and Global Witness, 2018, 31, https://images.transparencycdn.org/
images/2018_report_GoldenVisas_English.pdf.
622 “Immigration by Investment,” Renascence Capital, accessed September 10, 2022, https://www.renascence-
capital.com/immigration.
623 Scherrer and Thirion, “Citizenship by Investment (CBI) and Residency by Investment (RBI) Schemes in the 
EU,” 6.
624 Scherrer and Thirion, “Citizenship by Investment (CBI) and Residency by Investment (RBI) Schemes in the 
EU.”
625 Scherrer and Thirion, “Citizenship by Investment (CBI) and Residency by Investment (RBI) Schemes in the 
EU.”
626 “Draft Report With Proposals to the Commission on Citizenship and Residence by Investment Schemes,” 
European Parliament Committee on Civil Liberties, Justice and Home Affairs, November 9, 2021, https://
www.europarl.europa.eu/doceo/document/LIBE-PR-697745_EN.pdf, 6.
627 Jacob Borg, “A Look at Some of the Rich Russians Drawn to a Maltese 
Passport,” Times of Malta, March 9, 2022, https://timesofmalta.com/articles/
view/a-look-at-some-of-the-rich-russians-drawn-to-a-maltese-passport.939129.
628 Tim Diacono, “Owner Of ‘Russia’s Google’ Is Now A Maltese Citizen,” Lovin Malta (blog), January 10, 
2018, https://lovinmalta.com/news/owner-of-google-of-russia-is-now-a-maltese-citizen/.
629 Borg, “A Look at Some of the Rich Russians Drawn to a Maltese Passport.”
630 Nicole Meilak, “[WATCH] Russian Billionaire With Malta Passport Parks Superyacht in 
Birgu,” MaltaToday, March 4, 2022, http://www.maltatoday.com.mt/news/national/115373/
russian_billionaire_with_malta_passport_parks_superyacht_in_birgu.
631 “Pavel Grachev,” Passport Papers, accessed November 13, 2023, https://www.daphne.foundation/
passport-papers/profiles/pavel-grachev.
632 “Pavel Grachev,” Passport Papers.
633 Tim Diacono, “Did Malta’s Cash for Passports Scheme Damage Putin More Than 
We Thought?” Lovin Malta (blog), January 11, 2018, https://lovinmalta.com/news/
did-maltas-cash-for-passports-scheme-damage-putin-more-than-we-thought/.
634 “Directive (EU) 2018/843 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 30 May 2018 Amending 
Directive (EU) 2015/849 on the Prevention of the Use of the Financial System for the Purposes of Money 
Laundering or Terrorist Financing, and Amending Directives 2009/138/EC and 2013/36/EU (Text 
with EEA Relevance).” 156 OJ L § (2018), http://data.europa.eu/eli/dir/2018/843/oj/eng; see Annex 
III, which notes that customer risk factors include “ customer is a third country national who applies for 
residence rights or citizenship in the Member State in exchange of capital transfers, purchase of property or 
government bonds, or investment in corporate entities in that Member State”; “Investor Citizenship and 
Residence Schemes in the European Union.” [[what does this second part of the cite refer to?]]


Carnegie Endowment for International Peace   |   191
635 Clara Hernanz Lizarraga, “Russia’s War Puts Europe’s ‘Golden Passports’ Under Microscope,” 
Bloomberg, March 15, 2022, https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2022-03-15/
russia-s-war-puts-europe-s-golden-passports-under-microscope.
636 Chris Scicluna and Tomasz Janowski, “Malta Stops Sale of Passports to Russians, 
Belarusians,” Reuters, March 2, 2022, https://www.reuters.com/world/
malta-stops-sale-passports-russians-belarusians-2022-03-02/.
637 Andres Gutierrez, “As Malta Plans to Renew the IIP in 2020, Which Changes Should We 
Expect?,” Investment Migration Insider (blog), May 7, 2020, https://www.imidaily.com/europe/
as-malta-plans-to-renew-the-iip-in-2020-which-changes-should-we-expect/.
638 “The Maltese Citizenship by Naturalization for Exceptional Services by Direct Investment,” PwC, https://
www.pwc.com/mt/en/assets/Citizenship-Brochure.pdf. Individuals wishing to apply for citizenship must 
first satisfy a residency requirement of thirty-six months with a €600,000 payment or of twelve months 
with a €750,000 payment, plus an additional €50,000 contribution per dependent in each case. During this 
residency period, applicants are expected to build links to their new country. There is also a requirement 
to purchase real estate valued at €700,000 or more (up from €350,000 in the 2014 CBI scheme) or rent 
a property at a minimum cost of €16,000 per year, but the property or rental now must be held for five 
years from the date of confirmed naturalization. An additional requirement is a donation of €10,000 to a 
registered philanthropic or cultural agency approved by the Community Malta Agency. Finally, the applicant 
cannot be subject to sanctions or criminal investigation at the time of application and should expect due 
diligence checks.
639 He had personally met with Muscat and the head of Malta’s CBI program and received their promise not to 
publish his name. https://www.daphne.foundation/passport-papers/profiles/bander-al-saud
640 Jacob Borg, “Passport Papers: Saudi Prince Secured Secret Passport After Muscat 
Meeting,” Times of Malta, April 21, 2021, https://timesofmalta.com/articles/view/
passport-papers-saudi-prince-secured-secret-passport-after-muscat.866304.
641 Sabriyah Saeed, “What We Know About the Nationalities of Passport Applicants,” Passport Papers, April 21, 
2021, https://www.daphne.foundation/passport-papers/2021/04/applicant-nationalities.
642 “Low Taek Jho,” Passport Papers, accessed September 11, 2022, https://www.daphne.foundation/
passport-papers/profiles/jho-low.
643 Jacob Borg and Matthew Xuereb, “Exposed: The Great Residency Sham to Obtain a 
Maltese Passport,” Times of Malta, April 21, 2021, https://timesofmalta.com/articles/view/
exposed-the-great-residency-sham-to-obtain-a-maltese-passport.866220.
644 Borg and Xuereb, “Exposed”; and “Malta Golden Passports: ‘Loopholes’ Found in Citizenship Scheme,” 
BBC News, April 22, 2021, https://www.bbc.com/news/world-europe-56843409.
645 “Malta Golden Passports,” BBC News.
646 Scherrer and Thirion, “Citizenship by Investment (CBI) and Residency by Investment (RBI) Schemes in 
the EU,” 28–29; and “Sixth Annual Report on the Individual Investor Programme of the Government of 
Malta,” Office of the Regulator Individual Investor Programme (ORiip), November 2019, 27, https://orgces.
gov.mt/en/Documents/Reports/Annual%20Report%202019.pdf.
647 The Maltese regulator rejects any suggestions that sufficient due diligence is not carried out on applicants, 
noting that the 75 percent success rate for applicants to the Maltese scheme is much lower than success rates 
elsewhere: “Given that Malta’s success rate is significantly lower (standing at 75% as indicated in the 2018 
ORiip report), it is logical to consider that Malta’s checks and controls are stricter.” See “Sixth Annual Report 
on the Individual Investor Programme of the Government of Malta,” ORiip, 38. However, it is unclear how 
many of the failures are the result of applicants withdrawing their applications and how many are the result 
of an application being rejected, as the “failure” rate includes all applications that were either rejected or 
withdrawn.
648 Scherrer and Thirion, “Citizenship by Investment (CBI) and Residency by Investment (RBI) Schemes in the 
EU,” 18.
649 “Investor Citizenship Schemes: European Commission Opens Infringements Against Cyprus and Malta for 
‘Selling’ EU Citizenship,” European Commission, October 20, 2020, https://ec.europa.eu/commission/
presscorner/detail/EN/IP_20_1925.


192   |   Sovereign Wealth Funds: Corruption and Other Governance Risks
650 “‘Golden Passport’ Schemes: Commission Proceeds With Infringement Case Against Malta,” European 
Commission, April 6, 2022, https://ec.europa.eu/commission/presscorner/detail/en/IP_22_2068.
651 “Annual Report 2020,” National Development and Social Fund, 5. Article 13 of the Individual Investor 
Programme of the Republic of Malta Regulations establishes that there shall be a fund to be known as the 
National Development and Social Fund. 
652 “Annual Report 2020,” National Development and Social Fund, 5.
653 “Annual Report 2020,” National Development and Social Fund, 7-8. 
654 “Media Release 01/2021—Monday 24 May 2021,” National Development and Social Fund, May 24, 2021, 
https://ndsf.com.mt/en/Pages/News/Media-Release-01-2021.aspx.
655 “Annual Report 2020,” National Development and Social Fund, 8.
656 “Annual Report 2020,” National Development and Social Fund, 8.
657 “The Fund,” Norges Bank Investment Management, accessed July 12, 2023, https://www.nbim.no/; and 
“Who We Are,” GIC (blog), accessed July 12, 2023, https://www.gic.com.sg/who-we-are/.
658 “Annual Report 2020,” National Development and Social Fund, 8.
659 “Annual Report 2020,” National Development and Social Fund, 10, 11. This includes 6.5 percent in U.S. 
equities and 6.1 percent in emerging market equities.
660 “Annual Report 2020,” National Development and Social Fund. 10.
661 “Annual Report 2020,” National Development and Social Fund, 14.
662 “Annual Report 2020,” National Development and Social Fund, 15.
663 While the cash balance is high, it should be noted that the NDSF was used to support the Maltese economy 
and help provide social services during the pandemic. Referred to as a war-chest by Malta’s prime minister, 
the NDSF helped the Maltese government provide a guaranteed wage to some of its citizens in addition 
to other social services. “Malta Citizenship by Investment Fund,” ACC Immigration, December 7, 2021, 
https://www.maltaimmigration.eu/malta-citizenship-by-investment-fund/; “NDSF’s Targeted Funding 
for Social Projects Reaches €109.04M by December 2020,” Community Agency Malta, May 24, 2021, 
https://komunita.gov.mt/en/2021/05/24/ndsf-targeted-funding-for-social-projects-reaches-109m-by-
december-2020/; and David Curmi, “The Importance of the National Development and Social Fund 
(NDSF),” National Development and Social Fund, accessed November 13, 2023, https://ndsf.com.mt/en/
Documents/Interview-David-Curmi.pdf. The Chairman of the NDSF also noted that the fund’s large cash 
balance allowed it to support the Maltese government without having to liquidate its assets. 
664 “Annual Report 2020,” National Development and Social Fund, 5.
665 “Sovereign Investors 2020: A Growing Force,” PwC, 2020, 3–6, https://www.pwc.com/gx/en/sovereign-
wealth-investment-funds/publications/assets/sovereign-investors-2020.pdf.
666 “Sovereign Investors 2020,” PwC.
667 “Offshore Leaks Database,” International Consortium of Investigative Journalists, 2022, https://
offshoreleaks.icij.org/; Julian Delia, “Four Years after Promised Divestment, Passports Fund Retains Majority 
Share of Lombard Bank,” February 9, 2022, https://theshiftnews.com/2022/02/09/four-years-after-
promised-divestment-passports-fund-retains-majority-share-of-lombard-bank/; Lombard Bank Malta, 
“Lombard Bank Malta p.l.c.: Annual Report and Financial Statements,” 2022, https://www.lombardmalta.
com/financial-report/2021/LOM_20211231_CON_AFR_529900UIRB65OY6U4B21/reports/
lombardbankmaltaplc-2021-12-31-en-InlineViewer.xhtml; and Lombard Bank Malta, “2017 Annual 
Report,” 2018, https://www.lombardmalta.com/financial-results.
668 “Offshore Leaks Database,” International Consortium of Investigative Journalists; Delia, “Four Years after 
Promised Divestment, Passports Fund Retains Majority Share of Lombard Bank.”
669 Christian Henrik Nesheim, “Malta’s Budget Surplus Soars to Highest in EU, 90% Attributable to 
Citizenship by Investment,” Investment Migration Insider (blog), May 4, 2018, https://www.imidaily.com/
editors-picks/maltas-budget-surplus-soars-to-highest-in-eu-90-attributable-to-citizenship-by-investment/.


Carnegie Endowment for International Peace   |   193
670 Scherrer and Thirion, “Citizenship by Investment (CBI) and Residency by Investment (RBI) Schemes in the 
EU,” 6.  
671 Ranieri, “The Malta Connection: A Corrupting Island in a ‘Corrupting Sea’?”
672 Christian Henrik Nesheim, “Malta Sovereign Wealth Fund Now in World Top 50 Thanks to Citizenship 
Program,” Investment Migration Insider (blog), October 2, 2018, https://www.imidaily.com/europe/
malta-sovereign-wealth-fund-now-in-world-top-50-thanks-to-citizenship-program/.
673 Nesheim, “Malta Sovereign Wealth Fund Now in World Top 50 Thanks to Citizenship Program.”
674 “Top 100 Largest Sovereign Wealth Fund Rankings by Total Assets,” Sovereign Wealth Fund Institute, 
accessed September 05, 2023, https://www.swfinstitute.org/fund-rankings/sovereign-wealth-fund.
675 Scherrer and Thirion, “Citizenship by Investment (CBI) and Residency by Investment (RBI) Schemes in the 
EU,” 45. 
676 Scherrer and Thirion, “Citizenship by Investment (CBI) and Residency by Investment (RBI) Schemes in the 
EU,” 45.
677 Scherrer and Thirion, “Citizenship by Investment (CBI) and Residency by Investment (RBI) Schemes in the 
EU,” 45.
678 “Malta Golden Passports,” BBC News.
Chapter 11
679 Susan Rose-Ackerman and Bonnie J. Palifka, Corruption and Government: Causes, Consequences, and Reform 
(New York, NY: Cambridge University Press, 2016), 108; and Kevin Dehoff, John Dowdy, and O Sung 
Kwon, “Defense Offsets: From ‘Contractual Burden’ to Competitive Weapon,” McKinsey & Company, 
July 1, 2014, https://www.mckinsey.com/industries/public-sector/our-insights/defense-offsets-from-con-
tractual-burden-to-competitive-weapon.\\uc0\\u8221{} McKinsey & Company, July 2014, https://www.
mckinsey.com/industries/public-sector/our-insights/defense-offsets-from-contractual-burden-to-competi-
tive-weapon.”,”plainCitation”:”Susan Rose-Ackerman and Bonnie J. Palifka, Corruption and Government:  
Causes, Consequences, and Reform, 2nd ed. (New York, NY: Cambridge University Press, 2016
680 The shrimp pools could not remain cool, and the project failed. A retired brigadier general who owned an 
18 percent share of the Arabian Shrimp Company had been the head of Saudi Arabia’s Economic Offset 
Secretariat until he had retired from the military. He also had a 45 percent stake in the private venture firm 
that handled the offset obligation. “Guns and Sugar,” Economist, May 25, 2013, https://www.economist.
com/business/2013/05/25/guns-and-sugar; and Shana Marshall, “The New Politics of Patronage: The Arms 
Trade and Clientelism in the Arab World,” University of Maryland College Park, 2012, 151, retrieved 
from https://www.proquest.com/dissertations-theses/new-politics-patronage-arms-trade-clientelism/
docview/1179020359/se-2. 
681 Marshall, “The New Politics of Patronage,” 169–170.
682 “UAE: OPB Turns Into TEC,” Countertrade and Offset, June 25, 2012. CTO archives available via 
paywall at https://www.cto-offset.com/archive-newsletter. See also Daniel Haberly, “From Financialization 
to Vulture Developmentalism: The South-North Strategic Sovereign Wealth Fund and Politics of the 
‘Quadruple Bottom Line,’” in The Oxford Handbook of Sovereign Wealth Funds, eds. Douglas Cumming, 
Geoffrey Wood, Igor Filatotchev, and Juliane Reinecke (Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press, 2017); 
Agnes Helou, “UAE Launches ‘Edge’ Conglomerate to Address Its ‘Antiquated Military Industry,’” Defense 
News, November 6, 2019, https://www.defensenews.com/digital-show-dailies/dubai-air-show/2019/11/06/
uae-launches-edge-conglomerate-to-address-its-antiquated-military-industry/; “About Us,” EDGE Group, 
accessed July 12, 2023, https://edgegroup.ae/about; “Our History,” Mubadala, accessed July 12, 2023, 
https://www.mubadala.com/en/who-we-are/our-history; and “Top 100 Largest Sovereign Wealth Fund 
Rankings by Total Assets,” Sovereign Wealth Fund Institute, accessed July 12, 2023, https://www.swfinsti-
tute.org/fund-rankings/sovereign-wealth-fund, 100.
683 “Our History,” Mubadala, accessed July 29, 2023.


194   |   Sovereign Wealth Funds: Corruption and Other Governance Risks
684 El-Din reportedly stepped down from UOG in 2000, which would predate Mubadala’s founding by two 
years. Marshall, “The New Politics of Patronage”; and “United Arab Emirates: The Cabinet—His Highness 
Sheikh Mohamed Bin Zayed Al Nahyan,” accessed December 8, 2023, https://uaecabinet.ae/en/details/
federal-supreme-council/his-highness-sheikh-mohamed-bin-zayed-al-nahyan, 200–201. Most dates for 
the founding of the UOG merely point to its establishment in the 1990s, but one source states that it was 
founded in 1998 by the governments of Abu Dhabi and Dubai. Prior to 1997, each of the seven emirates 
that make up the UAE had to organize, train, and equip their own forces. In 1997, these forces were com-
bined under one General Headquarters (GHQ). The UOG was created to serve as a combined organization 
to funnel defense offset–related investments into UAE-wide projects, whereas the Offsets Program Bureau 
(now Tawazun) was originally designated for offset investments just for the emirate of Abu Dhabi. “Abu 
Dhabi—UAE Offset Group,” The Free Library, 2014, accessed July 29, 2023, https://www.thefreelibrary.
com/ABU+DHABI+-+UAE+Offset+Group.-a097785581. 
685 US Security and Exchange Commission Form S-1 , “Makara Strategic Investment Corp.” February 25, 
2022, accessed July 29, 2023, https://www.sec.gov/Archives/edgar/data/1871810/000110465922027517/
tm2130459d2_s1.htm. Other sources that cite Mubadala’s development from the UAE’s offset program 
and its prior title as the Offset Development Company include Haberly, “From Financialization to Vulture 
Developmentalism,”101–103; and “Abu Dhabi Leading German Press Headlines,” Emirates New Agency, 
April 27, 2004, https://wam.ae/en/details/1395226435407. Another example comes from Stanley Carvalho, 
“New Firm to Control Dolphin,” Gulf News, March 20, 2003, https://gulfnews.com/uae/new-firm-to-con-
trol-dolphin-1.350783; which notes that the new “Offsets Development Co,” has replaced the “UAE Offsets 
Group” as the new equity holder with a 51 percent interest in Dolphin Energy Ltd. Subsequent reports note 
that it is Mubadala that has the 51 percent stake, such as Daniel Canty, “Special Report: Dolphin Energy: 
Mubadala, Total, and Oxy Have Turned Pipe Dreams Into Reality,” Oil & Gas Middle East, May 12, 2009, 
https://www.oilandgasmiddleeast.com/news/article-5444-special-report-dolphin-energy. 
686 Haberly, “From Financialization to Vulture Developmentalism,” 101–103. Mubadala and the Tawazun 
are not the only funds set up to funnel defense offsets to UAE-based businesses. Others include Sinaat, 
a joint stock company established in 1999; a company called UAE Special Investments set up by Chase 
Manhattan Bank and Finasa Emirates in 1994; and the Alfia private equity fund managed by First Gulf 
Bank and incorporated in Mauritius in 2000. Little information is publicly available on these funds once 
they are established. Yawar Hanif Mian, “UAE Offset Programme: A Success Story,” Military Technology 
23, no 3 (March 1999): 6015, accessed July 29, 2023, https://www.proquest.cm/docview/199055721/
FA489EE4C984454FPQ/2?accountid=11091; “Chase Sets Up UAE Offset Investment Company,” Project 
and Trade Finance, issue 134 (September 1994), accessed July 29, 2023, https://www.proquest.com/
docview/200636132?accountid=11091&forcedol=true; and Marshall, “The New Politics of Patronage,” 
169–171.
687 James Chen, “Mubadala Development Company,” Investopedia, September 9, 2022, https://www.investo-
pedia.com/terms/m/mubadala-development-company.asp.
688 Haberly, “From Financialization to Vulture Developmentalism,” 108.
689 Andrew England, Simeon Kerr, and Samer al-Atrush, “The New Gulf Sovereign Wealth Fund Boom,” 
Financial Times, January 3, 2023, https://www.ft.com/content/33a985a5-6955-4f44-869f-82e82e620581.
690 “Pilatus Gives Workshare to UAE’s Strata,” Countertrade and Offset XXXIX, no. 8, April 26, 2021, 4. CTO 
archives available via paywall at https://www.cto-offset.com/archive-newsletter. 
691 Stanley Carvalho, “Abu Dhabi Creates $125 Billion Fund by Merging Mubadala, IPIC,” Reuters, January 
21, 2017, https://www.reuters.com/article/us-emirates-abudhabi-funds-idUSKBN1550R2. If Mubadala 
was formed from IPIC in 2002 as described on Mubadala’s website, then the child sovereign wealth fund has 
acquired its original parent.
692 Carvalho, “Abu Dhabi Creates $125 Billion Fund by Merging Mubadala, IPIC”; James Griffiths, 
“How 1MDB Finally Caught Up With Najib Razak,” CNN, February 11, 2019, https://www.cnn.
com/2019/02/10/asia/malaysia-najib-trial-1mdb-profile-intl/index.html; and England, Kerr, and al-Atrush, 
“The New Gulf Sovereign Wealth Fund Boom.”
693 England, Kerr, and al-Atrush, “The New Gulf Sovereign Wealth Fund Boom.”


Carnegie Endowment for International Peace   |   195
694 “Our History,” Mubadala; “About Mubadala,” Mubadala, accessed July 12, 2022, https://www.mubadala.
com/en/who-we-are/about-the-company; and “Top 100 Largest Sovereign Wealth Fund Rankings by Total 
Assets,” Sovereign Wealth Fund Institute. 
695 Since 2019, the Defense and Security Development Fund has been managed under the Tawazun Economic 
Program, which in turn is run by Tawazun.
696 “UAE: OPB Turns Into TEC,” Countertrade and Offset; and “UAE: Tawazun Gains Muscle as New 
Investments are Readied,” Countertrade and Offset XXVI, no. 21, November 10, 2008, 6–7. CTO archives 
available via paywall at https://www.cto-offset.com/archive-newsletter. 
697 Haberly, “From Financialization to Vulture Developmentalism,” 107. Tawazun is Arabic for “balance.” It 
was the U.S. Commerce Department’s International Trade Division that originally suggested establishing 
such funds in 1997. Soon after, however, the agency backed off, especially after members of Congress 
and some Commerce Department staff raised concerns that up-front offset payments could be used to 
channel financial favors to foreign officials. Daniel Pearl, “Offset Requirements of Defense Deals Often 
Have Little to Do With Purchaser,” Wall Street Journal, April 20, 2000, https://www.wsj.com/articles/
SB956183692708157042.\nunder the new logic of international arms deals.”,”container-title”:”Wall Street 
Journal”,”ISSN”:”0099-9660”,”language”:”en-US”,”section”:”Front Section”,”source”:”www.wsj.com”,”ti-
tle”:”Offset Requirements of Defense Deals Often Have Little to Do With Purchaser”,”URL”:”https://
www.wsj.com/articles/SB956183692708157042”,”author”:[{“family”:”Pearl”,”given”:”Daniel”}],”accesse
d”:{“date-parts”:[[“2021”,7,2]]},”issued”:{“date-parts”:[[“2000”,4,20]]}}}],”schema”:”https://github.com/
citation-style-language/schema/raw/master/csl-citation.json”} 
698 “Tawazun Council—Who We Are,” accessed December 8, 2023, https://www.tawazun.gov.ae/who-we-are/. 
The council members are the Tawazun Council CEO, the Chief Officer of the Industrial Development Unit, 
and the Senior Manager of Government Affairs. The Tawazun Council is also part of the Tawazun Economic 
Committee (TEC) which is “composed of six members who represent the GHQ [General Headquarters of 
the UAE Armed Forces], the Presidential Guard Command (PGC), and the Tawazun Economic Council. 
GHQ and PGC members include the Chief of Logistics Staff, Director of Purchasing Department, and 
Director of Contracts and Finance of PGC.” The Offset Guidelines Quarterly Bulletin, CTO, July 31, 2023, 
318. CTO archives available via paywall at https://www.cto-offset.com/archive-qb. Though the UAE 
recently renamed the Tawazun Economic Council simply the “Tawazun Council,” trade publications still 
refer to it as the “Tawazun Economic Council,” including the source cited here.
699	 The Offset Guidelines Quarterly Bulletin, CTO, 318..
700 “Entities by Cluster,” EDGE Group, accessed July 28, 2023, https://edgegroup.ae/entities. 
701 Helou, “UAE Launches ‘Edge’ Conglomerate to Address Its ‘Antiquated Military Industry.’”
702 “Abu Dhabi’s Tawazun Economic Council Launches $680m Defense Fund,” Arab News, February 14, 2019, 
https://www.arabnews.com/node/1451806/amp.
703 “Titomic to Advance 3D Manufacturing Line With UAE-Based Tawazun SDF,” Australian 
Manufacturing (blog), February 26, 2021, https://www.australianmanufacturing.com.au/
titomic-to-advance-3d-manufacturing-line-with-uae-based-tawazun-sdf/.
704 “Defense and Security Development Fund Invests Into Al Marakeb in 
Return for 30%,” SDF (blog), February 19, 2019, https://www.sdf.ae/
defense-and-security-development-fund-invests-into-al-marakeb-in-return-for-30/.
705 The Singaporean firm is called ST Engineering. Its corporate venture capital unit that conducted the deal 
was itself originally formed from Singapore’s sovereign wealth fund, Temasek Holdings. “ST Engineering’s 
Corporate Venture Capital Unit Invests in HiSky,” Satellite Markets & Research, December 8, 2021, http://
satellitemarkets.com/st-engineering-investment-hisky; “HiSky Raised $30M Series A Funding, Led by ST 
Engineering,” Strategic Development Fund, December 2021, https://www.sdf.ae/hisky-raised-30m-series-
a-funding-led-by-st-engineering/; and Kristie Neo, “ST Engineering Ventures Eyes China Market, Plans 
Presence in US, Israel,” DealStreetAsia (blog), October 25, 2018, https://www.dealstreetasia.com/stories/
st-engineering-ventures-109670/.


196   |   Sovereign Wealth Funds: Corruption and Other Governance Risks
706 The three banks are First Abu Dhabi Bank, Commercial Bank of Dubai, and National Bank 
of Fujairah. Deena Kamel, “Tawazun’s Defence Fund Partners With Local Banks on Dh700m 
Programme,” National, November 13, 2019, https://www.thenationalnews.com/business/banking/
tawazun-s-defence-fund-partners-with-local-banks-on-dh700m-programme-1.937276.
707 Dehoff, Dowdy, and Kwon, “Defense Offsets.”
708 It is not only states that demand these agreements be shielded from public view; defense firms often argue 
that offsets should be classified as “proprietary” information to prevent disclosure. See box 1 for additional 
information on US laws and regulations regarding defense offsets..
709  The estimated dollar value based on a British pound/U.S. dollar exchange rate of 1.98 as of December 1, 
2006. The SFO investigation was shut down by the UK government in December 2006 as allegations of 
these immense bribes continued to emerge. Exchange rate for 2006 accessed from https://www.poundster-
linglive.com/bank-of-england-spot/historical-spot-exchange-rates/gbp/GBP-to-USD-2006. 
710 “The Al Yamamah Arms Deals,” World Peace Foundation, accessed July 12, 2023, https://sites.tufts.edu/
corruptarmsdeals/the-al-yamamah-arms-deals/.
711 “The South African Arms Deal,” World Peace Foundation, accessed July 12, 2023, https://sites.tufts.
edu/corruptarmsdeals/the-south-african-arms-deal/; Mogomotsi Magome, “South African Court 
Rules Zuma’s Corruption Case to Continue,” AP News, October 26, 2021, https://apnews.com/
article/africa-money-laundering-south-africa-jacob-zuma-87b8accb7f37accbe168ff8104c4bbcf; and 
Mogomotsi Magome and Gerald Imray, “Former South African President’s Trial Over Arms Deal Begins,” 
Defense News, May 26, 2021, https://www.defensenews.com/global/mideast-africa/2021/05/26/
former-south-african-presidents-trial-over-arms-deal-begins/.
712 Goodman, “Holes in the Net,” 10.
713 “Annual BIS Offset Report: Total Volume of Offsets Higher Than Average Despite Lowest Number of Offset 
Contracts and Transactions,” Countertrade and Offset, August 16, 2021. CTO archives available via paywall 
at https://www.cto-offset.com/archive-newsletter. American defense companies must annually report 
any offset contract agreements that exceed $5 million, as well as the performance of any offset obligations 
worth over $250,000 in credits. The Commerce Department only publishes aggregated data; no individual 
company data can be released without the permission of the company. “Reporting for Calendar Year 2020 
on Offsets Agreements Related to Sales of Defense Articles or Defense Services to Foreign Countries or 
Foreign Firms,” U.S. Federal Register 86, no. 100 (2021): 28335–6, https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/
FR-2021-05-26/pdf/2021-11068.pdf.
714 “Lockheed Adds $2.4 Billion of Outstanding Offsets in 2020, Drops $100m in Penalty Liabilities,” 
Countertrade and Offset, March 22, 2021. CTO archives available via paywall at https://www.cto-offset.
com/archive-newsletter. 
715 “Defense Offsets Expectations Are Considerable, But Implementation Is Uneven,” Avascent 
(blog), February 23, 2021, https://www.avascent.com/news-insights/perspectives/
defense-offsets-expectations-are-considerable-but-implementation-is-uneven.
716 Marshall, “The New Politics of Patronage,” 154.
717	 The Offset Guidelines Quarterly Bulletin, CTO, July 31, 2023, 323. CTO archives available via paywall at 
https://www.cto-offset.com/archive-qb.
718 Bilal Y. Saab, “The Gulf Rising: Defense Industrialization in Saudi Arabia and the UAE,” May 7, 2014, 28, 
www.atlanticcouncil.org/images/publications/The_Gulf_Rising.pdf. An offset agreement is known as a 
Tawazun Economic Programme Agreement (TEPA). The Offset Guidelines Quarterly Bulletin, CTO, July 31, 
2023, 323. CTO archives available via paywall at https://www.cto-offset.com/archive-qb.
719	 The Offset Guidelines Quarterly Bulletin, CTO, July 31, 2023, 320-322. CTO archives available via paywall 
at https://www.cto-offset.com/archive-qb.
720 Marshall, “The New Politics of Patronage,” 167.
721 Marshall, “The New Politics of Patronage,” 149.
722 Marshall, “The New Politics of Patronage,” 211–17, 224–29.


Carnegie Endowment for International Peace   |   197
723 Marshall, “The New Politics of Patronage,” 148.
724 Marshall, “The New Politics of Patronage,” 168.
725 Andrew England and Simeon Kerr, “The Abu Dhabi Royal at the Nexus of UAE Business 
and National Security,” Financial Times, January 25, 2021, https://www.ft.com/content/
ce09911b-041d-4651-9bbb-d2a16d39ede7.
726 Carola Hoyas, “Quid Pro Quos Mean Defence Contracts Help Gulf Economies,” Financial Times, October 
9, 2013, https://www.ft.com/content/2e332690-25f1-11e3-8ef6-00144feab7de.
727 Hoyas, “Quid Pro Quos Mean Defence Contracts Help Gulf Economies.”
728 Shireena Al Nowais, “President Sheikh Khalifa Appoints New Minister of 
State,” National, September 18, 2018, https://www.thenationalnews.com/uae/
president-sheikh-khalifa-appoints-new-minister-of-state-1.768327.
729 In July 2022, Mubadala announced that Aldar was buying $1.17 billion worth of properties from Mubadala. 
“Minister of State His Excellency Ahmed Bin Ali Al Sayegh,” United Arab Emirates Ministry of Foreign 
Affairs & International Cooperation, accessed August 13, 2022, https://www.mofaic.gov.ae/the-ministry/
the-ministers/minister-of-state-and-chairman-of-abu-dhabi-global-market/minister-of-state-and--chair-
man-of-abu-dhabi-global-market; and Massoud A. Derhally and Sarmad Khan, “Aldar Agrees to Buy Four 
Properties From Mubadala in $1.17bn Deal,” National, July 28, 2022, https://www.thenationalnews.com/
business/2022/07/28/aldar-agrees-to-buy-4-properties-from-mubadala-in-117bn-deal/.
730 Derhally and Khan, “Aldar Agrees to Buy Four Properties From Mubadala in $1.17bn Deal.”
731 Leo G.B. Welt and Dennis B. Wilson, “Offsets in the Middle East,” Middle East Policy Council, accessed 
November 1, 2023, https://www.mepc.org/journal/offsets-middle-east; and “UAE: Tawazun’s Policy Is Off 
the Record—And That’s Official,” Countertrade and Offset, March 18, 2019, 2–3. The Offset Guidelines 
Quarterly Bulletin, Countertrade and Offset, July 31, 2023, 320–322. Excess credits can be banked for 
up to five years following the completion of the offset project. The Offset Guidelines Quarterly Bulletin, 
Countertrade and Offset, July 31, 2023, 327. CTO archives available via paywall at https://www.cto-offset.
com/archive-qb.
732  Marshall, “The New Politics of Patronage,” 200–201; and “Chescor Capital I Corporate Finance & Strategy 
I Dubai,” Chescor Capital, accessed January 30, 2022, https://www.chescorcapital.com.
733  Blenheim was also heavily involved in aircraft leasing, which is another common use for offset funds. 
Marshall, “The New Politics of Patronage,” 201–204; “Blenheim Capital Services Limited,” UK Companies 
House, accessed July 12, 2023, https://find-and-update.company-information.service.gov.uk/compa-
ny/05819287/officers; and Anne Rhodes, “UAE Offsets Move Westward With Refining and Marketing 
Megaproject,” Oil & Gas Journal 98, no. 36 (September 4, 2000): accessed July 29, 2023, https://www.
proquest.com/docview/274441469/C62E1617E5D642AAPQ/1?accountid=11091. Blenheim declared 
bankruptcy in 2021 after a public and expensive divorce by R. Grant Rogan and a feud with Lockheed 
Martin over offset contracts with South Korea. 
734 Transparency International, “Defence Companies Index 2020 on Anti-Corruption and Corporate 
Transparency,” Transparency International Defence and Security Program, accessed July, 28, 2021, https://
ti-defence.org/dci/. 
735 “UAE: Tawazun Introduces Temporary ‘Get Out of Trouble’ Option,” Countertrade and Offset, November 
7, 2016, 6. CTO zrchives available via paywall at https://www.cto-offset.com/archive-newsletter.
736 “UAE: Tawazun Introduces Temporary ‘Get Out of Trouble’ Option,” Countertrade and Offset, 5–6.
737	 The Offset Guidelines Quarterly Bulletin, CTO, July 31, 2023, 326. CTO archives available via paywall at 
https://www.cto-offset.com/archive-qb.
738 Ryan Grim, “Gulf Government Gave Secret $20 Million Gift to D.C. Think Tank,” 
The Intercept (blog), August 10, 2017, https://theintercept.com/2017/08/09/
gulf-government-gave-secret-20-million-gift-to-d-c-think-tank/.


198   |   Sovereign Wealth Funds: Corruption and Other Governance Risks
739 If, for instance, a company were to win an arms contract worth $10 million, then presumably, a $6 million 
offset would be owed with it. That $6 million should be put into creating a local parts supplier, for instance, 
which increases the country’s industrial base and provides jobs. If, however, cash is provided instead, it would 
have made much more sense to simply charge $4 million for the defense contract rather than charge $10 
million to the country’s treasury but then divert $6 million of that to an off-budget fund.
740 Alex Emmons, “Weapons Money Intended for Economic Development Being Secretly Diverted 
to Lobbying,” The Intercept (blog), August 17, 2017, https://theintercept.com/2017/08/17/
weapons-money-intended-for-economic-development-being-secretly-diverted-to-lobbying/.
741 “UAE: Tawazun’s Policy Is Off the Record,” Countertrade and Offset, 2. CTO archives available via paywall 
at https://www.cto-offset.com/archive-newsletter.
742 The Government Defense Integrity Index (GDI) is the only global assessment tool for countries’ security 
sector susceptibility to corruption.  As the European Commission noted about the index, “It [the GDI] 
is thus a comprehensive assessment of the quality of institutional controls in the defence sector.” See 
“Government Defence Integrity Index,” European Commission, accessed April 19, 2024, https://compos-
ite-indicators.jrc.ec.europa.eu/explorer/explorer/indices/gdii/government-defence-integrity-index. 
743 Transparency International, “Government Defence Integrity Index 2020—United Arab Emirates,” 
Transparency International Defence and Security Program, accessed July, 28, 2021, https://ti-defence.org/
gdi/countries/united-arab-emirates/.
744 Transparency International, “Government Defence Integrity Index 2020—United Arab Emirates.”
745 Julien Maire, Adnan Mazarei, and Edwin M. Truman, “Sovereign Wealth Funds 
Are Growing More Slowly, and Governance Issues Remain,” Peterson Institute for 
International Economics, February 2021, https://www.piie.com/publications/policy-briefs/
sovereign-wealth-funds-are-growing-more-slowly-and-governance-issues.
746 “Linaburg-Maduell Transparency Index,” accessed July 12, 2023, https://www.swfinstitute.org/research/
linaburg-maduell-transparency-index.
747 “UAE: Tawazun’s Policy Is Off the Record,” Countertrade and Offset.
748 “UAE: Tawazun’s Policy Is Off the Record,” Countertrade and Offset, 1.
749 Artur Grigoryan, “The Ruling Bargain: Sovereign Wealth Funds in Elite-Dominated Societies,” Economics 
of Governance 17, no. 2 (May 2016): 169–170, https://doi.org/10.1007/s10101-015-0168-7; and “ Sheikh 
Mohamed Bin Zayed Al Nahyan Issues Resolutions Appointing Tawazun to Manage Procurements, 
Contracts of UAE Armed Forces, Abu Dhabi Police,” Zawya, press release, February 24, 2021, https://www.
zawya.com/en/press-release/sheikh-mohamed-bin-zayed-al-nahyan-issues-resolution-appointing-tawazun-
to-manage-procurements-contracts-of-no72gg8d.
750 Kristian Coates Ulrichsen, The United Arab Emirates: Power, Politics, and Policymaking (New York, NY: 
Routledge, 2017), 145.
751 “HE Tareq Al Hosani—Al Yah Satellite Communications Company,” Yahsat, accessed July 13, 2023, 
https://www.yahsat.com/en/about-yahsat/our-leadership/board-of-directors/he-tareq-abdulraheem-al-ho-
sani.2022, https://www.yahsat.com/en/about-yahsat/our-leadership/board-of-directors/he-tareq-abdul-
raheem-al-hosani.”,”plainCitation”:”“HE Tareq Al Hosani - Al Yah Satellite Communications Company 
(Yahsat
752 Marshall, “The New Politics of Patronaged,” 422; and “HE Tareq Al Hosani—Al Yah Satellite 
Communications Company,”MA”,”language”:”en”,”page”:”32”,”publisher”:”Brandeis University Crown 
Center for Middle East Studies”,”publisher-place”:”Waltham, MA”,”source”:”Zotero”,”title”:”The 
New Politics of Patronage: The Arms Trade and Clientism in the Arab World”,”URL”:”https://
www.brandeis.edu/crown/publications/working-papers/pdfs/wp4.pdf”,”author”:[{“fam-
ily”:”Marshall”,”given”:”Shana”}],”accessed”:{“date-parts”:[[“2021”,2,18]]},”issued”:{“-
date-parts”:[[“2012”,10]]}},”locator”:”422”},{“id”:3865,”uris”:[“http://zotero.org/groups/4437687/items/
LZ3J7BPM”],”itemData”:{“id”:3865,”type”:”webpage”,”title”:”HE Tareq Al Hosani - Al Yah Satellite 
Communications Company (Yahsat Yahsat.
753 Marshall, “The New Politics of Patronage,” 169.


Carnegie Endowment for International Peace   |   199
754 Charles Forrester, “Tawazun Boosts Investments After Reshuffling Businesses,” Janes, September 23, 2021, 
https://www.janes.com/defence-news/news-detail/tawazun-boosts-investments-after-reshuffling-businesses.
755 “HE Tareq Al Hosani—Al Yah Satellite Communications Company,”1,17]]}}}],”schema”:”https://github.
com/citation-style-language/schema/raw/master/csl-citation.json”}  Yahsat.
756 Marshall, “The New Politics of Patronage,” 427.
757 “UAE: Duel in the Sun as Passions Boil Over,” Countertrade and Offset, August 27, 2012. CTO archives 
available via paywall at https://www.cto-offset.com/archive-newsletter.
758 “UAE: Duel in the Sun as Passions Boil Over,” Countertrade and Offset.
759 The CEO of Saudi Arabian Military Industries is the former defense contractor Rheinmetall CEO. The Offset 
Guidelines Quarterly Bulletin, CTO, July 31, 2023, 233. CTO archives available via paywall at https://www.
cto-offset.com/archive-qb.
760 “Airbus to Form Joint Venture With SAMI as It Pushes for Jet Order,” Countertrade and Offset, December 
20, 2021. CTO archives available via paywall at https://www.cto-offset.com/archive-newsletter.
761	 The Offset Guidelines Quarterly Bulletin, CTO, July 31, 2023, 233. CTO archives available via paywall at 
https://www.cto-offset.com/archive-qb.
762 Hadeel Al Sayegh and Moataz Mohamed, “Saudi Arabia Transfers Aramco Shares Worth $80 Bln to State 
Fund,” Reuters, February 13, 2022, https://www.reuters.com/business/saudi-arabia-transfers-4-aramco-
shares-sovereign-wealth-fund-state-news-agency-2022-02-13/; England, Kerr, and al-Atrush, “The New 
Gulf Sovereign Wealth Fund Boom.”
763 The board of the General Authority for Military Industries (GAMI) is headed by Crown Prince Mohammad 
bin Salman; other members include the Minister of Energy, Industry, and Mineral Resources; Minister of 
Finance; Minister of Commerce and Industry; Chairman of the Board of SAMI; and representatives from 
the ministries of defense and interior plus the national guard. The Offset Guidelines Quarterly Bulletin, 
Countertrade and Offset, July 31, 2023, 233. CTO archives available via paywall at https://www.cto-offset.
com/archive-qb. Offset proposals from defense contracts may be submitted to GAMI before they develop 
a full offset plan; among the information contained in a project proposal is information on the chosen 
local partner or subcontractor. A trade publication notes, “Selecting a partner [a local Saudi partner to an 
offset agreement] connected to the royal family, perhaps through a young person close to Prince Salman, 
could liberate the OEM [original equipment manufacturers] from offset requirements and focus instead on 
localization.” The Offset Guidelines Quarterly Bulletin, Countertrade and Offset, July 31, 2023, 236–237. 
CTO archives available via paywall at https://www.cto-offset.com/archive-qb.
764 “GAMI and Tawazun Sign Cooperation Agreement,” Countertrade and Offset, March 8, 2021. CTO 
archives available via paywall at https://www.cto-offset.com/archive-newsletter.
765	 The Offset Guidelines Quarterly Bulletin, Countertrade and Offset, July 31, 2023, 239. CTO archives 
available via paywall at https://www.cto-offset.com/archive-qb.
766 “Saudi Arabia,” Transparency International Government Defence Integrity Index, September 2019, accessed 
July 29, 2023, https://ti-defence.org/gdi/countries/saudi-arabia/.
767 This trial has been especially sensitive in the United Kingdom because the defendants claimed that GPT 
was merely a “middleman” to facilitate the payment of bribes (to Saudi senior leaders and royals) that were 
arranged as part of a UK-Saudi arms deal that had been agreed to in 1978. Oliver Briggs, “GPT Pleads 
Guilty to Corruption,” UK Serious Fraud Office, April 28, 2021, https://www.sfo.gov.uk/2021/04/28/
gpt-pleads-guilty-to-corruption/; “GPT and the Saudi National Guard,” World Peace Foundation, 
accessed August 13, 2022, https://sites.tufts.edu/corruptarmsdeals/gpt-and-the-saudi-national-guard/; 
“Court Halts Case Into UK Bribery to Secure Saudi Arms Deal,” Middle East Monitor (blog), July 15, 
2022, https://www.middleeastmonitor.com/20220715-court-halts-case-into-uk-bribery-to-secure-
saudi-arms-deal2022, https://sites.tufts.edu/corruptarmsdeals/gpt-and-the-saudi-national-guard/; \\
uc0\\u8220{}Court Halts Case into UK Bribery to Secure Saudi Arms Deal,\\uc0\\u8221{} {\\i{}Middle 
East Monitor} (blog; and David Pegg and Rob Evans, “Two Men Acquitted of Bribing Saudis in Huge 
British Defence Deal,” Guardian, March 6, 2024, https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2024/mar/06/
two-men-acquitted-of-bribing-saudis-in-huge-british-defence-deal.


200   |   Sovereign Wealth Funds: Corruption and Other Governance Risks
768 Andrew England and Simeon Kerr, “Saudi Arabia: $3.5bn Fraud Case Set to Define Crown 
Prince’s Anti-Graft Campaign,” Financial Times, March 28, 2021, https://www.ft.com/content/
df95eab7-5dce-48fc-943d-889efe74fd6b.
769 “Tawazun and Bahrain Strengthen Offset Cooperation,” Countertrade and Offset, December 6, 2021. CTO 
archives available via paywall at https://www.cto-offset.com/archive-newsletter.
770 “Tawazun and Bahrain Strengthen Offset Cooperation,” Countertrade and Offset, 6.
771	 The Offset Guidelines Quarterly Bulletin, Countertrade and Offset, July 31, 2023, 41. CTO archives available 
via paywall at https://www.cto-offset.com/archive-qb.
772 Fareed Rahman, “Mubadala and Bahrain’s Mumtalakat Sign Deal to Explore Co-Investment Opportunities,” 
National, December 14, 2021, https://www.thenationalnews.com/business/economy/2021/12/14/
mubadala-and-bahrains-mumtalakat-sign-deal-to-explore-co-investment-opportunities/.
773	 The Offset Guidelines Quarterly Bulletin, Countertrade and Offset, July 31, 2023, 39. CTO archives available 
via paywall at https://www.cto-offset.com/archive-qb.
774 “Bahrain,” Transparency International Government Defence Integrity Index, October 2020, https://ti-de-
fence.org/gdi/countries/bahrain/.
775 For more on Bahrain’s defense sector, see Jodi Vittori, “Bahrain’s Fragility and Security Sector Procurement,” 
Carnegie Endowment for International Peace, February 26, 2019, https://carnegieendowment.
org/2019/02/26/bahrain-s-fragility-and-security-sector-procurement-pub-78443.
776 “Mubadala Shares Plans: Establishing Strong Aerospace Industry in Abu Dhabi,” November 10, 2007, 
https://www.mubadala.com/en/news/mubadala-shares-plans-establishing-strong-aerospace-indus-
try-abu-dhabi. Some Mubadala press releases are no longer available on their website. The author is grateful 
to a researcher in the UAE who shared downloads of the original press releases.
777 Peter Shaw-Smith, “Horizon Flight Academy Vital to Mideast Rotorcraft Training,” Aviation International 
News, January 23, 2020, https://www.ainonline.com/aviation-news/general-aviation/2020-01-23/hori-
zon-flight-academy-vital-mideast-rotorcraft-training. At least one member of the Board of Horizon Flight 
Academy is also a senior military leader: His Excellency Major General Staff Pilot Stephen A. Toumajan. 
778 “Statement of Armed Forces Official Source on Refugee Boat Incident,” Emirates News Agency, March 20, 
2017, http://wam.ae/en/details/1395302603973.
779 Quoted from Michael Picard and Colby Goodman, “Hidden Costs: US Private Military and Security 
Companies and the Risks of Corruption and Conflict,” Transparency International Defence and Security, 
July 2022, 18-20, available at  https://ti-defence.org/wp-content/uploads/2022/08/Hidden-Costs-US-
Private-Military-and-Security-Companies-and-the-Risks-of-Corruption-and-Conflict-Web-PDF.pdf.
780 Quoted from Picard and Goodman, “Hidden Costs.” Per an Emirati government website, “Toumajan was 
the former Commander and Senior Aviation Advisor for the Joint Aviation Command (JAC). Specifically 
responsible for the combat readiness and execution of all aviation missions and training for UAE forces and 
numerous Foreign Military Sales (FMS) and Direct Commercial Sales (DCS) aviation programs.” A few 
paragraphs later, the same website states, “He [Toumajan] has been a member of the several [sic] Board of 
Directors including Knowledge Point International and Horizon Flight Academy International and Board 
of Directors for Horizon flight Academy and AMMROC Maintenance Company.” More information on his 
role in the UAE can be found at Aram Roston, “This American Is a General for a Foreign Army Accused of 
War Crimes in Yemen,” BuzzFeed News, May 7, 2018, https://www.buzzfeednews.com/article/aramroston/
stephen-toumajan-general-us-uae-yemen-contractor; Craig Whitlock and Nate Jones, “UAE Relied on 
Expertise of Retired U.S. Troops to Beef Up Its Military,” Washington Post, accessed July 12, 2023, https://
www.washingtonpost.com/investigations/interactive/2022/uae-military-us-veterans/.
781 In 2021, Knowledge Point was placed under the company Jaheziya, another EDGE Group company that 
specializes in firefighting and emergency response. See “Edge Consolidates Training Businesses,” Janes, 
October 27, 2021, available at https://www.janes.com/defence-news/news-detail/edge-consolidates-train-
ing-businesses; and Picard and Colby, “Hidden Costs.”
782 “Documents Show Arms Network Skirted EU Embargoes,” Organized Crime and Corruption Reporting 
Project, October 2, 2017, https://www.occrp.org/en/investigations/7070-documents-show-arms-net-
work-skirted-eu-embargoes; “From London to Juba: A UK-Registered Company’s Role in One of the 
Largest Arms Deals to South Sudan,” Amnesty International, 2017, https://www.amnesty.org/en/wp-con-
tent/uploads/2021/05/ACT3071152017ENGLISH.pdf.


Carnegie Endowment for International Peace   |   201
783 “EDGE Expands End-to-End Defence Capabilities With Addition of International Golden 
Group,” Aletihad, January 23, 2024, https://en.aletihad.ae/news/business/4458457/
edge-group-adds-international-golden-group-to-portfolio-of-c.
784 Neil Gordon, “The U.S. Just Created a Public Beneficial Ownership Registry for a Subset of Companies,” 
Project On Government Oversight, March 4, 2021, https://www.pogo.org/analysis/2021/03/the-u-s-
just-created-a-public-beneficial-ownership-registry-for-a-subset-of-companies/.2022, https://www.pogo.
org/analysis/2021/03/the-u-s-just-created-a-public-beneficial-ownership-registry-for-a-subset-of-compa-
nies/.”,”plainCitation”:”Neil Gordon, “The U.S. Just Created a Public Beneficial Ownership Registry for a 
Subset of Companies,” Project On Government Oversight, accessed March 12, 2022, https://www.pogo.
org/analysis/2021/03/the-u-s-just-created-a-public-beneficial-ownership-registry-for-a-subset-of-com-
panies/.”,”noteIndex”:693},”citationItems”:[{“id”:3967,”uris”:[“http://zotero.org/groups/4437687/items/
UJRMUGLB”],”itemData”:{“id”:3967,”type”:”webpage”,”abstract”:”The recent U.S. defense budget 
bill contains a powerful corporate accountability and transparency weapon: new requirements for com-
panies, including government contractors, to disclose their beneficial owners.”,”container-title”:”Project 
On Government Oversight”,”language”:”en-US”,”title”:”The U.S. Just Created a Public Beneficial 
Ownership Registry for a Subset of Companies”,”URL”:”https://www.pogo.org/analysis/2021/03/
the-u-s-just-created-a-public-beneficial-ownership-registry-for-a-subset-of-companies/”,”author”:[{“fam-
ily”:”Gordon”,”given”:”Neil”}],”accessed”:{“date-parts”:[[“2022”,3,12]]}}}],”schema”:”https://github.com/
citation-style-language/schema/raw/master/csl-citation.json”} 
Chapter 12
785 “Government Spending Open Data,” USAspending, accessed July 12, 2023, https://www.usaspending.gov/.
786 Robert D. Lamb, Kathryn Mixon, and Sadika Hameed, “Sovereign Wealth Funds in Commodity-Rich 
Fragile States,” May 13, 2013, https://www.csis.org/analysis/sovereign-wealth-funds-commodity-rich-frag-
ile-states; and The Economist, “The Dutch Disease,” University of Oslo, November 26, 1977, https://www.
uio.no/studier/emner/sv/oekonomi/ECON4925/h08/undervisningsmateriale/DutchDisease.pdf. Dutch 
disease describes the paradox wherein a country’s discovery and exploitation of its natural resources can 
often harm other parts of its economy. The case that helped coin the term occurred after the Netherlands 
discovered vast natural gas deposits in 1959. This newfound wealth and exponential growth in oil exports 
caused the Dutch guilder to rise very sharply, making it less competitive for all other non-oil export Dutch 
products. Unemployment in the Netherlands rose from 1.1 percent to 5.1 percent as a result.
787 Andrew Bauer and Perrine Toledano, “Managing the Public Trust: How to Make Natural Resource Funds 
Work for Citizens,” Columbia Center on Sustainable Investment, https://people.climate.columbia.edu/
projects/view/1151. 
788 “Global Foreign Direct Investment Flows Over Last 30 Years,” UN Conference 
on Trade and Development, May 5, 2023, https://unctad.org/data-visualization/
global-foreign-direct-investment-flows-over-last-30-years.
789 “Select USA: Indirect Jobs Supported by U.S. Exports,” International Trade Administration, 
U.S. Department of Commerce, 2, https://www.trade.gov/sites/default/files/2022-04/
IndirectJobsSelectUSABrief.pdf.
790 “Sovereign Wealth Funds: Laws Limiting Foreign Investment Affect U.S. Assets and Agencies Have Various 
Enforcement Processes,” U.S. Government Accountability Office, May 2009, https://www.gao.gov/assets/
gao-09-608.pdf.
791 “National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 1993,” Public Law 102–484, U.S. Congress, October 
23, 1992, https://www.congress.gov/102/statute/STATUTE-106/STATUTE-106-Pg2315.pdf. 
792 Scott Horsley, “Lessons for Today From the U.S.-Japan Trade War of the 1980s,” NPR, May 20, 2019, 
https://www.npr.org/2019/05/20/725139664/lessons-for-today-from-the-u-s-japan-trade-war-of-the-1980s. 
793 Mark E. Talisman, “CFIUS and China: The FIRRMA Factor,” Diplomat, October 26, 2018, https://
thediplomat.com/2018/10/cfius-and-china-the-firrma-factor; and “Executive Order on Ensuring Robust 
Consideration of Evolving National Security Risks by the Committee on Foreign Investment in the 
United States,” White House, September 15, 2022, https://www.whitehouse.gov/briefing-room/presiden-
tial-actions/2022/09/15/executive-order-on-ensuring-robust-consideration-of-evolving-national-securi-
ty-risks-by-the-committee-on-foreign-investment-in-the-united-states. 


202   |   Sovereign Wealth Funds: Corruption and Other Governance Risks
794 Reed Smith Client Alerts, “Executive Order Directs CFIUS to Expand Review of National Security 
Factor,” Reed Smith, October 5, 2022, https://www.reedsmith.com/en/perspectives/2022/10/
executive-order-directs-cfius-to-expand-review-of-national-security-factors. 
795 David Marchick, “Sovereign Wealth Funds and National Security: OECD/City of London Conference,” 
Carlyle Group, March 31, 2006, 11, https:///www.oecd.org/investment/investment-policy/40395077.pdf.
796 James Flanigan, “Company News; Semi-Gas Systems,” New York Times, December 29, 1990, https://www.
nytimes.com/1990/12/29/business/company-news-semi-gas-systems.html.
797 Reuters, “Thomson of France in Offer for LTV Units,” New York Times, April 2, 1992, https://www.
nytimes.com/1992/04/02/business/thomson-of-france-in-offer-for-ltv-units.html. 
798 Marchick, “Sovereign Wealth Funds and National Security,” 60.
799 A comprehensive list can be found in “Sovereign Wealth Funds: Laws Limiting Foreign Investment Affect 
U.S. Assets and Agencies Have Various Enforcement Processes,” U.S. Government Accountability Office.
800 Carol J. Smit, ed., “Prevention of Money Laundering/Combating Terrorist Financing: Guidance for the UK 
Financial Sector: Part I,” Joint Money Laundering Steering Group, July 2022, 111–14, https://www.jmlsg.
org.uk/wp-content/uploads/2022/07/JMLSG-Guidance-Part-I_July-2022.pdf. 
801 Smit, “Prevention of Money Laundering/Combating Terrorist Financing.”
802 Smit, “Prevention of Money Laundering/Combating Terrorist Financing.”
803 “KYC Requirements for Eligible Foreign Investors,” Securities and Exchange Board of India, September 
12, 2013, https://www.sebi.gov.in/legal/circulars/sep-2013/kyc-requirements-for-eligible-foreign-inves-
tors_25366.html.
804 “2022 Investment Climate Statements: Azerbaijan,” Bureau of Economic and Business Affairs, U.S. 
Department of State, https://www.state.gov/reports/2022-investment-climate-statements/azerbaijan/.
805 David Humphreys, “Six Reasons Why Sovereign Wealth Funds Should Not Invest or Spend at Home,” 
Natural Resource Governance Institute, February 23, 2021, https://resourcegovernance.org/blog/
six-reasons-why-sovereign-wealth-funds-should-not-invest-or-spend-home-0.
806 Prequin 2023, reports accessed by the author.
807 Prequin 2023, reports accessed by the author.
808 Prequin 2023, reports accessed by the author.
809 Prequin 2023, reports accessed by the author.
810 Gubad Ibadoghlu, “The Empty Bucket of the State Oil Fund of Azerbaijan: Profits and Profiteering,” Crude 
Accountability, 2020, 26, https://crudeaccountability.org/wp-content/uploads/The_Empty_Bucket_
report_web.pdf. 
811 Ibadoghlu, “The Empty Bucket of the State Oil Fund of Azerbaijan,” 28.
812 Ibadoghlu, “The Empty Bucket of the State Oil Fund of Azerbaijan,” 5.
813 Emin Huseynov, “Baku’s Grand Prix Is Being Used to ‘Sportswash’ Corruption,” Guardian, June 18, 
2016, https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jun/18/formula-1-azerbaijan-human-rights; 
Roberto Martinez B. Kukutschka, “Azerbaijan: Overview of Corruption and Anti-Corruption,” 
Transparency International, September 7, 2017, https://knowledgehub.transparency.org/helpdesk/azer-
baijan-overview-of-corruption-and-anti-corruption; and Gubad Ibadoghlu, “Corrupt and Flashy Events 
Disguised as Modernization in Azerbaijan,” Crude Accountability, 2019, https://crudeaccountability.org/
corrupt-and-flashy-events-disguised-as-modernization-in-azerbaijan. 
814 Matthew Campbell and Kit Chellel, “How Goldman Sachs Lost $1.2 Billion of Libya’s Money,” Bloomberg, 
March 31, 2023, https://www.bloomberg.com/features/2016-goldman-sachs-libya; Roger Cohen, “Missing 
Millions—Kuwait’s Bad Bet—A Special Report—Big Wallets and Little Supervision,” New York Times, 
September 28, 1993, https://www.nytimes.com/1993/09/28/business/missing-millions-kuwait-s-bad-bet-
special-report-big-wallets-little-supervision.html; “Latest Libyan Investment Authority Claim Dismissed at 
Interim Stage on Limitation Grounds,” Stewarts, December 6, 2021, https://www.stewartslaw.com/news/
latest-libyan-investment-authority-claim-dismissed-at-interim-stage-on-limitation-grounds; and Michael 
Stothard and Jane Croft, “SocGen Agrees €963m Settlement With Libyan Investment Authority,” Financial 
Times, May 4, 2017, https://www.ft.com/content/7dc88450-3094-11e7-9555-23ef563ecf9a. 


Carnegie Endowment for International Peace   |   203
815 Campbell and Chellel, “How Goldman Sachs Lost $1.2 Billion of Libya’s Money”; and Cohen, “Missing Millions.” 
816 Campbell and Chellel, “How Goldman Sachs Lost $1.2 Billion of Libya’s Money.”
817 This allegedly included flying the LIA’s fund manager to Dubai from Morocco, paying for his 
five-star hotel accommodation, and arranging and paying for two prostitutes to spend the eve-
ning with him. Carolyn Cohn, “Goldman Exec Tells Libya Fund Trial That Offering Prostitutes 
‘Unacceptable,’” Reuters, June 30, 2016, https://www.reuters.com/article/us-libya-swf-litigation/
goldman-exec-tells-libya-fund-trial-that-offering-prostitutes-unacceptable-idUSKCN0ZG319. 
818 The LIA alleged that Société Générale paid a bribe of $58.5 million that allowed the bank to get the LIA’s 
business and execute five financial trades, which resulted in losses to the LIA. Stothard and Croft, “SocGen 
Agrees €963m Settlement with Libyan Investment Authority.”
819 “Latest Libyan Investment Authority Claim Dismissed at Interim Stage on Limitation Grounds,” Stewarts; and 
Stothard and Croft, “SocGen Agrees €963m Settlement with Libyan Investment Authority.”
820 Roger Cohen, “Missing Millions.”
821 “Kuwait Committee to Visit London for Sovereign Fund Probe,” Reuters, 
July 13, 2015, https://www.reuters.com/article/uk-kuwait-swf-probe/
kuwait-committee-to-visit-london-for-sovereign-fund-probe-idUKKCN0PN1AA20150713.
822 “Nigeria’s Four Seasons of Lavishness With N15.46 Trillion Excess Crude Fund,” 
Dataphyte (blog), March 15, 2019, https://www.dataphyte.com/latest-reports/extractive/
nigerias-four-seasons-of-lavishness-with-n15-46-trillion-excess-crude-fund.
823 “Depletion of Excess Crude Account Resurrects Questions on Its Legality, Exposes Weak Oversight,” 
PLACNG (blog), August 16, 2022, https://placng.org/Legist/depletion-of-excess-crude-account-resur-
rects-questions-on-its-legality-exposes-weak-oversight; and “Nigeria’s Excess Crude Account (ECA) Falls 
By 89%,” YouTube video, posted by News Central TV, November 25, 2022, https://www.youtube.com/
watch?v=laP_oIVcM9A.
824 “Depletion of Excess Crude Account Resurrects Questions on its Legality, Exposes Weak Oversight,” PLACNG.
825 Nasir Ayitogo, “After Approving $462m for Aircraft, Buhari Formally Seeks Reps Approval,” Premium Times, 
April 24, 2018, https://www.premiumtimesng.com/news/top-news/266068-after-approving-462m-for-air-
craft-buhari-formally-seeks-reps-approval.html.
826 Pallavi Roy et al., “When Rainy Day Funds Run Dry: Corruption and Mismanagement of Nigeria’s Excess 
Crude Account,” Anti-Corruption Evidence SOAS Consortium, April 2022, 24, https://eprints.soas.
ac.uk/37907/1/ACE-WorkingPaper045-Nigeria-ECA.pdf.
827  Joshua Olufemi and Richard Akinwumi, “Investigation: At Least ₦11.56 Trillion Excess Crude Fund 
Unaccounted for in 8 Years,” Premium Times (blog), July 16, 2015, https://www.premiumtimesng.com/inves-
tigationspecial-reports/186780-investigation-at-least-%E2%82%A611-56-trillion-excess-crude-fund-unac-
counted-for-in-8-years.html.
828 “Nigeria (Oil and Gas),” Resource Governance Index, 3, https://api.resourcegovernanceindex.org/system/
documents/documents/000/000/316/original/Resource_Governance_Index_Nigeria_oil_and_gas_pro-
file_%28English%29.pdf?1623749732.
829 “Nigeria (Oil and Gas),” Resource Governance Index.
830 “Nigeria’s Crude Account One of World’s Least Transparent—NRGi,” CNBC Africa, June 29, 2017, https://
www.cnbcafrica.com/2017/nigerias-crude-account-one-worlds-least-transparent-nrgi/.
831 Bassey Udo, “IMF Clarifies Report on Nigeria’s Sovereign Wealth Fund,” Premium Times (blog), August 13, 
2019, https://www.premiumtimesng.com/business/business-news/325207-imf-clarifies-report-on-nigerias-
sovereign-wealth-fund.html.
832  Kenan Aslanli, “Fiscal Sustainability and the State Oil Fund in Azerbaijan,” Journal of Eurasian Studies 
6, no. 2 (2015): 114–21, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.euras.2015.03.004; and Rebeka Foley, “Corruption on 
the Caspian: Fueling Aliyev’s Regime,” Freedom House, July 26, 2016, https://freedomhouse.org/article/
corruption-caspian-fueling-aliyevs-regime. ﻿
833 “Santiago Principles Self-Assessment: State Oil Fund of Azerbaijan,” International Forum of Sovereign Wealth 
Funds, n.d., https://www.ifswf.org/assessment/sofaz.


204   |   Sovereign Wealth Funds: Corruption and Other Governance Risks
834 Bauer and Toledano, “Managing the Public Trust.”
835 Azerbaijan, Botswana, Iran, and Kuwait do not have withdrawal rules for their SWFs. Botswana also does 
not  
have deposit rules for its SWF. 
836 Daniel Gross, “Little Sovereign Wealth Fund on the Prairie,” Slate, May 29, 2014, https://slate.com/busi-
ness/2014/05/north-dakota-sovereign-wealth-fund-the-state-holds-tight-to-its-sense-of-midwestern-fru-
gality.html; Joe Marsh, “Why Norway’s 1.3 Trillion Fund Prizes Transparency So Highly,” Capital Monitor, 
June 22, 2021, https://capitalmonitor.ai/institution/asset-owners/why-norways-1-3trn-wealth-fund-prizes-
transparency-so-highly; “Permanent School Fund Named Finalist for the Sovereign Wealth Fund of the Year 
Award,” Texas Education Agency, April 15, 2019, https://tea.texas.gov/about-tea/news-and-multimedia/
news-releases/sboe-news/permanent-school-fund-named-finalist-for-the-sovereign-wealth-fund-of-the-year-
award; and Bauer and Toledano, “Managing the Public Trust.”
837 Bauer and Toledano, “Managing the Public Trust.” 
838 Adam D. Dixon and Imogen T. Liu, “Santiago Principles 2.0: Advancing the Agenda,” International 
Forum of Sovereign Wealth Funds, n.d., https://archive.ifswfreview.org/2018/our-partners/
santiago-principles-20-advancing-agenda.
839 “Development and Globalization: Facts and Figures 2022,” United Nations Conference on Trade and 
Development, Division on Investment and Enterprise, February 2023, 4, https://unctad.org/system/files/
official-document/diaepcbinf2023d2_en.pdf.
840 “Development and Globalization: Facts and Figures 2022,” United Nations Conference on Trade and 
Development, 4.
841 “Santiago Principles: Generally Accepted Principles and Practices,” International Forum of Sovereign Wealth 
Funds, https://www.ifswf.org/sites/default/files/santiagoprinciples_0_0.pdf, GAPP 14.
842 “Santiago Principles: Generally Accepted Principles and Practices,” International Forum of Sovereign Wealth 
Funds, GAPP 18.2.
843 Bénédicte Bull and Katerina Standish, “The Politics of Sovereign Wealth Funds,” in Handbook on Wealth 
and  
the Super-Rich, ed. Iain Hay (Cheltenham, UK: Edward Elgar Publishing, 2021), 79-81.
844 Dixon and Liu, “Santiago Principles 2.0: Advancing the Agenda.”
845 Dixon and Liu, “Santiago Principles 2.0: Advancing the Agenda.”
846 Dixon and Liu, “Santiago Principles 2.0: Advancing the Agenda.” Chapter 1 discusses this in greater detail 
when looking at the different ways in which SWFs invest, including participating in investment strategies 
with the private sector.
847 Dixon and Liu, “Santiago Principles 2.0: Advancing the Agenda.”
848 The Committee on Foreign Investments in the United States (CFIUS) is an interagency committee that 
reviews foreign investments and certain real estate transactions by foreign persons that may negatively 
impact U.S. national security interests. See “The Committee on Foreign Investment in the United States 
(CFIUS),” U.S. Department of the Treasury, https://home.treasury.gov/policy-issues/international/
the-committee-on-foreign-investment-in-the-united-states-cfius.
849  However, most SWFs felt that transparency did not offer any commercial advantage. See Abdullah Al-
Hassan, Michael Papaioannou, Martin Skancke, and Cheng Chih Sung, “Sovereign Wealth Funds: Aspects 
of Governance Structures and Investment Management,” International Monetary Fund working paper 
13/231, November 2013, https://www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/wp/2013/wp13231.pdf.﻿
850  This process should ensure that SWFs in developing countries are not unfairly targeted, as this has potential 
consequences for de-risking. There has been criticism around global listing processes. For more information, 
see the testimony of Barbadian Prime Minister Mia Amor Mottley: “When Banks Leave: The Impacts 
of De-Risking on the Caribbean and Strategies for Ensuring Financial Access,” Statement of Mia Amor 
Mottley, Prime Minister of Barbados, Minister of Finance, Economic Affairs and Investment and Minister 
of National Security and Civil Service at the Hearing of the United States Representatives Committee on 
Financial Services, September 14, 2022, https://democrats-financialservices.house.gov/uploadedfiles/hmtg-
117-ba00-wstate-mottleym-20220914.pdf.


Carnegie Endowment for International Peace   |   205
Appendices
851 The IFSWF counts the Türkiye Wealth Fund as a member, even though it does not expressly meet the 
definitional requirements of the Santiago Principles.
852 PLC Corporate & Securities and PLC Finance, “US Treasury Reports on Sovereign Wealth Fund Investment 
Policies,” Thomson Reuters, December 11, 2008, https://content.next.westlaw.com/practical-law/docu-
ment/Ibb0a61faef0511e28578f7ccc38dcbee/Legal-Update-US-Treasury-Reports-on-Sovereign-Wealth-
Fund-Investment-Policies?viewType=FullText&originationContext=document&transitionType=Docu
mentItem&ppcid=80e32ce08a3f4efa950f8bb2b07ffd32&contextData=(sc.Glossary)&firstPage=true; 
https://eur-lex.europa.eu/EN/legal-content/summary/a-common-european-approach-to-sover-
eign-wealth-funds.html. 
853 “Sovereign Wealth Funds: Generally Accepted Principles and Practices—‘Santiago Principles,’” International 
Working Group of Sovereign Wealth Funds, October 2008, 3–4, 27, https://www.ifswf.org/sites/default/
files/santiagoprinciples_0_0.pdf. 
854 PLC Corporate & Securities and PLC Finance, “US Treasury Reports on Sovereign 
Wealth Fund Investment Policies”; and “Glossary: Sovereign Wealth Funds,” Thomson 
Reuters, accessed April 5, 2023, https://content.next.westlaw.com/Glossary/PracticalLaw/
I03f4d832eee311e28578f7ccc38dcbee?transitionType=Default&contextData=(sc.Default)&firstPage=true.
855 Javier Capape Aguilar, “Sovereign Wealth Funds: From Traditional Banking to Artificial 
Intelligence,” IE Insights (blog), October 13, 2017, https://www.ie.edu/insights/articles/
sovereign-wealth-funds-from-traditional-banking-to-artificial-intelligence/.
856 Freddy Orchard, “The Rise of Sovereign Wealth Funds,” GIC, February 26, 2020, 2, https://www.gic.com.
sg/wp-content/uploads/2021/04/GIC-ThinkSpace-The-Rise-of-Sovereign-Wealth-Funds.pdf.
857 “What Is a Sovereign Wealth Fund?,” SWFI, https://www.swfinstitute.org/research/sovereign-wealth-fund.
858 “Sovereign Wealth Funds—A Work Agenda,” International Monetary Fund, February 
29, 2008, 4, https://www.imf.org/en/Publications/Policy-Papers/Issues/2016/12/31/
Sovereign-Wealth-Funds-A-Work-Agenda-PP4234. 
859 “A Common European Approach to Sovereign Wealth Funds,” EUR-Lex, October 10, 2008, https://eur-lex.
europa.eu/EN/legal-content/summary/a-common-european-approach-to-sovereign-wealth-funds.html. 
860 For an exhaustive examination of the challenges of defining corruption, see Laura S. Underkuffler, “Defining 
Corruption: Implications for Action,” in Corruption, Global Security, and World Order, ed. Robert I 
Rotberg, (Washington, DC: Brookings Institution, 1999), pages 27–46. 
861 “What Is Corruption?,” Transparency International, https://www.transparency.org/en/what-is-corruption. 
862 “Anticorruption Fact Sheet,” The World Bank, February 19, 2020, https://www.worldbank.org/en/news/
factsheet/2020/02/19/anticorruption-fact-sheet; and “Governance and Anti-corruption,” International 
Monetary Fund, https://www.imf.org/en/Topics/governance-and-anti-corruption.  
863 “What Is Corruption?,” Basel Institute on Governance, https://baselgovernance.org/what-is-corruption. 




207
In a complex, changing, and increasingly contested world, the Carnegie Endowment 
generates strategic ideas, supports diplomacy, and trains the next generation of international 
scholar-practitioners to help countries and institutions take on the most difficult global 
problems and advance peace. With a global network of more than 170 scholars across twenty 
countries, Carnegie is renowned for its independent analysis of major global problems and 
understanding of regional contexts.
Democracy, Conflict, and Governance Program
The Carnegie Democracy, Conflict, and Governance Program rigorously analyzes the 
global state of democracy, conflict, and governance, the interrelationship among them, and 
international efforts to strengthen democracy and governance, reduce violence, and stabilize 
conflict.
 
Carnegie Endowment for  
International Peace


CarnegieEndowment.org


 
© 20[xx] International Monetary Fund 
IMF POLICY PAPER 
REVIEWS OF THE FUND’S SOVEREIGN ARREARS 
POLICIES AND PERIMETER 
IMF staff regularly produces papers proposing new IMF policies, exploring options for 
reform, or reviewing existing IMF policies and operations. The following documents have 
been released and are included in this package: 
 
• 
A Press Release summarizing the views of the Executive Board as expressed during its 
May 4, 2022 consideration of the staff report. 
• 
The Staff Report, prepared by IMF staff and completed on February 24, 2022 for the 
Executive Board’s consideration on May 4, 2022. 
• 
Two Staff Supplements titled Reviews of the Fund’s Sovereign Arrears Policies and 
Perimeter—Supplementary Information.  
 
The IMF’s transparency policy allows for the deletion of market-sensitive information and 
premature disclosure of the authorities’ policy intentions in published staff reports and 
other documents. 
 
Electronic copies of IMF Policy Papers  
are available to the public from  
http://www.imf.org/external/pp/ppindex.aspx  
 
International Monetary Fund 
Washington, D.C. 
May 18, 2022 


 
 
PR22/156 
 
IMF Executive Board Completes Review of the Fund's Policies 
on Sovereign Arrears and Related Perimeter Issues 
FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE 
Washington, DC – May 18, 2022: On May 4, 2022, the Executive Board of the International 
Monetary Fund (IMF) completed a comprehensive review of the Fund’s sovereign arrears 
policies, endorsing the main recommendations of the staff paper “Reviews of The Fund's 
Sovereign Arrears Policies and Perimeter.” This is the last step in a multi-year modernization 
of the Fund’s legal and policy framework for treatments of sovereign debt in IMF 
arrangements 1 ). It adopts incremental but important amendments that aim to support more 
effective, orderly, and transparent resolution of sovereign debt difficulties in member countries.  
Recognizing the disruptive nature of sovereign arrears for Fund members and the 
international community at large, the Fund’s legal and policy framework for sovereign debt 
includes a policy of non-toleration of arrears (NTP) to international financial institutions and 
official bilateral creditors in specific circumstances, complemented by the policy on Lending 
Into Arrears (LIA) to private creditors, which was adopted in 1989 and last reviewed in 20022, 
and the Lending Into Arrears to Official Bilateral Creditors (LIOA) policy, adopted in 20153. 
In light of the evolution in the creditor landscape—including the emergence of new official 
bilateral and International Financial Institution creditors and instruments—the Executive Board 
also endorsed staff’s recommendations on the Fund’s definitions and practices used to 
categorize claims when applying these arrears policies.  
The main changes are in four areas:  
1. The LIA policy has been revised to place greater emphasis on debt transparency, and 
streamlined by eliminating the reference to a formal negotiating framework.  
2. The Fund’s existing practice governing lending to members who are not in arrears but 
seeking a debt restructuring (“preemptive debt restructurings”) is codified into a formal 
policy, with an emphasis on debt transparency along the lines of the LIA policy.  
3. While the LIOA policy remains unchanged (given limited experience with its application 
since its adoption in 2015), the Fund’s definition of an official bilateral claim was updated in 
 
1 See Public Information Notice: IMF Executive Board Discusses Sovereign Debt Restructuring, Recent 
Developments and Implications for the Fund’s Legal and Policy Framework; Press Release: IMF Executive Board 
Discusses Strengthening the Contractual Framework in Sovereign Debt Restructuring; Press Release: IMF Executive 
Board Approves Exceptional Access Lending Framework Reforms; Press Release: IMF Executive Board Discusses 
Reforming the Fund's Policy on Non-Toleration of Arrears to Official Creditors. 
2 See Fund Policy on Lending into Arrears to Private Creditors–Further Consideration of the Good Faith Criterion. 
3 See Press Release: IMF Executive Board Discusses Reforming the Fund's Policy on Non-Toleration of Arrears to 
Official Creditors. 


2 
light of the recent evolution of the creditor landscape (such as new creditors and new types 
of instruments). 
4. The NTP with respect to IFIs has been updated to provide clarity on how new IFIs will be 
treated. As is currently the case, the question of whether an IFI should benefit from the NTP 
will remain a judgment call informed by several factors. In addition to the existing factors—
global membership, treatment by the Paris Club, and participation in the HIPC initiative—
the Board will also consider whether the institution is a Regional Financing Arrangement 
and whether the IFI is receiving preferred creditor treatment by the official bilateral creditor 
community. For all other IFIs, the NTP would apply in cases when a restructuring involving 
official creditors is not required, while the LIOA would apply in the remaining cases. 
 
Executive Board Assessment4  
Directors welcomed the comprehensive review of the Fund’s policy on lending into 
arrears to private creditors (LIA policy), the Fund’s policy on lending into sovereign arrears to 
official bilateral creditors (LIOA policy), and the Fund’s non-toleration of sovereign arrears 
policy to official bilateral and multilateral creditors. 
Directors agreed that, overall, the Fund’s arrears policies have worked well in 
enabling the Fund to proceed with providing financing in cases of arrears. At the same time, 
they noted that practice in sovereign debt restructuring and the creditor landscape have 
evolved over the last 20 years and certain updates are in order. Directors agreed that the 
proposals endorsed today are accurately reflected in the Executive Board understandings in 
Supplement 2 of the main paper to be issued shortly. 
Directors agreed that the LIA policy remains broadly appropriate and agreed with 
staff’s proposed updates to the principles guiding the Fund’s assessment of good faith.  
 
i. 
First, Directors agreed that debtors would be expected to share “relevant” information, 
generally aligned with what the member would be required to share under the Debt 
Limits Policy. They noted that this expectation would replace the earlier two-track 
approach on confidential and non-confidential information. Directors emphasized, 
however, that decisions on an adequate macroeconomic framework and the design of 
the financing plan or the adjustment program that could form the basis for the Fund’s 
lending into arrears will remain in the sole purview of the Fund.  
ii. 
Second, Directors considered that any terms offered to the creditors by the member 
should be consistent with the parameters of the Fund-supported program.  
 
4 At the conclusion of the discussion, the Managing Director, as Chairman of the Board, summarizes the views of 
Executive Directors, and this summary is transmitted to the country's authorities. An explanation of any qualifiers used 
in summings up can be found here: http://www.IMF.org/external/np/sec/misc/qualifiers.htm.  


3 
iii. 
Third, Directors expected that the debtor should provide clarity on the perimeter of 
claims that would be subject to the private-sector debt restructuring at the outset of 
the debt restructuring process.  
iv. 
Fourth, Directors decided to eliminate the expectation that debtors would engage with 
creditor committees under a “formal negotiating framework” and only “where 
warranted by the complexity of the case.” That said, Directors continued to expect that 
the debtor would engage with a representative creditor committee or committees.  
v. 
Fifth, Directors reiterated their support for the use of flexibility in applying the LIA 
policy in emergency financing cases, in line with the flexibility provided under the LIOA 
policy. 
Directors agreed that the current practice in preemptive restructuring cases remains 
appropriate and should be codified such that in those cases, the Fund may provide financing 
only if it has adequate assurances that such a restructuring will be successful. Such 
assurances are obtained by a judgment that a credible process for restructuring is underway 
and will result in sufficient creditor participation to restore debt sustainability and close 
financing gaps within the macroeconomic parameters of the program, taking into account 
official sector commitments. Directors welcomed the recommendation to add an expectation of 
enhanced transparency and information sharing in preemptive debt restructurings. A number 
of Directors cautioned against an overly prescriptive codification of the current practice. 
With respect to claims held by official bilateral creditors, Directors broadly agreed that 
the Fund’s nontoleration of arrears policy in cases where no official sector involvement is 
required (non-OSI cases) and the LIOA policy in cases where official sector involvement is 
required (OSI cases) continues to be appropriate and no amendments are needed. A number 
of Directors recalled the recent, novel application of the LIOA policy as a source of financing in 
the context of special circumstances, and emphasized that this approach could not be 
presumed to ensure debt sustainability outside these circumstances. Regarding the Fund’s 
financing assurances policy, a number of Directors saw merit in conducting a review of the 
policy noting that it provides a critical safeguard for Fund lending. On the role of the Common 
Framework (CF), while a few Directors expressed a desire to recognize the CF as a 
representative standing forum now, most Directors agreed that more experience is needed 
and welcomed staff’s plan to closely monitor the CF’s evolution and revert to the Board on 
whether it emerges as a new representative standing forum.  
Directors also concurred that new Fund-supported programs should continue to 
incorporate the assumption that old OSI-related claims would be restructured in line with the 
terms stipulated in the original Fund-supported program. 
Directors agreed that application of the non-toleration of arrears policy with respect to 
multilaterals has worked well, but the policy needs to be updated to clarify how the policy 
applies to new international financial institutions (IFIs) and to ensure that the special treatment 
multilateral creditors receive under the Fund’s arrears policy is not diluted. IFIs are defined as 
international financial institutions with at least two sovereign members (and no non-sovereign 
member). While many Directors expressed a preference for staff’s original proposal on this 
issue, which would reduce scope for judgement in this area and provide for more clarity, a 
number of Directors could not support staff’s original proposal. In the end, most Directors went 
along with the alternative approach set out in the Supplement in light of staff’s expectation that 


4 
implementation of the approach described in the Supplement would not fundamentally differ 
from that in the original proposal. Therefore, Directors endorsed the following: 
• 
First, Fund financing in the face of arrears to the World Bank Group should continue 
to require an Agreed Plan between the debtor and the World Bank to clear the arrears over a 
defined period. Fund financing in the face of arrears to any other IFI should continue to require 
that a Credible Plan be in place in non-OSI cases. 
• 
Second, in OSI cases: 
o 
Where the member is in arrears to an IFI, the Fund should judge whether a 
Credible Plan to resolve such arrears is required as a condition for lending. Factors informing 
the Fund’s judgment in this regard will include: (i) global, rather than regional, membership of 
the institution; (ii) whether the institution is a regional financing arrangement or a reserve 
currency union central bank that forms part of the global financial safety net; (iii) the Paris 
Club’s treatment of the institution, (iv) participation of the institution in the Heavily Indebted 
Poor Countries (HIPC) Initiative, and (v) whether the institution is being excluded from the 
scope of debt restructuring by official bilateral creditors through a creditor committee based on 
a representative standing forum recognized under the LIOA policy in the case at hand. 
o 
When arrears are owed to an IFI that is not captured under the above bullet, 
Directors agreed that the LIOA policy should be expanded to apply to these cases mutatis 
mutandis. In these cases, the Fund policy will also provide for the flexibility in extraordinary 
circumstances for emergency financing cases consistent with the LIOA policy. 
 
Directors broadly agreed with staff’s restatements of how a Direct Bilateral Claim is 
defined for purposes of the application of the Fund’s arrears, financing assurances, and debt 
sustainability policies, with some Directors emphasizing that the Fund’s definition should aim 
to align with the classifications of the World Bank and Paris Club. They also endorsed two 
amendments with respect to identifying official claims. First, to the extent that the IFI 
purchases securities in the secondary market as part of the global financial safety net, such 
claims can be treated as claims subject to the Fund’s arrears policies as applicable to IFIs. 
However, the Fund would rely on the IFI’s own representation in this regard. Second, any 
Direct Bilateral Claims or claims held by IFIs that are contractually part of a pooled voting 
mechanism with private creditors shall be subject to the LIA policy. Directors asked that staff 
reports include greater transparency on how staff assessed the perimeter of claims, including 
when the Fund’s classifications differ from that of the Paris Club’s. A few Directors called on 
the Fund to treat central bank swaps with utmost caution, considering its unique 
characteristics.  
The above amendments and restatements will enter into effect immediately and will 
apply to all future purchases and disbursements (including under existing arrangements), with 
respect to existing and future arrears. 
Directors agreed that the Fund’s arrears policies should be reviewed on an as needed 
basis. 


 
REVIEWS OF THE FUND'S SOVEREIGN ARREARS POLICIES 
AND PERIMETER  
 
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 
This paper undertakes a comprehensive review of the Fund’s sovereign arrears 
policies. The arrears policies determine the conditions under which the Fund can lend 
to a member in the presence of sovereign arrears (after it has defaulted on a financial 
obligation). The paper also reviews the conditions for Fund lending to member 
countries seeking to restructure privately held claims preemptively (i.e., before a default 
occurs and arrears arise). Finally, as the creditor landscape has evolved, the Fund’s 
definitions and practices used to categorize claims for purposes of applying these 
policies are in need of a review and should be updated. 
Staff assesses that the Fund’s Lending into Arrears to Private Creditors (LIA) policy 
(established in 1989 and last reviewed in 2002) remains broadly appropriate, 
while recommending some improvements given the experience gained over the 
last 20 years. These include amendments to the guiding principles on “good faith” 
efforts by the debtor under the LIA policy, including to simplify requirements for 
engagement with creditor committees (by eliminating the references to a formal 
negotiating framework) and to add that any debt restructuring offer by the debtor 
should restore debt sustainability consistent with the program parameters (in line with 
the Fund’s Lending into Arrears to Official Bilateral Creditors (LIOA) policy). Staff also 
recommends providing additional guidance on the sharing of relevant information with 
creditors, with a particular focus on debt transparency. 
Staff also sees merit in codifying the existing practice guiding the Fund in 
preemptive debt restructurings into a Fund policy, together with an amendment 
focusing on debt transparency. This recommendation reflects the increased use of 
preemptive debt restructurings over the last 20 years and input received in outreach to 
the private sector and other stakeholders. In line with the existing practice, the new 
policy would state that in such settings, the Fund can lend if a credible process for debt 
restructuring is underway and such debt restructuring will likely deliver debt 
sustainability in line with program parameters. Furthermore, it would provide that in 
assessing whether a credible process for debt restructuring is underway, staff would 
usually expect the member to share relevant information with its creditors along the 
lines of the guiding principles under the LIA policy. 
February 24, 2022 


REVIEWS OF THE FUND’S SOVEREIGN ARREARS POLICIES AND PERIMETER 
2 
INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND 
Given limited experience with the application of the LIOA policy (established in 2015), staff 
does not propose any amendments but only one restatement confirming current practice. This 
refers to the fact that once a claim is determined to be Official Sector Involvement (OSI)-related 
(where restoration of debt sustainability requires restructuring official bilateral claims), that 
determination will carry forward to future Fund arrangements. In light of the recent practice with the 
G20 Common Framework for debt treatments beyond the DSSI, staff will monitor whether a new 
representative standing creditor forum may emerge with which the Fund may decide to engage in 
the future under the LIOA policy. 
Given recent developments in the international creditor community, staff proposes refining 
the Fund’s arrears policies with respect to multilateral creditors. Arrears to multilaterals are 
currently subject to the non-toleration policy (NTP), where (with the exception of the World Bank 
Group) the designation of “multilateral” is based on a judgment informed by factors including global 
membership, and treatment by the Paris Club and under the Heavily Indebted Poor Countries (HIPC) 
Initiative. This approach offers little guidance on how to treat new International Financial Institutions 
(IFIs) with regional membership, which have been proliferating in recent years. Treating them all as 
multilaterals would dilute the value of the NTP and complicate crisis resolution when OSI is required. 
To address this, staff proposes two main reforms for OSI cases, while retaining the current approach 
for the World Bank Group (where an Agreed Plan to clear arrears will continue to be required) and in 
non-OSI cases (where all IFIs with two or more sovereign members would continue to be subject to 
the NTP): 
i. 
In OSI cases, the NTP will cover only IFIs whose (i) mandate/financing is closely aligned with 
the Fund’s mandate to provide financing to help members resolve their Balance of Payments (BOP) 
problems, such as Regional Financing Arrangements (RFAs) and global Multilateral Development 
Banks (MDBs), or (ii) where the treatment by official bilateral creditors belonging to a representative 
standing forum—as recognized under the LIOA policy—in the restructuring at hand (or the 
anticipated treatment informed by past practice) excludes that IFI from the scope of the debt 
restructuring.  
ii. 
Claims of those IFIs not covered by the NTP above would be subject to the (expanded) LIOA 
policy—paralleling the treatment received by official bilateral claims.  
Finally, recent developments raise questions about the perimeter between official bilateral 
and private claims, with significant implications for the Fund’s arrears policies. In updating the 
Fund’s definition of an official claim for purposes of the arrears policies, staff proposes several 
restatements, as well as two amendments, in particular: (1) to exclude claims of official bilateral 
creditors and IFIs subject to vote pooling with the private sector from LIOA and NTP treatment, 
respectively, to avoid a situation where holdings of the same instrument could receive different 
treatment depending on the holder; and (2) to clarify the treatment under the Fund’s arrears policies 
of claims purchased in the secondary market by official bilateral creditors and IFIs. 
 


REVIEWS OF THE FUND’S SOVEREIGN ARREARS POLICIES AND PERIMETER 
 
INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND 3 
Approved By 
Yan Liu, Jeromin 
Zettelmeyer, and 
Miguel Savastano  
Prepared by an inter-departmental team led by Wolfgang Bergthaler 
(LEG). The team comprised of Julianne Ams (LEG lead); Peter Breuer 
(MCM lead), Thordur Jonasson (all MCM); and Marcos Chamon (SPR 
lead), Tom Best (SPR coordinator), Atif Saeed Chaudry (all SPR). 
Sebastian Grund and Clara Thiemann (all LEG), Maximilien Kaffo, 
Geoffrey Keim, and Vivian Malta (all SPR) contributed to the paper.1 
The team worked under the overall guidance provided by Tobias 
Adrian, Ceyla Pazarbasioglu, and Rhoda Weeks-Brown. 
 
CONTENTS 
Abbreviations and Acronyms 
_______________________________________________________________________ 5 
INTRODUCTION ___________________________________________________________________________________ 7 
EXISTING LEGAL AND POLICY FRAMEWORK ___________________________________________________ 8 
A. Financing Assurances, Debt Sustainability, and Market Access _________________________________ 8 
B. Arrears Policies 
__________________________________________________________________________________ 11 
LENDING INTO ARREARS POLICY 
_______________________________________________________________ 18 
A. Review of Post-Default Debt Restructuring Cases Since 2002 _________________________________ 19 
B. Review of Application of LIA Policy to Jurisdictional Arrears ___________________________________ 24 
C. Recommendations 
______________________________________________________________________________ 25 
PREEMPTIVE DEBT RESTRUCTURING PRACTICE _______________________________________________ 32 
A. Review of Practice in Preemptive Debt Restructuring Cases ___________________________________ 32 
B. Recommendations ______________________________________________________________________________ 34 
LENDING INTO OFFICIAL BILATERAL ARREARS _______________________________________________ 35 
A. Review of Cases with Arrears to Official Bilateral Creditors Since 2015 ________________________ 35 
B. Recommendations ______________________________________________________________________________ 37 
POLICY ON NON-TOLERATION OF ARREARS TO INTERNATIONAL FINANCIAL  
INSTITUTIONS 
____________________________________________________________________________________ 40 
TREATMENT OF CERTAIN CLAIMS UNDER THE FUND’S ARREARS POLICIES 
________________ 46 
 
1 The team would like to acknowledge contributions from Ali Abbas, Charlotte Lundgren, Sanaa Nadeem, Alex 
Pienkowski, Bahrom Shukurov and Hajime Takizawa (all formerly SPR) to previous work on the LIA review. 


REVIEWS OF THE FUND’S SOVEREIGN ARREARS POLICIES AND PERIMETER 
4 
INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND 
ISSUES FOR DISCUSSION ________________________________________________________________________ 53 
1. Lending into Arrears (LIA) Policy 
________________________________________________________________ 13
2. Lending Into Arrears to Official Bilateral Creditors (LIOA) Policy _______________________________ 15
3. Argentina and the 2004 Global Committee of Argentina Bondholders (GCAB) ________________ 22
4. Other Fund Workstreams on Debt Transparency _______________________________________________ 25
5. IIF Principles For Stable Capital Flows and Fair Debt Restructuring ____________________________ 31
6. Defining the Budgetary Process ________________________________________________________________ 51
AI.1. Assurances on Debt Sustainability ___________________________________________________________ 56
AI.2 Evolution of Paris Club’s Debt Treatment and Coordination with the Fund 
__________________ 57
AI.3. Debt Sustainability in Emergency Financing Cases __________________________________________ 58
AI.4. Disputed Claims Doctrine ____________________________________________________________________ 61
References _________________________________________________________________________________________ 74 
BOXES 
1. Lending into Arrears (LIA) Policy 
________________________________________________________________ 13
2. Lending Into Arrears to Official Bilateral Creditors (LIOA) Policy _______________________________ 15
3. Argentina and the 2004 Global Committee of Argentina Bondholders (GCAB) ________________ 22
4. Other Fund Workstreams on Debt Transparency _______________________________________________ 25
5. IIF Principles For Stable Capital Flows and Fair Debt Restructuring ____________________________ 31
6. Defining the Budgetary Process ________________________________________________________________ 51
FIGURES 
1. Decision Tree Summarizing the Current Multilateral NTP ______________________________________ 18
2. Outcomes of Preemptive and Post-Default Debt Restructuring since 2002 
____________________ 19
3. Decision Tree Summarizing the Proposed Multilateral Arrears Framework ____________________ 43
4. Determination of a Claim as a Direct Bilateral Claim ___________________________________________ 53
TABLES 
1. Episodes of Preemptive Restructuring of Public Marketable Debt, 2002-2021 
_________________ 33
2. Arrears to Official Bilateral Creditors—Application of Arrears Policies _________________________ 36
3. Twenty-Five International Financial Institutions with the Broadest Memberships 
______________ 44
ANNEXES 
I. The Fund’s Policies on Debt Sustainability, Market Access, Financing Assurances, and
External Arrears 
____________________________________________________________________________________ 55
II. Creditor Dialogue in Pre- and Post- Default Debt Restructuring _______________________________ 64
III: The Evolution of the Fund’s Lending into Arrears Policy 
_______________________________________ 66
IV . Resolution of Official Arrears __________________________________________________________________ 71


REVIEWS OF THE FUND’S SOVEREIGN ARREARS POLICIES AND PERIMETER 
 
INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND 5 
Abbreviations and Acronyms 
BIS 
 
Bank for International Settlements 
BOP 
 
Balance of Payments 
CAC  
 
Collective Action Clause  
CF  
 
G20 Common Framework for debt treatments beyond DSSI  
CUCB  
Currency Union Central Bank 
DLP 
 
Debt Limits Policy 
DSA 
 
Debt Sustainability Analysis 
DSSI  
 
Debt Service Suspension Initiative   
ECA 
 
Export Credit Agency 
ECB 
 
European Central Bank 
ECF 
 
Extended Credit Facility  
EFF 
 
Extended Fund Facility  
ESM  
 
European Stability Mechanism 
GCAB  
Global Committee of Argentina Bondholders 
GFSN  
Global Financial Safety Net  
FN 
 
Footnote 
HIPC   
Heavily Indebted Poor Countries  
ICMA   
International Capital Market Association  
IFI  
 
International Financial Institution  
IIF  
 
Institute of International Finance  
IMF  
 
International Monetary Fund  
LIA  
 
Lending into Arrears  
LIC  
 
Low Income Country  
LIOA 
 
Lending into Official Arrears 
MDB   
Multilateral Development Bank  
MDRI  
Multilateral Debt Relief Initiative  
MPA 
 
Multi-Pronged Approach 
NPV  
 
Net Present Value  
NTP 
 
Non-Toleration of Arrears Policy 
OECD  
Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development 
OMT 
 
Outright Monetary Transactions 
OSI 
 
Official Sector Involvement  
PC 
 
Paris Club 
PCS 
 
Preferred Creditor Status 
PRGT  
Poverty Reduction and Growth Trust 
PSI 
 
Private Sector Involvement 
RCF 
 
Rapid Credit Facility 
RCUCB  
Reserve Currency Union Central Banks 
Rep. PC 
 
Representative Paris Club Agreed Minute 
RFA 
 
Regional Financing Arrangements 
RFI 
 
Rapid Financing Instrument 


REVIEWS OF THE FUND’S SOVEREIGN ARREARS POLICIES AND PERIMETER 
6 
INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND 
SBA 
 
Stand-By Arrangement 
SMSF  
Secondary Market Support Facility 
SWF 
 
Sovereign Wealth Fund 
 
 


REVIEWS OF THE FUND’S SOVEREIGN ARREARS POLICIES AND PERIMETER 
 
INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND 7 
INTRODUCTION 
1.      
This paper undertakes a comprehensive review of the Fund’s sovereign arrears 
policies. Recognizing the destructive nature of arrears, since 1970, the Fund has had a policy of 
non-toleration of arrears (NTP), unless a specific policy applies that enables the Fund to lend into 
sovereign arrears.2 These specific policies are those on Lending into Arrears (LIA) to private 
creditors—which was adopted in 1989 and last reviewed in 2002—and on Lending into Arrears to 
Official Bilateral Creditors (LIOA), which was adopted in 2015.3 As described in more detail below 
and in Annex III, the application of the specific arrears policies depends on (i) whether a sovereign 
(“member” or “debtor”) is in arrears to private sector, official bilateral, or multilateral creditors, and 
(ii) whether Private Sector Involvement (PSI) and/or Official Sector Involvement (OSI) is needed.4, 5  
2.      
This paper reviews the application of the sovereign arrears policies and proposes 
updates to these policies to make them more effective in the current sovereign debt 
landscape. Despite several attempts—most recently in line with the sovereign debt work program 
endorsed by the Executive Board in May 2013—the LIA policy has not been reviewed since 2002.6, 7 
The Executive Board established the Fund’s LIOA policy in 2015, with an expectation that it would 
be reviewed in two to three years.8 The Fund’s NTP has not been comprehensively reviewed since 
its establishment in 1970.9 In addition, as the creditor landscape has evolved, it has become 
increasingly clear that the Fund’s definitions and practices used to categorize claims for purposes of 
applying these different arrears policies should be reviewed as well and updated as needed. 
 
2 See: IMF, 2018, Prevention and Resolution of Sovereign Debt Crises (Washington) at Prevention and Resolution of 
Sovereign Debt Crises | imfsg. 
3 Summing Up by the Chairman—Fund Involvement in the Debt Strategy, May 1989; The Acting Chair’s Summing 
Up—Fund Policy on Lending into Arrears to Private Creditors— Further Consideration of the Good Faith Criterion , 
September 2002;  The Chairman’s Summing Up— Reforming the Fund’s Policy on Non-Toleration of Arrears to 
Official Creditors, December 2015. 
4 Arrears arise when a debtor does not pay its contractual financial obligation under a debt instrument to a creditor 
or creditors in full and by the contractual due date, including any grace periods. 
5 “OSI” and “PSI” mean that the Fund-supported program does not provide for full repayment of the claim and 
needs a contribution from the official sector or private sector, respectively, which can consist of debt relief and new 
financing (e.g., loans, bond financing, guarantees, and grants). The framework for involving the private sector in 
crisis resolution, relying as much as possible on market-oriented solutions and voluntary approaches, was endorsed 
by the IMFC at its meeting in Prague in September 2000 (see IMFC, Communique, 2000 and IMF 2001, Report of the 
Managing Director to the International Monetary and Financial Committee on Private Sector Involvement in the 
Prevention and Resolution of Financial Crises, IMFC/Doc/4/01/5). 
6 The Acting Chair's Summing Up—Fund Policy on Lending into Arrears to Private Creditors—Further Consideration 
of the Good Faith Criterion, September 2002. 
7 Sovereign Debt Restructuring—Recent Developments and Implications for the Fund's Legal and Policy Framework, 
April 2013. The review of the LIA is the fourth and last leg of the Fund’s work program on sovereign debt launched 
in 2013. 
8 Reforming the Fund’s Policy on Non-Toleration of Arrears to Official Creditors, December 2015; The Chairman’s 
Summing Up—Reforming the Fund’s Policy on Non-Toleration of Arrears to Official Creditors, December 2015.  
9 Payments Arrears in Current International Transactions, October 1970. 


REVIEWS OF THE FUND’S SOVEREIGN ARREARS POLICIES AND PERIMETER 
8 
INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND 
3.      
The paper is organized as follows. The next section reviews the existing legal and policy 
framework. The following sections review, in turn, the LIA policy, the preemptive debt restructurings 
practice, the LIOA policy, and the NTP for multilaterals and recommend proposed targeted 
amendments. The paper then tackles the contours of the definitions of direct bilateral claims and 
multilateral claims. Last, the paper raises issues for discussion. 
EXISTING LEGAL AND POLICY FRAMEWORK 
4.      
Under its Articles of Agreement (the “Articles”), the Fund may only provide financing 
to assist members to resolve their balance of payments (BOP) problems under adequate 
safeguards. Article I(v) and Article V, Section 3(a) of the Articles require the Fund to adopt policies 
that will assist members in resolving their BOP problems and that will establish adequate 
safeguards for the temporary use of the general resources of the Fund. In other words, Fund 
financing can only be provided in support of a member’s economic policies that are capable of 
resolving the member’s BOP problems over a timeframe consistent with the revolving nature of 
Fund financing aimed at restoring the member to medium external viability.10 The inter-related 
policies on financing assurances, debt sustainability, market access, and arrears, which are germane 
to restoring medium term external viability, help the Fund achieve these objectives.11 For the Fund 
to provide financing, it must determine that the requirements under each of these policies have 
been met. 
A.   Financing Assurances, Debt Sustainability, and Market Access  
5.      
The financing assurances policy requires Fund-supported programs to be fully 
financed.12 Program financing includes assumptions regarding a member’s expected financing 
from private sector creditors (including (re)gaining market access, if relevant), the clearance of 
arrears, as well as the envisaged debt restructuring operation. Under the Fund’s financing 
assurances policy, the Fund must be satisfied that program financing is adequate to fill financing 
gaps during the program period to ensure external viability, as well as to ensure that the member is 
in a position to repay the Fund during the post-program period. Specifically, this requires that in 
the event that there are gaps with respect to new external financing to be provided by the official 
sector: (i) "firm commitments" of financing must be in place for the upcoming 12 months of the 
arrangement, and (ii) "good prospects" that there will be adequate financing for the remaining 
 
10 Guidelines on Conditionality, Decision No. 12864-(02/102), September 2002, as amended. 
11 Policies referring to restoring market access are not directly relevant for Fund members that have not historically 
had market access.  
12 Sovereign Debt Restructuring—Recent Developments and Implications for the Fund's Legal and Policy Framework, 
April 2013. Because there is no economic program underlying emergency financing, the financing assurances policy 
is limited in such cases to a judgment that the member will be in a position to repay the Fund. 


REVIEWS OF THE FUND’S SOVEREIGN ARREARS POLICIES AND PERIMETER 
 
INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND 9 
program period beyond the upcoming 12 months.13 With respect to the post-program period, staff 
needs to assess whether the member’s prospective policies deliver a projected post-program 
macroeconomic performance that adequately safeguards repayments to the Fund consistent with a 
sustainable debt path. A Fund-supported program in the Fund’s General Resources Account (GRA) 
is designed to restore the member to medium term external viability and resolve the BOP problem 
within the program period.14, 15, 16 
6.      
Where a member’s debt is assessed as unsustainable, the Fund is precluded from 
providing financing unless the member takes steps to restore debt sustainability.17 A 
combination of policy adjustment and financing from public and private sources has been sufficient 
to preserve debt sustainability in the vast majority of Fund-supported programs. The catalytic role 
of Fund financing is however put to the test in cases where members with significant external 
indebtedness have lost—or are losing—market access.18  
7.      
Closely related to—but distinct from—the concept of debt sustainability is that of 
market access.19 While lack of debt sustainability normally triggers loss of market access, 
temporary loss of market access does not necessarily imply that debt is unsustainable. Whether a 
member is assessed to have market access will depend on its ability to tap international capital 
markets on a sustained basis through the contracting of loans and/or issuance of securities across a 
range of maturities, regardless of the currency denomination of the instruments, and at reasonable 
interest rates.20 The Fund’s exceptional access policy, inter alia, requires that the member has 
 
13 During program reviews, assurances on full financing of successive 12-month periods beyond the initial 12 
months (or whatever period is left under the arrangement) must be ascertained. Specifically, the "good prospects" 
must become "firm commitments" or actual financing. 
14 2018 Review of Program Design and Conditionality, May 2019. 
15 For ECF arrangements under the PRGT, it may not be feasible to fully resolve the protracted BOP problems within 
the program period. In this context, the existence of post-program financing gaps could be more explicitly 
recognized with appropriate safeguards. Post-program financing gaps can be justified when the sensitivity analysis 
confirms that capacity to repay remains adequate and debt remains sustainable under realistic financing 
assumptions, including level of funding on non-concessional terms to close the post-program financing gaps.  
16 Staff needs to assess that the member has good prospects for (re)gaining access to capital markets at sufficient 
depth, maturity, and price to ensure capacity to repay the Fund and consistent with a sustainable debt path, taking 
into account all sovereign maturities falling due in the post-program period during the time repayments to the Fund 
are outstanding. As long as obligations to the Fund are outstanding, staff needs to judge that there no financing 
gaps in the post-program period at arrangement approval and each respective program review. 
17 See the definition of public debt sustainability: “In general terms, public debt can be regarded as sustainable when 
the primary balance needed to at least stabilize debt under both the baseline and realistic shock scenarios is 
economically and politically feasible, such that the level of debt is consistent with an acceptably low rollover risk and 
with preserving potential growth at a satisfactory level.” See, Review of the Debt Sustainability Framework for Market 
Access Countries, January 2021. 
18 Market access is lost when sovereigns default or stop issuing bonds controlling for financing needs and previous 
pattern of issuance. See, The Fund’s Lending Framework and Sovereign Debt—Further Considerations, April 2015. 
19 Id. 
20 Id.  


REVIEWS OF THE FUND’S SOVEREIGN ARREARS POLICIES AND PERIMETER 
10 
INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND 
prospects of (re)gaining access to private capital markets within the timeframe Fund resources are 
outstanding. 
8.      
When debt is unsustainable, but a member is not yet in arrears, the Fund requires 
assurances that debt sustainability will be restored and the program will be fully financed.21 
While the arrears policies described in the following section may fill this role in cases where the 
debtor has defaulted on external creditors (see Annex I for further details), the standards for these 
assurances in preemptive debt restructurings derive from the debt sustainability and financing 
assurances policies. The financing assurances policy does not prescribe the burden sharing between 
creditors, including official and private creditors, provided the member achieves high private sector 
creditor participation. The form of such assurances depends on the nature of the creditors:  
• 
The Fund requires “specific and credible” assurances on debt relief and/or financing from 
official bilateral creditors, which should preferably take the form of a written communication 
from the creditor showing an understanding of the debtor member’s situation and a 
commitment to the needed actions to restore debt sustainability and financing in line with 
program parameters.22 In practice, a similar standard of “specific and credible” assurances on 
financing applies to new financing being provided by International Financial Institutions (IFIs) 
to help restore debt sustainability and close program financing gaps. 
• 
When a contribution from private creditors is required to restore debt sustainability and to 
close financing gaps, assurances are derived from the Fund’s judgment that a credible process 
for debt restructuring is underway and such debt restructuring will likely deliver an outcome in 
line with program parameters. Relevant considerations to form such judgment include the 
engagement of legal and financial advisors by the member, the launching of consultations with 
creditors, and the design of the debt restructuring strategy, including the terms of the new 
instruments and use of inducements for creditor participation.23  
9.      
When debt is unsustainable and the member is in arrears to its private creditors, the 
Fund may consider that debt sustainability will be restored if (i) the member’s debt 
restructuring offer (if any) is sufficient to restore debt sustainability consistent with the 
program parameters and (ii) the criteria under the LIA policy are satisfied (as described in 
 
21 See Sovereign Debt Restructuring—Recent Developments and Implications for the Fund’s Legal and Policy 
Framework, April 2013, Annex I at para. 4. 
22 For Paris Club creditors, these credible and specific assurances on debt relief and/or financing generally take the 
form of a preliminary indication that the Paris Club is willing to provide debt relief in anticipation of an Agreed 
Minute. 
23 The debt restructuring should normally be undertaken before the approval of the Fund arrangement. However, 
there may be circumstances under which more flexibility is warranted, such that the conclusion of the debt 
operation is contemplated at a later date—normally, by the first review under the Fund arrangement. Against this 
background, it would not be necessary to hold up Fund support until there is complete clarity regarding the terms 
of this financing. See, The Acting Chair’s Summing up—The Fund’s Lending Framework and Sovereign Debt—
Further Considerations, January 2016.  


REVIEWS OF THE FUND’S SOVEREIGN ARREARS POLICIES AND PERIMETER 
 
INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND 11 
detail below).24, 25 The criteria under the LIA policy act as a safeguard to give the Fund assurance 
that if the member is meeting those requirements, a debt restructuring deal will be forthcoming 
and arrears will be resolved. The Fund may decide that no further “assurances” regarding the 
restoration of debt sustainability are required. As an additional safeguard, the financing assurances 
reviews required under the LIA policy allow the Fund to assess the status of debtor-creditor 
negotiations, and whether further progress is being made to reach agreement on a debt 
restructuring. If, in the context of such reviews, the Fund determines that the member is no longer 
in compliance with the LIA policy and a debt restructuring deal is unlikely to be forthcoming, the 
Fund can decide not to approve Fund financing. 
10.      When debt is unsustainable and the member is in arrears to its official bilateral 
creditors, the Fund may consider that debt sustainability will be restored, provided the 
requirements under the Fund’s LIOA policy are satisfied (as described in detail below).26 
However, the requirements under the LIOA policy are more stringent in certain respects: In 
particular, the application of the LIOA policy is normally dependent on an agreement being reached 
between the debtor and a (representative) majority of its official bilateral creditors. Therefore, in 
practice, the LIOA is normally applied to minority hold-out creditors. In certain cases, including 
where the creditor provides consent, the Fund may proceed to lend under the LIOA policy even in 
the presence of arrears to a majority creditor or creditors (see discussion in paragraph 49 below). 
However, given that, in general, a durable solution to a BOP problem requires a debt restructuring 
which is unlikely to be achieved without the participation of large creditors, the Fund may ultimately 
judge that, despite compliance with the requirements under the LIOA policy, the overall risks to the 
Fund-supported program may be too high to proceed. 
B.   Arrears Policies 
11.      When a member is in arrears to external creditors at the time Fund financing is 
requested (for instance, at either approval of or a review under an arrangement), the arrears 
 
24 This includes cases where, under the exceptional access policy (see, Access Policy and Limits in the Credit Tranches 
and Under the Extended Fund Facility and on Overall Access to the Fund’s General Resources, and Exceptional 
Access Policy—Review and Modification, Decision No. 14064-(08/18), as amended), debt sustainability must be 
restored with a high probability. If the member’s offer has not yet been made, the Fund could proceed if an offer 
consistent with debt sustainability is expected to be forthcoming. 
25 In this regard, the safeguards under the LIA policy also give the Fund assurances that market access will be 
restored. The LIA policy is predicated on the basis that if the criteria are met, orderly relations between the debtor 
and its creditor(s) are being restored. As such, this would also mean that in due course, market access will be 
restored.  
26 As further described in Annex I, the Fund may consider that debt sustainability will be restored if either the criteria 
under the LIOA are satisfied or the Executive Director for the creditor member provides consent to Fund financing 
notwithstanding arrears owed to it.  


REVIEWS OF THE FUND’S SOVEREIGN ARREARS POLICIES AND PERIMETER 
12 
INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND 
policies (LIA or LIOA) must be satisfied for the Fund to lend.27, 28 Recognizing the destructive 
nature of external payments arrears to both national and international prosperity (see Article I(v)), 
the Fund encourages members to stay current on their obligations to the extent possible. However, 
where that is not possible, the arrears policies give the Fund the possibility to continue providing 
financing in the face of difficulties that may emerge for the member in securing an agreement with 
its creditors on terms consistent with the parameters of the Fund-supported program, provided the 
Fund judges that the member meets the requirements under these policies. The arrears policies 
therefore enable the Fund to tackle the hold-out problem by removing the veto power from 
creditors. At the same time, the arrears policies provide creditors with comfort that the debt relief 
or financing sought by the member from its creditors is consistent with a balance between 
financing and adjustment that has been endorsed by the Fund. 
Private 
12.      The LIA policy governs Fund lending in the face of arrears to external private creditors 
and on other types of external debt claims.29 The LIA policy was initially established to apply to 
sovereign arrears to external creditors on bank loans and was extended to also address sovereign 
arrears to other private creditors, including bondholders, and non-sovereign arrears that arise from 
the imposition of exchange controls (see Box 1 and Annex III). 
 
 
 
 
27 The Fund takes a claim-by-claim determination whether the LIA or the preemptive restructuring practice applies; 
therefore, the LIA only applies to an external debt claim in arrears. “External” is defined in terms of residency of the 
creditor. 
28 The Fund’s arrears policies do not apply to arrears in dispute. Under this practice, where the Fund accepts a 
member's representation that the validity or amount of a debt claim is in dispute, such disputed claim does not give 
rise to arrears for Fund purposes. However, such claims are taken into account (as a contingent claim) for purposes 
of determining whether adequate assurances exist for the financing of a Fund-supported program and the Fund 
DSA. See Sovereign Debt Restructuring—Recent Developments and Implications for the Fund’s Legal and Policy 
Framework, April 2013, Annex I, at FN. 11. 
29 The Fund’s LIA policy has never formally defined the scope of "payments arrears." However, the evolution of the 
arrears policies and their coverage is informative. Accordingly, the Executive Board has applied the LIA policy to 
obligations arising from “commercial financial obligations of a contractual nature” that are not paid when due 
(taking into account any contractual grace periods). For example, arrears on bank loans, suppliers' credits (i.e., where 
the creditor contractually defers payment, or the good/service does not need to be paid on delivery), and since 1999 
bonds have been included in the scope of the LIA policy. However, the LIA policy has not been applied more broadly 
to arrears on non-debt obligations (e.g., financial obligations originating from an arbitral award, unpaid dues, 
payment on delivery). 


REVIEWS OF THE FUND’S SOVEREIGN ARREARS POLICIES AND PERIMETER 
 
INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND 13 
Box 1. Lending Into Arrears (LIA) Policy 
Under the LIA policy, the Fund may provide financing despite sovereign arrears to private creditors 
on a case by case basis and only where (i) prompt Fund support is considered essential for the successful 
implementation of the member’s adjustment program, and (ii) the member is pursuing appropriate policies 
and it is making a good faith effort to reach a collaborative agreement with its private creditors (or to 
facilitate a collaborative agreement between private debtors and creditors and a good prospect exists for 
the removal of exchange controls).1 
The assessment of “good faith” is guided by the following principles: 
• 
First, when a member has reached a judgment that a restructuring of its debt is necessary, it should 
engage in an early dialogue with its creditors, which should continue until the restructuring is 
complete. 
• 
Second, the member should share relevant, non-confidential information with all creditors on a timely 
basis, which would normally include: 
i. 
an explanation of the economic problems and financial circumstances that justify a debt 
restructuring; 
ii. 
a briefing on the broad outlines of a viable economic program to address the underlying 
problems and its implications on the broad financial parameters shaping the envelope of 
resources available for restructured claims;  
iii. 
and the provision of a comprehensive picture of the proposed treatment of all claims on the 
sovereign, including those of official bilateral creditors, and the elaboration of the basis on 
which the debt restructuring would restore medium term sustainability, bearing in mind 
that not all categories of claims may need to be restructured. 
• 
Third, the member should provide creditors with an early opportunity to give input on the design of 
restructuring strategies and the design of individual instruments. 
• 
Finally, in cases in which an organized negotiating framework is warranted by the complexity of the 
case and by the fact that creditors have been able to form a representative committee on a timely 
basis, there would be an expectation that the member would enter into good faith negotiations with 
this committee, though the unique characteristics of each case would also be considered.2 This formal 
negotiating framework would include, inter alia, the sharing of confidential information needed to 
enable creditors to make informed decisions on the terms of a restructuring, and the agreement to a 
standstill on litigation during the restructuring process by the creditors represented in the committee. 
With respect to the imposition of exchange controls (jurisdictional arrears), the LIA provides the 
following guidance:3 Fund lending into non-sovereign arrears stemming from the imposition of 
exchange controls should be on a case-by-case basis and only where: 
i. 
prompt Fund support is considered essential for the successful implementation of the 
member’s adjustment program; and 
ii. 
the member is pursuing appropriate policies, is making a good faith effort to facilitate a 
collaborative agreement between private debtors and their creditors, and a good prospect 
exists for the removal of exchange controls. 
 
 


REVIEWS OF THE FUND’S SOVEREIGN ARREARS POLICIES AND PERIMETER 
14 
INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND 
Official Bilateral 
13.      Arrears on claims held by official bilateral creditors are subject to different policies 
depending on the nature of the claim. Official bilateral creditors hold a variety of claims on other 
sovereigns, reflecting the many functions such creditors play in the international financial 
architecture. These claims are held in different forms and are extended or purchased for different 
public-policy reasons. However, the Fund’s arrears policies give preferential treatment to only the 
subset of these claims that are Direct Bilateral Claims, i.e., claims that are (a) held by a government, 
or an agency acting on behalf of a government; and (b) originate from an underlying transaction 
where the creditor government, or an agency acting on behalf of the government, provided or 
guaranteed financing to the borrowing member.30, 31, 32 While other types of official financing are 
also critical to the operation of domestic and international financial systems, the Fund has 
recognized this specific type of financing as closely tied to the Fund’s operations as it provides 
critical contributions to Fund-supported programs, constitutes BOP support, and often is extended 
during crises when the private sector becomes unwilling to provide support. Another type of 
important official financing is central bank swap lines which may be part of the Global Financial 
Safety Net (GFSN) or direct sovereign-to-sovereign BOP financing. Where such central bank swaps 
are extended on behalf of the government for BOP purposes, they are a Direct Bilateral Claim and 
subject to the Fund’s arrears policies. 
 
30 Reforming the Fund’s Policy on Non-Toleration of Arrears to Official Creditors, December 2015. 
31 While the 2015 Paper establishing the LIOA policy referred to these types of claims as “official claims,” that was a 
misnomer. The claims covered by the LIOA policy are only a subset of official claims, specifically the claims held by 
official bilateral creditors that fall under the definition in the preceding paragraph. Id. 
32 Claims guaranteed by governments or agencies acting on their behalf are provided this preferential treatment 
once the guarantee has been called. Id. Debt claims as well as other sovereign-to-sovereign financial claims such as 
a payment on delivery, and debt-related arbitral awards are covered. 
Box 1. Lending Into Arrears (LIA) Policy (concluded) 
In emergency situations, such as for requests of the Rapid Credit Facility (RCF) and the Rapid 
Financing Instrument (RFI), the LIA policy applies with flexibility in the wake of conflicts and natural 
disasters.4 
                                                                                                                                                                                                             
So long as a member has outstanding arrears to private creditors, all purchases made by such member 
under a Fund arrangement are subject to financing assurances reviews, which will provide an opportunity for 
the Fund to monitor relations between a debtor and its creditors, and for the Executive Board to be kept 
informed about developments in this area at an early stage. 
____________________________ 
1 The Acting Chair’s Summing Up—Fund Policy on Lending into Arrears to Private Creditors—Further Consideration of the 
Good Faith Criterion, September 2002. 
2 Id. 
3 The Acting Chair’s Summing up—Fund Policy on Arrears to Private Creditors—Further Considerations, June 1999. 
4 The Acting Chair's Summing Up - The Fund's Engagement in Fragile States and Post-Conflict Countries-A Review of 
Experience-Issues and Options, March 2008. 


REVIEWS OF THE FUND’S SOVEREIGN ARREARS POLICIES AND PERIMETER 
 
INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND 15 
14.      As set forth in paragraph 1 above, the treatment afforded under the arrears policies 
to Direct Bilateral Claims depends on whether contributions from the official sector (Official 
Sector Involvement or OSI) are required under the Fund-supported program.33 In non-OSI 
cases, the Fund’s NTP applies to arrears on Direct Bilateral Claims—i.e., the Fund may only provide 
financing if the creditor’s Executive Director acquiesces or does not object to the Fund approving 
financing despite the arrears. In OSI cases, the LIOA policy applies to these claims (Box 2). Claims 
held by official bilateral creditors on sovereigns that are not Direct Bilateral Claims are treated 
under the LIA policy in practice (Box 1). 
Box 2. Lending Into Arrears to Official Bilateral Creditors (LIOA) Policy 
The LIOA policy allows Fund financing despite sovereign arrears to official bilateral creditors on 
Direct Bilateral Claims in carefully circumscribed circumstances.1 The LIOA policy was introduced in 2015 
“to ensure that, where a restructuring is deemed necessary, collective action among official bilateral 
creditors is encouraged and the provision of Fund support is not held up by the unwillingness of hold-out 
creditors to join an effort that is supported by an adequately representative group of creditors.”2 Under the 
LIOA policy, where OSI is required, the Fund may provide financing despite arrears on Direct Bilateral Claims 
where: 
• 
There is a representative Paris Club agreement (i.e., providing a majority of the total financing 
contributions—meaning new financing and/or debt relief—required from official bilateral creditors over 
the program period). In such cases, based on the Paris Club’s comparability of treatment principle, 
arrears are considered eliminated (“deemed away”) for purposes of the LIOA policy for both 
participating and non-participating creditors when financing assurances are received from the Paris Club 
in anticipation of an Agreed Minute. The Executive Board has indicated,3, 4 however, that “should another 
representative standing forum emerge, the Fund would be open to engaging with such a forum.” 
Affording another representative standing forum similar status to the Paris Club under the LIOA policy 
would require an Executive Board decision; 
• 
Creditor consent has been provided, in the absence of a representative Paris Club Agreement; or 
• 
In the absence of a representative Paris Club agreement or creditor consent5, if the following three 
criteria hold: (i) prompt financial support from the Fund is considered essential, and the member is 
pursuing appropriate policies; (ii) the debtor is making good faith efforts to reach agreement with the 
creditor on a contribution consistent with the parameters of the Fund-supported program—i.e., that the 
absence of an agreement is due to the unwillingness of the creditor to provide such a contribution; and 
(iii) the decision to provide financing despite the arrears would not have an undue negative effect on the 
Fund’s ability to mobilize official financing packages in future cases. The Executive Board has provided 
guidance on how to apply the second and third criteria. The assessment of “good faith” will take into 
account, inter alia, whether the debtor: 
 
  
 
 
 
33 “Contribution” here comprises, and is limited to, debt relief and new financing (e.g., loans, bond financing, 
guarantees, and grants). 


REVIEWS OF THE FUND’S SOVEREIGN ARREARS POLICIES AND PERIMETER 
16 
INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND 
 
Box 2. Lending Into Arrears to Official Bilateral Creditors (LIOA) Policy (concluded) 
i. 
has approached the creditor to which it owes arrears either bilaterally or through a relevant 
grouping of official bilateral creditors;  
ii. 
has offered to engage in substantive dialogue with the creditor and has sought a 
collaborative process with the creditor to reach agreement;  
iii. 
has provided the creditor relevant information on a timely basis consistent with the Fund’s 
policy on confidentiality of information; and  
iv. 
has offered the creditor terms that are consistent with the parameters of the Fund-supported 
program and consistent with the contributions from other official bilateral creditors. 
• 
In assessing the third criterion, the Fund will consider the signal that such a decision would send to 
official bilateral creditors as a group, given the specific circumstances of the case. This criterion 
would normally not be satisfied where the creditor or group of creditors that has not reached 
agreement with the debtor accounts for an adequately representative share. Separately, an 
assessment of whether the third criterion is satisfied would take into consideration the creditor’s 
track record of providing contributions in past debt restructurings under Fund-supported programs, 
even if the creditor does not account for an adequately representative share of total financing 
contributions. 
In emergency situations, where the extraordinary demands on the affected government are such that there 
is insufficient time for the debtor to undertake good faith efforts to reach agreement with its creditors, the 
Fund may provide financing under the RCF or the RFI despite arrears owed to official bilateral creditors and 
without assessing whether the three criteria above have been satisfied or obtaining the creditor’s consent. 
Finally, so long as unresolved arrears owed to official bilateral creditors are outstanding, every purchase or 
disbursement made available after the approval of the arrangement is subject to a financing assurances 
review by the Executive Board. 
____________________________ 
1 Reforming the Fund’s Policy on Non-Toleration of Arrears to Official Creditors, December 2015. 
2 The Chairman’s Summing Up—Reforming the Fund’s Policy on Non-Toleration of Arrears to Official Creditors, December 
2015. 
3 To the extent that arrears are not rescheduled by the deadline set forth in the Agreed Minute, the arrears are considered 
to arise anew for program purposes, unless the Fund considers that the member is exercising its best efforts to conclude 
the bilateral agreement in line with the terms of the Agreed Minute. 
4 This special recognition of agreements reached in the Paris Club is based on long-standing Fund policy and close 
coordination with the Paris Club. The Acting Chairman's Summing Up—Settlement of Disputes Between Members 
Relating to External Financial Obligations—Role of the Fund, July 1984; IMF, Prevention and Resolution of Sovereign Debt 
Crises, Selected Legal and Institutional Papers Series, 2018. 
5 Creditors generally provide explicit consent prior to the circulation of the staff report for use of Fund resources to the 
Executive Board. However, where the relevant Executive Director has, despite repeated inquiries, not received a response 
from the creditor authorities, staff follows a less stringent “deemed consent” approach, under which consent is assumed 
absent the receipt of an objection. Application of the Fund’s Policy on Arrears to Official Bilateral Creditors—Modalities of 
Creditor Consent, April 2017. 


REVIEWS OF THE FUND’S SOVEREIGN ARREARS POLICIES AND PERIMETER 
 
INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND 17 
Multilateral 
15.      Multilateral creditors play an important role in the international financial architecture. 
They are better placed than official bilateral creditors to pool risk, internalize global externalities, 
and overcome collective action problems. Their role is widely recognized by the international 
creditor community which accords certain multilateral claims special treatment. The rationale for 
this treatment is based on the Articles, which require the Fund to assist its members in solving BOP 
problems without resorting to measures destructive of national or international prosperity (Article 
I(v)). The Fund’s NTP provides special protection to claims of multilateral institutions arising from 
activities that help the Fund achieve this objective.  
16.      Arrears on claims held by multilateral creditors are subject to the NTP (Figure 1).34 
Fund-supported programs have long required the resolution of existing arrears and the non-
accumulation of new arrears during the program period with respect to multilateral creditors.35 
While membership with at least two sovereign members is a necessary condition, the Fund does 
not have a clear definition of a multilateral creditor or an agreed list of such institutions. Instead, 
the Fund considers a number of factors in making such a judgment, including (i) global, rather than 
regional, membership of the institution, (ii) the Paris Club’s treatment of the institution and the 
institution’s participation in the Paris Club, and (iii) the treatment of the institution under the 
Heavily Indebted Poor Countries (HIPC) Initiative. Arrears to multilateral creditors are considered 
resolved if, in the Fund’s judgment, the debtor has a credible plan and projected financing to 
eliminate arrears over a defined period (Credible Plan). Such a plan must be credible to Fund staff—
and ultimately the Executive Board—but the creditor’s concurrence is not required. However, for 
the World Bank Group or multilaterals providing substantial financing (i.e., net positive BOP 
financing) to the Fund-supported program, the creditor’s agreement with the arrears clearance plan 
over a defined period has generally been required (Agreed Plan).36 The current NTP is silent on the 
treatment of claims to IFIs that are not considered “multilateral creditors”. 
 
 
34 While the current policy explicitly looks at the status of the institution, in practice, it also takes into account the 
type of claim held by the multilateral institution. Claims related to IFI financing of a global public good nature, even 
outside the context of resolving BOP problems, have been protected by the NTP while arrears on other types of 
claims—such as membership fees or treasury/investment operations—have been considered to fall outside the NTP. 
Most overdue membership fees are owed to multilateral non-financing institutions—and key IFIs do not impose 
membership fees—so non-payment does not affect a country’s ability to access external financing. Further, in most 
cases, amounts of overdue fees are de minimis—i.e., not large enough to affect the country’s ability to tap external 
financing. 
35 Payments Arrears in Current International Transactions, October 1970. 
36 For the World Bank, this treatment is based on the 1989 IMF-World Bank Concordat, Bank-Fund Collaboration in 
Assisting Member Countries, March 1989. 


REVIEWS OF THE FUND’S SOVEREIGN ARREARS POLICIES AND PERIMETER 
18 
INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND 
 
LENDING INTO ARREARS POLICY 
17.      Fund staff reviewed 30 sovereign debt restructuring cases involving private-sector 
creditors since 2002 and reached out to stakeholders in early 2021. Staff reviewed all 
preemptive and post-default PSIs that occurred in the context of financing from the Fund (including 
both Fund-supported programs and emergency financing requests), and four cases without a Fund 
arrangement, since 2002 (Figure 2, Annex II).37, 38 In addition, staff held consultations with 
 
37 The preemptive debt restructuring cases include Chad (2015), Chad (2018), Cyprus (2013), Ecuador (2020), Greece 
(2012), Grenada (2005), Jamaica (2010), Jamaica (2013), Moldova (2002), Mongolia (2018), Mozambique (2016), 
Nicaragua (2003), Nicaragua (2008), Ukraine (2015), and Uruguay (2003), all with a Fund arrangement. In addition, 
staff reviewed the preemptive PSIs of Belize in 2007, 2013, and 2017 outside the context of a Fund arrangement. The 
post-default cases, subject to the LIA policy, include, Argentina (2005/2010), Barbados (2019), Côte d'Ivoire (2010), 
Dominica (2006), Dominican Republic (2005), Grenada (2015), Iraq (2006), Mozambique (2019), Republic of Congo 
(ongoing), Serbia and Montenegro (2010), Serbia and Montenegro (2005), Seychelles (2010), St. Kitts and Nevis 
(2012), and Suriname (ongoing). Staff also reviewed the post-default restructuring in Argentina (2020), outside a 
Fund-supported program. Separately, the LIA policy was applied in a number of cases that did not involve a 
significant PSI, including cases involving legacy claims from an earlier PSI (e.g., Argentina, 2018), and cases where PSI 
represented a small share of overall debt relief (e.g., Antigua and Barbuda, 2010), or no PSI was envisaged (e.g., 
Gabon, 2017). 
38 Sovereign arrears to private creditors may arise for reasons unrelated to the need for debt restructuring, such as 
administrative issues on the debtor side and/or difficulties in affecting payments. In such cases, in practice, the 
standard “good faith” principles have been applied to the extent relevant as the debtor needs to engage its 
creditor(s) to resolve the arrears. Where payments are in arrears due to factors outside the debtor’s control, such as 
(continued) 
Figure 1. Decision Tree Summarizing the Current Multilateral NTP  
 


REVIEWS OF THE FUND’S SOVEREIGN ARREARS POLICIES AND PERIMETER 
 
INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND 19 
stakeholders representing a variety of private sector investors, interest groups, financial and legal 
advisors, IFIs, and public-sector officials and representatives. 
A.   Review of Post-Default Debt Restructuring Cases Since 2002 
 
18.      In most post-default debt restructuring cases reviewed, arrears were resolved shortly 
after the successful completion of the debt exchange. Most post-default debt restructurings 
during the review period had either full or very high creditor participation rates (in some instances 
only after the application of Collective Action Clauses (CACs))see Annex II. When full participation 
was not initially achieved, several countries opted to clear the arrears to remaining hold-outs. The 
main exceptions involving more protracted arrears to hold-outs were Argentina and Iraq following 
their debt restructurings in 2005 and 2006, respectively. In Argentina, the 2005 exchange achieved 
only 76 percent participation, with additional creditors participating in a reopened exchange in 
2010 and a further settlement with most remaining hold-outs in 2016, but US$1.2 billion of arrears 
to residual hold-outs remained outstanding by the time of the 2018 Stand-By Arrangement (SBA). 
Iraq’s initial (2006) debt exchange attracted higher participation (96 percent), and a reopening of 
 
international sanctions, the policy was generally considered met and the Fund could lend when payments were 
made into escrow. This approach has been taken in cases where arrears have accumulated to official creditors due to 
sanctions or the lack of a counterpart on the creditor side (e.g., Mali, 2013; Honduras, 2011).  
Figure 2. Outcomes of Preemptive and Post-Default Debt Restructuring since 2002 
 
a. By Duration and Year of  
    Debt Restructuring 
b. By Duration and NPV Haircut 
 
 
Sources: Staff reports and media reports; Asonuma, Niepelt and Ranciere (2018), Asonuma and Trebesch (2016), Cruces 
and Trebesch (2013), Das, Papaioannou and Trebesch (2012), Park and Samples (2021). 
Notes: Both figures exclude one outlier (Serbia, 1992, post-default, with committee, 12.1 year duration) and the (still-
ongoing) debt restructurings in the Republic of Congo and Suriname. Nicaragua (2003) and Chad (2015) are also 
excluded from Figure 2.b, as NPV haircut estimates are not available. 


REVIEWS OF THE FUND’S SOVEREIGN ARREARS POLICIES AND PERIMETER 
20 
INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND 
the exchange in 2008 resolved a further US$500m of arrears, but some residual arrears remained 
until after the conclusion of the 2010 SBA.39 
19.      Stakeholders generally found the LIA policy to be broadly appropriate. In general, the 
Fund’s involvement was welcomed, as it was viewed to enhance the credibility of the debt 
restructuring process, and the LIA policy’s good faith requirement incentivizes debtors to engage 
with creditors in a timely and constructive manner. That said, there was some criticism of the 
implementation of the “good faith” requirement, with some stakeholders arguing that a higher bar 
would be appropriate, while others contended that the Fund should not try to referee the process 
of debtor-creditor engagement. Stakeholders also noted that every debt restructuring poses unique 
challenges and that the precise modalities of creditor-debtor engagement can vary. Hence, it was 
largely acknowledged that the current policy, which allows for a flexible case-by-case approach, 
seems appropriate. However, a few issues were noted, as described below.  
Early Dialogue 
20.      Dialogue with private creditors typically began much earlier, and the completion of 
discussions, was faster in preemptive than post-default cases. The average time between the 
announcement of the debt restructuring and the start of dialogue with private creditors in 
preemptive cases was two months, less than half the average time observed in post-default cases 
(five months). Overall, the duration varied more among post-default cases: while some debtors 
initiated negotiations almost immediately, others kept creditors waiting for over a year. Similarly, 
the average time between announcement and the completion of the debt restructuring in 
preemptive cases was much shorter, only about a third of the average time for post-default cases. 
This difference could reflect the complexity of some post-default cases (i.e., a selection effect: more 
complex cases are more likely to both involve default and take longer to resolve), but also stronger 
incentives to reach an agreement in preemptive cases due to the threat of a default. However, as 
further described below, there is no evidence to suggest there were substantial differences in the 
“quality” or the form of dialogue between the two cases. 
Form of Engagement 
21.      In the cases reviewed, creditor committees were somewhat more common in post-
default cases, but there was no clear relationship between the existence of a recognized 
creditor committee and the duration of debt restructurings. Committees appear to have been 
formed more frequently in post-default cases, including around 80 percent of cases reviewed, 
compared to just under half in preemptive debt restructurings. In post-default cases, the duration 
of the debt restructuring was somewhat longer with a committee relative to those conducted by 
 
39 Commercial creditor participation in the HIPC Initiative has been weak, and there are several ongoing lawsuits. See 
Table AIII16 in the Heavily Indebted Poor Countries (HIPC) Initiative and Multilateral Debt Relief Initiative (MDRI)—
Statistical Update, August 2019.Application of the LIA policy has been attenuated in Fund arrangements constituting 
the track record towards the HIPC Completion Point. In that context, the requirement of good faith efforts has been 
essentially satisfied by the member communicating with, and ultimately offering HIPC terms, to creditors. 


REVIEWS OF THE FUND’S SOVEREIGN ARREARS POLICIES AND PERIMETER 
 
INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND 21 
means of bilateral dialogue. However, causality is not clear, since creditors may have stronger 
incentives to form committees in complex/difficult debt restructurings.  
22.      High participation was also achieved in the absence of creditor committees. In the 
cases reviewed, overall creditor participation levels were high, both in preemptive and post-default 
cases, and the existence of a creditor committee did not seem to have had much impact.  
23.      The lack of a distinct link between creditor committees and creditor participation was 
mirrored in stakeholders’ call for a case-by-case approach. There was consensus among 
stakeholders that creditor committees can be useful, and strong support for engagement with 
creditor committees where they exist. However, committees were not seen as a prerequisite for 
efficiency, and other forms of dialogue, including bilateral negotiations or with facilitating agents, 
can also be effective depending on the types of claims involved. Stakeholders noted that every debt 
restructuring poses unique challenges, and the precise modalities of debtor-creditor engagement 
can, and should, vary accordingly; that timely engagement rather than its form is paramount; that 
forming committees also comes with monetary costs and other complications that may prevent 
some creditors from participating; and that high participation has also been achieved without 
committees.  
24.      In practice, while debtors generally engaged with creditor committees, very few 
bonds include clauses requiring them to do so. The inclusion of such creditor engagement 
clauses has been advocated by the Institute of International Finance (IIF), and they are included as 
optional clauses in the form of enhanced CACs published by the International Capital Markets 
Association (ICMA). A frequent argument is that some creditors, such as some asset managers 
acting on behalf of bondholders, do not have budgets for covering committee costs, leading to less 
representative committees (or no committees at all). On this basis, some stakeholders have also 
argued that Fund policy should encourage creditor engagement clauses, which generally include 
provisions obligating debtors to pay for creditor committee costs.40 During the 2014 Executive 
Board’s discussion of the ICMA model clauses on CACs, the Executive Board did not endorse 
creditor engagement clauses, leaving the modality of creditor engagement and related fees for the 
debtor and its creditors to agree.41 Staff sees no reason to recommend a change in this position. 
25.      Stakeholders argued—and staff agrees—that the “complexity” limitation for creditor 
committees under the LIA (see Box 1) should be dropped, while cautioning that 
determinations of committee “representativeness” need to be case specific. Stakeholders 
recommended engagement with creditor committees more broadly, noting that whether a case is 
“complex” could be regarded as too subjective. Further, stakeholders generally recognized that it 
 
40 See DeSieno (2016) for a statement of this argument. However, to the extent that there is an efficiency argument 
for debtor funding of committee costs (such as a coordination failure on the side of creditors), nothing prevents the 
debtor from offering such funding. To the extent that there is not, such funding would not be in the interest of the 
debtor (nor possibly that of some creditors), and Fund policy requiring the debtor to shoulder this funding would be 
inappropriate. 
41 See Strengthening the Contractual Framework to Address Collective Action Problems in Sovereign Debt 
Restructuring, Minutes of Executive Board Meeting 14/92-2, October 2014. 


REVIEWS OF THE FUND’S SOVEREIGN ARREARS POLICIES AND PERIMETER 
22 
INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND 
would be difficult to objectively define “representativeness,” which has several dimensions and 
could depend on the debt portfolio to be restructured (see Box 3). More broadly, they were of the 
view that the Fund should not become overly prescriptive on de minimis thresholds, as what 
matters for the sovereign is to find a counterpart whose interests are broadly aligned with most 
creditors. It should be anticipated that in some cases there would be multiple committees, and in 
this case, it was suggested that creditor committees could organize themselves so that the debtor 
would engage with a steering committee. While some stakeholders expressed concern with the 
splitting of creditors into several committees, others argued that the existence of multiple 
committees did not prevent creditors from reaching an agreement with the sovereign. Indeed, 
recent debt restructurings with Argentina (2020) and Ecuador (2020) both involved multiple 
committees. 
Box 3. Argentina and the 2004 Global Committee of Argentina Bondholders (GCAB) 
Whether a creditor committee was “representative” was explored in depth in the case of Argentina 
in the early 2000s. Argentina announced a default on its external debt in December 2001 and the Fund 
approved two SBAs during the course of its debt restructuring.1 Several creditor committees were formed 
representing different interests, and a “global” creditor committee, the Global Committee of Argentina 
Bondholders (GCAB), was ultimately established on January 12, 2004, shortly before the first review under 
the second SBA.2 Disagreements over the extent of Argentina’s engagement with creditors under the LIA 
policy delayed completion of that review, and the staff report pointedly highlighted the importance of 
deepening exchanges with creditors going forward and assessing the representativeness of GCAB.3 In early 
March 2004, staff sought guidance from the Executive Board in an informal session on the proposed 
assessment that GCAB was “representative” based on criteria laid out for the Executive Board’s 
consideration.4 During the informal session, the Argentine authorities, supported by several Executive 
Directors, argued strongly that the complexity of the case precluded the formation of a single 
representative creditor committee. In particular, the authorities argued that GCAB did not include important 
constituencies of bondholders, there was inadequate verification of the bond holdings the committee 
members claimed to represent, and some committee members had previously not acted in good faith. 
Ultimately, in line with staff’s recommendation, the Executive Board advised that GCAB was a representative 
committee, and the authorities agreed to hold negotiations with GCAB and other creditor groups.5  
The conclusion that GCAB was representative was based on the following facts: (1) GCAB appeared to 
represent the creditors it purported to, with most support evidenced by formal, documented mandates, 
and the remainder based on “informal, but customary, procedures followed in the relevant jurisdictions”; 
(2) GCAB’s Steering Committee represented holders of approximately $35 billion of eligible bonds, 
accounting for approximately 89 percent of eligible bonds identified as held outside of Argentina, or 
approximately 43 percent of all eligible bonds.6 Staff also observed that membership was open to any 
major non-litigating creditors, and included non-Argentine institutional and retail creditors from a variety 
of jurisdictions.7 It was noted, however, that while GCAB had issued invitation letters to Argentine investor 
groups, no Argentine institutional investors had joined, having determined that their interests were 
substantially different from those of GCAB members. In assessing that GCAB was “representative” despite 
this absence, staff noted that (1) one group should not have effective veto power over the formation of a 
representative creditor committee; (2) the absent group had been invited to join; (3) litigation precluded a 
subset of the absent group from joining; and (4) a finding that the GCAB is representative would not 
prevent the authorities from engaging directly with non-participating creditors.8 
 


REVIEWS OF THE FUND’S SOVEREIGN ARREARS POLICIES AND PERIMETER 
 
INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND 23 
Box 3. Argentina and the 2004 Global Committee of Argentina Bondholders (GCAB) 
(concluded) 
___________________________ 
1 Under the first arrangement, approved in January 2003, three reviews were completed. Under the second, approved in 
September 2003, two reviews were completed. 
2 See, Argentina—Second Review Under the Stand-By Arrangement and Requests for Modification and Waiver of 
Performance Criteria, July 2004  at para. 7 (hereinafter, “Second Review”). 
3 Argentina—First Review Under the Stand-By Arrangement and Request for Waiver of Nonobservance and Applicability 
of Performance Criteria, January 2004 at paras. 25-26  
4 Argentina - Issues Related to Establishment of a Creditor's Committee Under the Fund's Policy on Lending into Arrears 
to Private Creditors, March 2004 (hereinafter, “Creditor Committee Issues”). 
5 Second Review at paras. 7, 37, 39 and Section E; Creditor Committee Issues at Annex II. See also Decision No. 13214, 
adopted March 22, 2004 (completing second review). 
6 Creditor Committee Issues at paras. 8, 10. 
7 Creditor Committee Issues at Annex I. 
8 Creditor Committee Issues at paras. 10-12. 
 
Information Sharing and Opportunity for Input 
26.      In both preemptive and post-default cases reviewed, debtors routinely shared non-
confidential information, and creditors appeared to have been given an opportunity to give 
input on the design of the debt restructuring. Staff reports indicate that non-confidential 
information was generally shared by the debtor with its creditors. This was also recognized by 
private creditors, although they noted that some information that they found essential, notably the 
full set of assumptions underlying the debt sustainability analysis, are not typically shared. Although 
staff reports are rarely explicit on the exact details of interactions with creditors, in most cases, this 
information sharing by debtors seems to have also lent creditors an opportunity to provide input 
on the design of debt restructuring instruments. 
27.      Stakeholders called for updates to the expectations for information sharing under 
“good faith” to reflect developments since this principle was defined. In terms of information 
sharing, private creditors suggested deleting the term “non-confidential” after “relevant”. They 
consider that the term “relevant” alone would be more descriptive and coherent in practice. In the 
context of the LIA policy, information sharing is divided into non-confidential information, which 
the debtor should share with all creditors, and confidential information, which the debtor only 
needs to share in the context of a formal negotiating framework subject to safeguards. In this 
regard, “confidential” refers to “market sensitive” information, the sharing of which is regulated by 
securities laws and restricts the trading of securities. Private creditors pointed to two problems with 
the current LIA policy’s treatment of information: First, the terms “confidential” and “non-
confidential” can be misunderstood. In particular, debtors may hide behind the principle that only 
non-confidential information is to be shared with all creditors, by defining all sorts of information 
that is actually not market sensitive as “confidential”. Second, creditor committee members may 
want to continue trading while they are negotiating. However, if they receive confidential (market 


REVIEWS OF THE FUND’S SOVEREIGN ARREARS POLICIES AND PERIMETER 
24 
INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND 
sensitive) information via the committee, they may violate securities law if they traded. Private 
creditors further asserted that they have developed mechanisms for sharing market sensitive 
information consistent with that framework. In terms of relevant information, participants 
mentioned that the following would be important: (i) the exchange of current macroeconomic and 
debt data, (ii) disclosure of the proposed treatment for different creditor classes, and 
(iii) transparency around macro policy assumptions (to the extent such information can be 
disclosed). 
Flexibility in Emergency Financing Cases 
28.      While the LIA policy applies flexibly in emergency financing situations, in practice this 
flexibility appears not to have been needed in the cases reviewed. Four emergency financing 
requests involving LIA were identified,42 but in each case the debtor had taken actions that were 
sufficient to support a determination that the authorities were engaged in “good faith” negotiations 
in line with the LIA policy. 
B.   Review of Application of LIA Policy to Jurisdictional Arrears 
29.      There have been few cases where the LIA policy has applied to non-sovereign arrears 
that arose because of the imposition of exchange controls (jurisdictional arrears). While 
jurisdictional arrears were the sole focus of the NTP in its original formulation (Annex III), such 
arrears now constitute only a small subset of cases to which the LIA policy applies. Staff identified 
three such cases since 2002: Iceland (2008); Latvia (2008); and São Tomé and Príncipe (2019). In 
each case, the LIA policy was applied to require both the member to make a good faith effort to 
facilitate a collaborative agreement between private debtors and creditors on the resolution of 
arrears and the existence of good prospects for the removal of the exchange controls giving rise to 
the arrears. Exchange controls were removed in both Iceland and Latvia, leading to a resolution of 
the arrears. Exchange controls remain in São Tomé and Príncipe, and the Executive Board has 
approved their temporary retention under the ongoing Fund-supported program. 
30.      Staff proposes no amendments to the LIA policy with respect to jurisdictional arrears. 
In this small set of cases, the LIA policy continues to help draw attention to the issue of arrears 
arising from the imposition of exchange controls, which continue to be an important part of the 
Fund’s mandate. The LIA policy operates in tandem with Article VIII, Section 2(a) to convey a 
consistent message on the need to eliminate exchange controls—and their consequent arrears—to 
the extent possible. 
 
42 Iraq (EPCA, 2006), Mali (2012, RCF), Ecuador (2016, RFI), Mozambique (2019, RCF). 


REVIEWS OF THE FUND’S SOVEREIGN ARREARS POLICIES AND PERIMETER 
 
INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND 25 
C.   Recommendations 
31.      Overall, staff considers the LIA policy to be well balanced and that there is no need for 
a major overhaul of the policy. However, some amendments, and updates are warranted, given 
the experience gained and the developments observed over the last 20 years of PSI. 
Update Elements of “Good Faith” Engagement 
32.      The principles for assessing “good faith” engagement outlined in 2002 remain 
broadly appropriate but could be amended, updated, and sharpened in several respects: 
• 
To provide guidance on what constitutes “relevant” information, with a focus on debt 
transparency. Specifically, staff proposes that the Fund specify that the relevant information 
that should generally be shared with creditors would include a comprehensive picture of the 
government debt stock and its terms (in the aggregate) in line with the recent changes 
adopted under the Fund’s Debt Limits Policy (DLP).43 The suggested elements of this disclosure 
could be aligned with what the member would/could be required to disclose in Fund program 
documents under the DLP (Box 4): creditor composition, major subcategories of instruments 
(with information on the main financial terms), upcoming debt service, and collateralized 
debt.44, 45  
Box 4. Other Fund Workstreams on Debt Transparency  
The Fund is addressing the need to support debt transparency through ongoing reforms to the policy 
frameworks for both program conditionality and surveillance: 
• 
The recent reform of the Debt Limits Policy (DLP) introduces an explicit expectation that critical debt 
data disclosure gaps be addressed upfront in Fund-supported programs that include debt limits. The 
new DLP also introduces a new standardized debt holder profile table, to be included in all Fund-
program documents. Similarly, the Fund introduced new safeguards requirements for access to the 
resources of the Poverty Reduction and Growth Trust (PRGT) in March 2021, including a requirement 
for enhanced discussion of the structure of public debt for programs involving high access and for 
countries whose external risk rating is ‘high’ or ‘in debt distress’. 
• 
The Fund is also considering expanding debt reporting requirements in the review of the data provision 
to the Fund for surveillance purposes to better identify fiscal risks. Recent updates to the Fund’s Debt 
Sustainability Analysis (DSA) frameworks also address debt coverage and disclosure. 
 
 
 
43 Reform of the Policy on Public Debt Limits in IMF-Supported Programs, November 2020. 
44 Guidance Note on Implementing the Debt Limits Policy in Fund Supported Programs, May 2021. 
45 It would be expected that aggregated debt data would include all relevant debt. To the extent that certain debt is 
covered by confidentiality clauses, a full breakdown may not be feasible and only the sharing of relevant aggregated 
data would be expected. It is recognized that data reconciliation may mean that there may be delays in sharing final 
numbers. 


REVIEWS OF THE FUND’S SOVEREIGN ARREARS POLICIES AND PERIMETER 
26 
INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND 
Box 4. Other Fund Workstreams on Debt Transparency (concluded) 
• 
The 2017 Review of the IMF-World Bank Debt Sustainability Framework for Low Income Countries 
features an expectation that DSAs should have a near-complete coverage of public debt, supported by 
standardized reporting of the sub-sectors included and excluded from the DSA and a new contingent 
liability stress test to assess risks from omitted sectors.1 
The 2021 Review of the Debt Sustainability Framework for Market-Access Countries enhances reporting of 
debt profile vulnerabilities, including through a breakdown of debt by instrument type and by holder 
profile.2 Bank and Fund staff are supporting official and private sector transparency initiatives: 
• 
For official creditors, World Bank Group and Fund staff are supporting G20 efforts on sustainable 
finance and transparency. The G20’s Operational Guidelines for Sustainable Financing—Diagnostic 
Tool identifies shortcomings in official creditor practices including on transparency, and a second round 
of voluntary self-assessment using the Diagnostic Tool is currently under way.3  
• 
For private creditors, Fund staff are supporting IIF/OECD work on debt transparency. Staff 
participate in a user’s group and the Advisory Board involving the World Bank, Fund, Bank for 
International Settlement (BIS), and the IIF to support Organization for Economic Co-operation and 
Development’s (OECD) development and hosting of a data repository, analysis and reporting of private 
sector foreign-currency lending to sovereigns (or borrowers with public guarantees) in PRGT-eligible 
countries. 
• The Fund and World Bank are actively working to address debt vulnerabilities in LICs with the 
implementation of a multi-pronged approach (MPA) since fall 2018. The MPA covers efforts to 
support improved debt monitoring, wider debt data coverage and transparency, stronger debt 
management capacity building, and outreach to creditors. 
• The ongoing Tenth Review of the IMF’s Data Standards Initiatives also aims to foster data 
transparency including regarding debt data. It builds on the current framework for data dissemination 
by encouraging more granular publication of debt data, focusing on debt breakdowns  
by creditor and creditor type. 
• Finally, the Fund’s work program includes an Executive Board paper to better understand the 
incentives for limited debt transparency by debtors and creditors. The paper envisages to focus on 
policies, including domestic legal frameworks, international standards, and best practices in debt data 
recording, reporting and disclosure that could lead to greater debt transparency. 
____________________________ 
1 Review of the Debt Sustainability Framework for Low Income Countries: Proposed Reforms, October 2017. 
2 Review of the Debt Sustainability Framework for Market Access Countries, February 2021. 
3 G20 Operational Guidelines for Sustainable Financing—Diagnostic Tool, November 2019. 
 
• 
To replace the two-track approach on confidential (formal negotiating framework) and 
non-confidential information (all cases) with an expectation to share all relevant 
information with creditors. As noted above, the distinction between confidential (i.e., market 
sensitive) and non-confidential information is no longer meaningful; private creditors have 
developed modalities to deal with market sensitive information even outside of a formal 
negotiating framework, while in some cases members of a creditor committee may prefer not 
to be privy to confidential information to avoid being subject to trading restrictions. As such, 


REVIEWS OF THE FUND’S SOVEREIGN ARREARS POLICIES AND PERIMETER 
 
INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND 27 
staff proposes that the existing two-track approach be replaced with a generalized expectation 
that the creditor should share relevant information (thereby eliminating the formal negotiating 
framework, including the expectation to enter into formal negotiations with a representative 
committee if timely formed in complex cases), subject to appropriate safeguards agreed 
between the parties where this information is market sensitive. This would also bring the LIA 
policy into closer alignment with “good faith” under the LIOA policy, which includes sharing of 
“relevant information.”46  
• 
To add the element that the debtor’s offer should be consistent with the parameters of 
the Fund-supported program. The existing “good faith” principles focus on procedural 
elements of debtor-creditor engagement, but it is important to recognize that in practice, good 
faith engagement also depends on the financial terms of a debt restructuring proposal. In 
particular, “good faith” engagement would require that a debt restructuring proposal—to the 
extent one is made before the Executive Board meeting, which may not always be the case—be 
broadly in line with what is needed to restore debt sustainability, as reflected in the parameters 
of the Fund-supported program. While this issue is currently addressed indirectly by the Fund’s 
other policies on debt sustainability,47 staff proposes to explicitly include an expectation as a 
fourth guiding principle of good faith, that any debt restructuring proposal offered by the 
debtor should be consistent with the parameters of the Fund-supported program. Again, this 
amendment would bring the LIA policy into closer alignment with the LIOA policy and would 
be consistent with the need to ensure that a debt restructuring will restore sustainability and 
has a reasonable prospect of succeeding. 
• 
To play a stronger role in encouraging early dialogue and clear communication by the 
debtor on the perimeter of claims of a PSI. Given the many unknowns private creditors have 
to factor in during a debt restructuring, the sooner the debtor can specify the perimeter of 
claims subject to PSI (including claims held on non-government public sector entities), the 
sooner those creditors can make progress toward an agreement among themselves and with 
the debtor. Although providing this clarity is the debtor's responsibility, the Fund could 
establish an expectation on the debtor to do this at the outset of the debt restructuring 
process. This expectation will also help the Fund establish the requisite assurances under the 
financing assurances or LIA policy that the debt restructuring will restore debt sustainability. 
However, this would need to be carefully balanced against the Fund’s approach not to 
micromanage  the debt restructuring process. Beyond establishing an expectation as part of the 
assessment of good faith, it would seem the Fund cannot (and should not) do more. The 
perimeter of claims that a government chooses to set for a PSI and/or the terms demanded 
from various private creditors is not something the Fund should interfere in. Creditors can exert 
 
46 For the avoidance of doubt, any information that the Fund produces (such as a DSA or a set of macroeconomic 
projections against which policies are assessed) continues to be confidential and subject to the Fund’s confidentiality 
rules, which prohibit sharing unless the Fund has published it or consented to its disclosure subject to safeguards. 
47 For example, an offer that falls short of program parameters would not typically be consistent with an assessment 
that debt sustainability will be restored, while a proposal that is seeking “excessive” relief (e.g., a large NPV haircut) 
would undermine the high creditor participation needed. 


REVIEWS OF THE FUND’S SOVEREIGN ARREARS POLICIES AND PERIMETER 
28 
INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND 
leverage on the debtors through several channels, and it is not for the Fund to get involved in 
debt restructuring negotiations (except that for instance, Fund staff could, at the member’s 
request, explain the Fund’s policies and/or the assumptions underlying the member’s macro 
forecast and Fund program parameters as well as the DSA). 
Sharpen the Expected Engagement with Creditor Committees in Two Respects  
33.      As noted above, staff recommends that the expectation of engagement with a 
creditor committee under a formal negotiating framework be eliminated. However, as a factor 
staff would consider in assessing good faith, a member would still be expected to engage with a 
creditor committee or creditor committees when the criteria under the LIA policy are met, with the 
two below amendments. 
34.      Because the “complexity” of a case is difficult to determine and not a critical element, 
staff recommends that this element not be retained under the LIA policy. The LIA policy 
currently sets the expectation that engagement with creditor committees should only occur “when 
warranted by the complexity of the case.” Three reasons underpin staff’s recommendation. First, 
given that each debt restructuring is unique and presents its own challenges, it is difficult to judge 
in practice whether one is truly more complex than another. Indeed, even where creditor 
committees were considered representative in Fund-supported programs, there has been very little 
discussion of whether the complexity of the case merited such a committee. Second, enforcement 
of the “complexity” requirement could undermine the objective of encouraging debtor-creditor 
engagement. In other words, the Fund should not sanction a debtor’s disregard of a representative 
creditor committee simply because a debt restructuring is not deemed complex enough. Third, the 
factors for determining complexity suggested by the 2002 Board Paper— the number and diversity 
of creditors, the range of instruments covered by the debt restructuring, the prevalence of inter-
creditor equity issues, and the size of the prospective haircut—are generally echoed in the 
determination of whether a creditor committee is sufficiently representative.48 Thus, it is somewhat 
redundant to require a judgment on complexity. Given the underlying objective of furthering 
debtor-creditor engagement and the overlap between the elements, staff considers that it is not 
necessary for the Fund to judge whether the complexity of a case merits the use of a creditor 
committee. 
35.      However, staff recommends retaining the expectation that the debtor would engage 
with a representative creditor committee or representative creditor committees; the below 
factors could be considered in determining “representativeness.”49 Specifically, staff proposes 
that a representative creditor committee may be expected: 
 
48 Fund Policy on Lending into Arrears to Private Creditors—Further Consideration of the Good Faith Criterion, July 
2002. 
49 The Executive Board has already provided factors that can be considered flexibly on a case-by-case basis. While 
declining to set a numerical threshold for determining representativeness, the 2002 paper suggested that 
consideration could be given on a case-by-case basis to factors such as (a) the proportion of principal held by 
(continued) 


REVIEWS OF THE FUND’S SOVEREIGN ARREARS POLICIES AND PERIMETER 
 
INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND 29 
• 
To represent a substantial portion of the principal covered by the debt restructuring. While 
staff continues to consider that it is not appropriate to set binding numerical thresholds, as 
case-specific circumstances can vary significantly (see Annex II), it would appear useful to 
specify that in cases where bonds contain aggregated CACs,50 creditor committees 
representing a share of claims sufficient to block the activation of these CACs would typically 
be considered to meet this test.  
• 
To reflect the diverse financial and economic interests of the creditors whose claims are to be 
restructured—for example, in terms of the different instruments to be restructured, 
geographical location, and nature of the holders (e.g., in terms of retail and institutional 
investors, large and small bondholders, special purpose vehicles with control or ownership of 
bonds, influential financial institutions, and hold-to-maturity and distressed debt purchasers). 
However, no group’s refusal to join the committee should act as a veto on the formation of a 
representative committee.  
• 
To have the support of the creditor groups that it purports to represent. As noted in the 
2002 Board Paper, because committees are expected to function in a purely advisory capacity 
under the LIA policy, the verification of claims as a precondition for negotiations has not been 
a serious issue, as reputational risk to the participants has generally disciplined the process.51 
However, direct participation by the largest creditors could be encouraged. For creditor 
representatives, the Fund could consider whether there is evidence that the participant 
represents the group it purports to represent, including in cases where some creditors are 
constrained in their ability to participate directly. 
36.      In cases where creditors form multiple committees, some engagement with 
committees that individually or collectively meet the above factors would generally be 
warranted. Entering into detailed negotiations with multiple committees may not always be 
feasible, nor may it be necessary in the case of smaller, non-representative committees. In such 
cases, the debtor may prefer to engage with the committee that appears most representative (or if 
relevant, a steering group with representation from the different committees). However, where 
other committees hold a sizeable share of claims, debtors could still be expected to engage with 
those committees, including to supply relevant information at the committees’ request. This would 
particularly be the case when there are several sizeable committees of which none is individually 
representative, but which are collectively representative. 
 
creditors that have signaled their support for the committee, and (b) the coverage of major types of creditors 
represented in the committee. Id. at para. 44 (noting also that participation might be expected to be higher among 
institutional rather than retail investors). In discussing this criterion, Executive Directors recognized the importance 
of flexibility and judgment. See The Acting Chair's Summing Up—Fund Policy on Lending into Arrears to Private 
Creditors—Further Consideration of the Good Faith Criterion, September 2002. 
50 Aggregated thresholds for approval in enhanced CACs are 66 2/3 percent across series (in two-limb aggregated 
voting) or 75 percent across series for single-limb aggregated voting. 
51 Fund Policy on Lending into Arrears to Private Creditors - Further Consideration of the Good Faith Criterion, July 
2002. 


REVIEWS OF THE FUND’S SOVEREIGN ARREARS POLICIES AND PERIMETER 
30 
INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND 
Restate the Use of Flexibility in Emergency Financing Cases 
37.      Staff proposes to restate the circumstances in which the LIA policy can be applied 
flexibly for emergency financing requests in line with the LIOA policy. While the review 
indicates that the need for flexibility under the LIA policy has so far been limited, staff continues to 
see circumstances in which this could become relevant in the future. In particular, it would appear 
sensible to align the expectations for the use of flexibility with the LIOA policy, under which 
flexibility is reserved for emergency situations, such as in the aftermath of a natural disaster, where 
the extraordinary demands on the affected government are such that there is insufficient time for it, 
as the debtor, to undertake good faith efforts to reach agreement with its creditors.52 In addition, it 
would be expected that the Fund’s support provided to the debtor in such cases would help 
advance normalization of relations with private creditors and the resolution of arrears, so that the 
approval of any subsequent Fund arrangement for the member would again be subject to the LIA 
policy. 
Provide Further Guidance on Implementation in Staff Reports 
38.      Staff will provide more precise guidance on how to assess, and document in the staff 
report compliance with the good faith criterion. Enhanced transparency and evenhandedness 
can be better achieved through standardized documentation in staff reports. Staff will also provide 
further guidance on the Fund’s role in sovereign debt restructuring. 
LIA policy versus IIF Principles for Stable Capital Flows and Fair Debt Restructuring 
39.      While staff supports many elements of the IIF Principles (the “Principles”)—and there 
are significant overlaps between the Fund’s current LIA policy and the Principles as well as 
their Addendum—there are also important differences (Box 5). Therefore, staff continues to 
take the view that it would not be appropriate to endorse the IIF Principles and their Addendum.53 
Staff also understands that the Principles are being reviewed to consolidate and update them, and 
staff has been in contact with the IIF. First, the Principles unreservedly encourage early negotiations 
with a committee after a default, while the current LIA policy provides for formal negotiations only 
if the case is complex, the committee is representative, and has been established on a timely basis. 
Second, the Principles call on the resumption of partial debt service and recommend including 
official bilateral creditors in the debt restructuring while the LIA policy remains silent on these 
issues. Third, in contrast to the Addendum to the Principles, the Fund’s policy does not foresee a 
formal involvement of the private sector in DSA preparations and leaves the specifics of creditor 
committee design, including costs, as well as the debt restructuring strategy and perimeter to 
negotiations between creditors and debtors. 
 
52 The requirements of debt sustainability and any other applicable Fund policies continue to apply. 
53 See also: Sovereign Debt Restructuring—Recent Developments and Implications for the Fund's Legal and Policy 
Framework, April 2013. 


REVIEWS OF THE FUND’S SOVEREIGN ARREARS POLICIES AND PERIMETER 
 
INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND 31 
Box 5. IIF Principles for Stable Capital Flows and Fair Debt Restructuring 
• 
The Institute of International Finance’s (IIF) “Principles for Stable Capital Flows and Fair Debt 
Restructuring” (the “Principles”) establish best practices for the consultation between debtors 
and creditors in sovereign debt restructurings. The Principles were announced in the G20 Berlin 
Communique in 2004 and have since been applied in several debt restructuring operations. The Fund 
has neither been involved in the Principles’ establishment nor formally endorsed them. 
• 
The Principles are non-binding rules aimed at facilitating a voluntary, market-based debt 
restructuring process based on good faith and ensuring the fair treatment of all affected 
creditors. They are used on a case-by-case basis and apply equally to preemptive and post-default  
debt restructurings. They consist of the following four key principles, which are further broken down  
into specific rules of conduct that build on international best practices: 
o 
Transparency and timely flow of information: The Principles call on debtors to disclose relevant 
information to creditors, including specific disclosure in a debt restructuring context relating to 
maturity and interest rate structures, the proposed treatment of such obligations, and the central 
aspects of economic policies and programs.  
o 
Close debtor-creditor dialogue and cooperation to avoid debt restructuring: Debtors and creditors 
should be in a regular dialogue regarding information and data on key economic and financial 
policies and performance, notably through investor relation channels, policy action and feedback, as 
well as consultations. In a debt restructuring, creditors should consider appropriate requests for the 
voluntary, temporary rollover of short-term maturities on public and private sector obligations, if 
necessary to avoid a broad debt restructuring.  
o 
Good-faith actions: Creditors and debtors should engage in a debt restructuring that is voluntary 
and based on good faith, and cooperate in order to identify the best means to bring the debtor 
member back to a sustainable BOP position while preserving and protecting asset value during 
debt restructurings. The Principles emphasize the sanctity of contracts, call on debtors and 
creditors to rely upon the Fund in its traditional role, and support the establishment of creditor 
committees, the costs of which are usually borne by the debtor member. 
o 
Fair treatment: Borrowing countries should avoid unfair discrimination among affected creditors. 
• Following the Greek sovereign debt restructuring of 2012, the IIF published an Addendum  
to the Principles (the “Addendum”) to make further recommendations taking account of specific 
issues in restructurings of mature market countries’ debts. The Addendum inter alia clarifies the 
meaning of “good faith actions”, calls for early restoration of market access, and recommends early 
discussions with representative creditor committees as well as greater private sector involvement in  
DSAs. 
 
 


REVIEWS OF THE FUND’S SOVEREIGN ARREARS POLICIES AND PERIMETER 
32 
INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND 
PREEMPTIVE DEBT RESTRUCTURING PRACTICE 
A.   Review of Practice in Preemptive Debt Restructuring Cases 
40.      In general, preemptive debt restructurings are associated with better outcomes for 
the debtor member and creditors.54 These debt restructurings tend to be shorter in duration, 
achieve higher creditor participation, have lower haircuts, and lead to better post-restructuring 
growth outcomes to the debtor than post-default debt restructurings. As noted above, the Fund 
advises members to remain current on all debt obligations to the extent possible. Thus, where a 
debt restructuring is needed, a member should seek to initiate a preemptive debt restructuring and 
continue to service the original claims during the debt restructuring process. In the context of 
financial support from the Fund, avoiding a default is important both because a default may 
exacerbate the immediate economic and financial dislocation and because it may undermine the 
member’s capacity to re-access international private capital markets in the medium term, which is a 
key requirement for Fund financing.  
41.      Unlike in post-default settings, where the LIA policy applies, the Fund does not have a 
formal policy linking Fund support to a specified standard for creditor engagement in 
preemptive debt restructuring negotiations. The LIA policy only tolerates arrears to private 
sector creditors in PSI cases under specific limited circumstances and motivates the standard for 
debtor-creditor engagement by focusing on the resolution of those arrears.55 Absent arrears, 
however, this motivation for specifying a standard for engagement to guide the Fund’s decision to 
lend does not apply. Furthermore, in 2002, staff expressed concern that establishment of a formal 
Fund framework establishing minimum engagement expectations would be too cumbersome in 
preemptive cases, running counter to the objective of swiftly concluding negotiations that would 
avert default.56 
42.      However, experience since 2002 indicates that debtor-creditor engagement in 
successful preemptive debt restructurings is similar to that in post-default debt 
restructurings. Since 2002, 20 preemptive sovereign debt restructuring episodes have taken place. 
The average time to conclude the preemptive operations ranged from 1 to 15 months with an 
average of 6.3 months (see Table 1). A review of cases since 2002 shows that creditor committees 
have been as frequent in preemptive as in post-default cases. Market participants have expressed 
 
54 See The International Architecture for Resolving Sovereign Debt Involving Private-Sector Creditors—Recent 
Developments, Challenges, And Reform Options, October 2020.  
55 “[Executive] Directors stressed that in promoting orderly financial relations, every effort must be made to avoid 
arrears, which could not be condoned or anticipated by the Fund in the design of programs. Nevertheless, an 
accumulation of arrears to banks may have to be tolerated where negotiations continue and the country's financing 
situation does not allow them to be avoided”, Summing Up by the Chairman—Fund Involvement in the Debt 
Strategy, May 1989,at p. 4.  
56 Fund Policy on Lending into Arrears to Private Creditors—Further Consideration of the Good Faith Criterion, July 
2002. 
 


REVIEWS OF THE FUND’S SOVEREIGN ARREARS POLICIES AND PERIMETER 
 
INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND 33 
the view that they consider preemptive cases with elevated debt vulnerabilities had a similar level of 
engagement as post-default cases. 
Table 1. Episodes of Preemptive Restructuring of Public Marketable Debt, 2002-20211 
 
Country 
Start of default 
or debt 
restructuring 
process2, 3 
End of debt 
restructuring 
process4 
Length of 
process (in 
months) 
Presence of a 
committee 
Participation rate 
(in percent) 
Moldova 
Jun-2002 
Oct-2002 
5 
No 
100 
Uruguay 
Mar-2003 
May-2003 
3 
No 
91 
Nicaragua 
Jul-2003 
Jul-2003 
1 
No 
100 
Dominican Republic 
Apr-2004 
May-2005 
14 
No 
97 
Grenada 
Oct-2004 
Nov-2005 
14 
Yes 
93 
Belize 
Aug-2006 
Feb-2007 
7 
Yes 
98.1 
Nicaragua 
Jun-2008 
Jul-2008 
1 
No 
100 
Jamaica 
Jan-2010 
Feb-2010 
1 
No 
99.2 
Greece 
Jul-2011 
Mar-2012 
9 
Yes 
96.9 
Belize 
Aug-2012 
Mar-2013 
6 
Yes 
100 
Jamaica 
Feb-2013 
Mar-2013 
1 
No 
99 
Cyprus 
Jun-2013 
Jul-2013 
1 
No 
100 
Chad 
Sep-2014 
Dec-2015 
15 
No 
100 
Ukraine 
Jan-2015 
Dec-2015 
10 
Yes 
100 
Mozambique 
Jun-2015 
Apr-2016 
10 
Yes 
85 
Belize 
Nov-2016 
Mar-2017 
4 
Yes 
100 
 
Mongolia 
Feb-2017 
Mar-2017 
1 
No 
905 
Chad 
Feb-2017 
Jun-2018 
17 
No 
100 
Ecuador 
Mar-2020 
Aug-2020 
5 
Yes 
100 
 
Sources: Das, Papaioannou and Trebesch (2012); Asonuma and Trebesch (2016); IMF (2015); IMF (2020); Moody’s 
(2020); Asonuma and Joo (2020); IMF country reports; and country authorities' websites. 
1 Note: Ongoing cases as of February-2022 have been excluded. 
2 Restructurings are defined as "preemptive" if (i) no debt service payments are missed (no legal default) or (ii) some 
debt service payments are missed, but only temporarily and after the start of formal or informal negotiations with 
creditor representatives (no unilateral default). "Post-default" debt restructurings are all other cases, in which debt 
service payments are missed unilaterally and without the agreement of creditors. 
3 The start of a default/restructuring process is defined as the default month or the month in which a distressed debt 
restructuring was announced. When both a default and an announcement take place, the earliest date is used. 
4 The end of a debt restructuring is defined as the month of the final agreement or the implementation of the debt 
exchange. 
5 83 percent participation rate of existing holders, or over 90 percent excluding US-based investors who could not 
participate for legal reasons. 
 
43.      On rare occasions, preemptive sovereign debt restructurings have also taken place 
outside Fund-supported programs. For example, the Fund played the role of an independent and 


REVIEWS OF THE FUND’S SOVEREIGN ARREARS POLICIES AND PERIMETER 
34 
INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND 
neutral party in Belize’s 2007, 2013, 2016, and 2021 preemptive debt restructurings. The 2006 
Article IV consultation documents and staff’s DSA and cash flow analysis played a central role in 
setting the parameter for the 2007 debt restructuring. In December 2006, at the request of the 
Belizean authorities, the Fund’s Managing Director issued an assessment letter to the international 
financial community, right after the exchange launch, encouraging high participation.57 Similarly, 
Fund staff were in close contact with the authorities and financial advisors in the 2013 debt 
restructuring. Technical assistance on debt management also helped build relevant institutional 
capacity. 
44.      Fund policies and practices have helped promote engagement during preemptive 
sovereign debt restructurings. First, the current LIA policy incentivizes the debtor to engage with 
its creditors in preemptive situations given the knowledge that a post-default debt restructuring 
would carry strong expectations concerning the debtor through the LIA policy. Second, the Fund’s 
current practice in preemptive debt restructuring cases, which requires a process that credibly 
delivers a debt restructuring outcome in line with program parameters, has generally looked to 
guiding principles for engagement broadly similar to those listed in Box 1 in order to assess the 
credibility of the process. Given that speed is of the essence to avoid a default, where conditionality 
has been employed in preemptive cases, the current practice has normally required debt operations 
to be completed or, if justified by the circumstances of the specific case, more advanced before 
approving the request for an arrangement than is typically the case in post-default settings. 
However, the application of this approach has varied in practice.58 
B.   Recommendations 
45.      Staff sees the current practice as broadly appropriate in preemptive debt 
restructuring cases. Any attempts to improve the status quo need to take into account that 
preemptive cases are different from post-default debt restructurings in that time is of the essence. 
It is in the interest of both the debtor and the creditors to avoid a default and the associated large 
costs and inefficiencies. Accordingly, any policy should continue to allow for flexibility such that its 
application does not result in a delay of the debt restructuring and the incurrence of arrears.  
46.      Staff nevertheless sees merit in codifying the existing practice into a Fund policy with 
some enhancements to guide creditors, debtors, and the Fund in preemptive debt 
restructuring cases and to enhance clarity, certainty, and transparency. Codifying the existing 
practice into a Fund policy amounts to a transparent commitment of the Fund to decide when a 
preemptive debt restructuring is credible taking into account a range of factors as discussed below. 
This can provide certainty to help guide creditors and debtor in their negotiations and accelerate 
their conclusion. The codification also creates an opportunity to highlight a particular ingredient of 
 
57 Belize - Assessment Letter for the International Financial Community, December 2006. 
58 In post-default cases, programs have generally allowed more time for the debt restructuring to be completed, 
with conditionality consisting of intermediate steps towards finalizing the debt operation. See: The Fund’s Lending 
Framework and Sovereign Debt—Further Considerations, April 2015. 


REVIEWS OF THE FUND’S SOVEREIGN ARREARS POLICIES AND PERIMETER 
 
INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND 35 
the preemptive debt restructuring process which the Fund has increasingly viewed as important: the 
need for debt transparency on the side of the debtor. It should be noted that, relative to the LIA 
policy that applies to post-default cases, the practice in preemptive cases provides fewer guiding 
principles and greater flexibility in order to encourage efficient resolution of debt issues without 
default. 
Codification of Current Practice into a Fund Policy with Enhanced Debt Transparency 
47.      Staff recommends codifying the current practice into a Fund policy requiring that the 
Fund assesses that a credible process for debt restructuring is underway and such debt 
restructuring will likely deliver an outcome in line with program requirements. Relevant 
considerations to form such judgment would continue to include the engagement of legal and 
financial advisors by the member, the launching of consultations with creditors, and the design of 
the debt restructuring strategy, including the terms of the new instruments and use of inducements 
for creditor participation. To inform its judgment, staff may consider a range of factors, including 
(but not limited to) the stage of the negotiations, the private sectors’ share of the overall financing 
envelope, and the strength of the creditors’ position given, e.g., the existence of collateral. 
48.      In addition, staff recommends adding an expectation of enhanced transparency and 
information sharing. Staff proposes that, for the reasons explained in paragraph 32, the Fund 
policy on preemptive debt restructurings also include an expectation that relevant information—as 
defined under the LIA policy—be shared on a timely basis. 
LENDING INTO OFFICIAL BILATERAL ARREARS 
A.   Review of Cases with Arrears to Official Bilateral Creditors Since 2015 
49.      Staff reviewed the 37 arrangements or outright disbursements during which arrears 
to official bilateral creditors arose since the establishment of the LIOA policy in 
2015 (Table 2).59 Several of these cases required the application of multiple strands of the LIOA 
policy over the course of the Fund-supported program.60  
• 
Of the 37 cases, 11 had “non-OSI arrears”—i.e., the program anticipated full repayment of the 
claim without the need for a contribution from official bilateral creditors. In all such cases, the 
Fund was able to provide financing, as the creditors’ Executive Directors acquiesced or did not 
object at the time of the Executive Board meetings. In these cases, staff has typically 
 
59 Where there is a representative Paris Club agreement and the member continues to make best efforts to conclude 
bilateral agreements, only the first arrangement after 2015 has been included. 
60 For example, in one case a creditor provided consent to proceed with a review under the arrangement; at the next 
review, however, the creditor did not provide such consent. Another example would be where arrears arose on 
claims that both pre-date and post-date a representative Paris Club agreement which are subject to the LIOA 
(former) and the NTP (latter). 


REVIEWS OF THE FUND’S SOVEREIGN ARREARS POLICIES AND PERIMETER 
36 
INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND 
complemented the debtors’ efforts by reaching out to the creditors’ Executive Director’s office 
in advance.  
• 
In 29 cases, there were arrears on claims where OSI was expected under the macro-framework. 
It was for these cases, where a debt restructuring is deemed necessary, that the LIOA policy 
was established to encourage collective action among official bilateral creditors and to ensure 
that the provision of Fund support is not held up by the unwillingness of hold-out creditors to 
join an effort that is supported by an adequately representative group of creditors. In all cases, 
the Fund was able to provide financing. Of these 29 cases, 14 had claims covered by a 
representative Paris Club agreement, allowing remaining arrears to official bilateral creditors to 
be deemed away. In 12 cases, creditors provided explicit consent to Fund financing despite the 
arrears. In Suriname (2021), the LIOA policy allowed the Fund to provide financing even before 
agreement on a restructuring was reached with all official bilateral creditors; China and India, 
which together account for a majority of official bilateral debt, provided consent to Fund 
financing despite the arrears, and restructuring discussions are ongoing.61 The three criteria 
under the LIOA policy were only applied in seven cases involving four debtors; the criteria were 
judged to be met in each case. Of the seven cases, three involved a national-security dispute 
between the debtor and creditor and one involved non-recognition of the creditor 
government; these issues fall outside the influence of the arrears policies. In the remaining 
three cases, which involve two debtors and a single creditor, creditor consent was sought but 
not provided by the time of the relevant Executive Board meetings. Over the course of the 
arrangements, this was both due to the creditor ultimately providing no response at times,62 as 
well as to affirmative objections from the creditor at other times. 
Table 2. Arrears to Official Bilateral Creditors—Application of Arrears Policies 
Debtor  
Facility, 
Approval 
non-OSI 
OSI 
Representative 
Paris Club 
agreement 
Consent 
Three 
criteria 
Emergency 
Financing 
Afghanistan 
ECF, 2016 
 
x 
 
 
 
Barbados 
EFF, 2018 
  
  
x 
  
  
Burkina Faso 
ECF, 2016 
  
x 
  
  
  
Central African Republic 
ECF, 2019 
  
  
x 
x 
  
Central African Republic 
ECF, 2017 
x 
  
x 
x 
 
Chad 
ECF 2017 
x 
  
  
  
  
Chad 
RCF, 2020 
x 
 
 
 
 
 
61 As described in Annex I, the application of the LIOA policy—including the receipt of consent—generally provides 
sufficient assurances to the Fund that debt sustainability will be restored with respect to the covered claims. Given 
case-specific circumstances, additional safeguards were considered important in Suriname: statements from the 
official creditors indicating their intent to work with Suriname on a restructuring that will restore debt sustainability, 
as well as commitments from the Surinamese authorities to only repay official and private creditors in line with 
program parameters. 
62 “Deemed consent” did not apply in these cases because the creditor authorities were responsive and sought 
additional time to consider the request, though they ultimately provided no substantive response. 


REVIEWS OF THE FUND’S SOVEREIGN ARREARS POLICIES AND PERIMETER 
 
INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND 37 
Table 2. Arrears to Official Bilateral Creditors—Application of Arrears Policies (concluded) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chad 
ECF, 2021 
 
x 
 
 
 
Comoros 
RCF, 2020 
x 
  
  
  
  
Dem. Rep. Of Congo 
ECF, 2019 
 
x 
x 
 
 
Djibouti 
RCF, 2020 
  
  
  
  
x 
Ethiopia 
EFF/ECF, 2019 
  
x 
  
  
  
Gabon 
EFF, 2017 
x 
  
  
  
  
Gabon 
RFI, 2020 
x 
  
  
  
  
The Gambia 
RCF, 2017 
  
  
x 
  
x 
The Gambia 
ECF, 2020 
  
  
  
x 
  
Grenada 
ECF, 2016 
  
x 
x 
  
  
Grenada 
RCF, 2020 
  
  
x 
x 
x 
Guinea 
ECF, 2017 
  
x 
  
  
  
Guinea 
ECF, 2016 
x 
  
  
  
  
Guinea-Bissau 
ECF, 2016 
  
  
x 
  
  
Guinea-Bissau 
RCF, 2021 
x 
 
x 
 
 
Iraq 
SBA, 2016 
  
x 
  
  
  
Jamaica 
EFF, 2016 
  
x 
  
  
  
Jordan 
EFF, 2016 
  
x 
  
  
  
Mongolia 
EFF, 2017 
  
  
x 
  
  
Mozambique 
RCF, 2019 
  
x 
  
  
  
Mozambique 
RCF, 2020 
x 
  
  
  
  
Rep. of Congo 
ECF, 2022 
 
 
x 
 
 
Sao Tome and Principe 
ECF, 2019 
x 
x 
  
  
  
Serbia 
SBA, 2016 
  
x 
  
  
  
Somalia 
EFF/ECF, 2020 
  
x 
  
  
  
Suriname 
SBA, 2016 
x 
  
  
  
  
Suriname 
EFF, 2021 
 
 
x 
 
 
Ukraine 
EFF, 2016 
  
  
  
x 
  
Ukraine 
SBA, 2019 
  
  
  
x 
  
Ukraine 
SBA, 2020 
  
  
  
x 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
• 
Four cases involved OSI-related arrears in emergency financing requests under the RCF or RFI. 
One of these (Djibouti 2020) was determined to fit the exceptional circumstances under the 
LIOA policy that allowed flexible application: it advanced on the basis of the authorities’ 
expected application for relief under the Debt Service Suspension Initiative (DSSI). In Grenada 
(2020), the flexibility was not used given that debtor-creditor discussions had already been 
long underway by the time of the request. Similarly, in The Gambia (2017) and Guinea-Bissau 
(2021), creditor consent was obtained given that arrears pre-dated HIPC and debt restructuring 
discussions were already underway. 
B.   Recommendations 
50.      The LIOA policy appears to have worked well. Importantly, arrears to hold-out official 
bilateral creditors have not prevented Fund financing, which is the main objective of the policy. 
Feedback from outreach to both debtor and creditor members has been overwhelmingly positive, 
indicating that the policy provides an opportunity for engagement on arrears and that it strikes the 


REVIEWS OF THE FUND’S SOVEREIGN ARREARS POLICIES AND PERIMETER 
38 
INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND 
right balance between discouraging arrears and preventing hold-out creditors from vetoing Fund 
financing. The fact that arrears have been addressed through collective action or debtor-creditor 
agreement in the large majority of cases is positive.63 It is difficult to draw broad lessons from the 
few cases where the Fund has had to resort to applying the three criteria. Sovereign arrears 
however could only be fully resolved in a few cases (see Annex IV). 
51.      Some stakeholders have asked for further clarification of the language on the LIOA 
policy’s third criterion. The summing up states that, the third criterion—i.e., whether the Fund’s 
decision to lend into arrears to an official bilateral creditor would have an undue negative effect on 
the Fund’s ability to mobilize official financing packages in future cases—“would normally not be 
satisfied where the creditor or group of creditors that has not reached agreement with the debtor 
accounts for an adequately representative share.”64 This admonition is in line with the intended use 
of the LIOA policy to ensure Fund financing supported by “an adequately representative group of 
creditors” is not vetoed by “hold-out creditors.”65 In practical terms, the use of “normally” indicates 
some degree of discretion to rebut the presumption not to lend into arrears to a majority creditor 
or group of creditors. In this regard, any evaluation of this criterion in these exceptional 
circumstances should be in line with the Fund’s mandate and based exclusively on a determination 
as to whether the Fund’s decision to provide financing despite the arrears would have an undue 
negative effect on its ability to mobilize official financing packages in future cases. The Fund would 
still need to assess that the third criterion under the LIOA policy is satisfied. In general, however, a 
durable solution to a BOP problem that requires a debt restructuring is unlikely to be achievable 
without the participation of large creditors. 
OSI-Related Arrears 
52.      As to the treatment of arrears that persist over multiple Fund-supported programs, 
once a claim has been determined to be OSI related, such determination is permanent under 
the current policy. The LIOA policy notes that “the regularization of arrears is an objective of any 
Fund-supported program and important for the functioning of the international financial system at 
large.”66 However, arrears occasionally persist beyond the length of a Fund-supported program and 
must again be addressed in the context of a successor arrangement. In such cases, the question 
arises as to whether the necessity for OSI must be assessed anew in the context of the new 
program. While the LIOA policy does not explicitly mention this, in practice, new Fund-supported 
programs have incorporated the assumption that old OSI-related claims would be restructured in 
line with the terms stipulated in the original Fund-supported program. The Fund took the same 
approach with respect to HIPC legacy arrears. The alternative approach would create perverse 
incentives: the prospect of having claims reclassified as non-OSI as the debtor’s situation improves 
 
63 The ultimate resolution of arrears depends on the debtor and its creditors. 
64 The Chairman’s Summing Up—Reforming the Fund’s Policy on Non-Toleration of Arrears to Official Creditors, 
December 2015. 
65 Id. 
66 Id. 


REVIEWS OF THE FUND’S SOVEREIGN ARREARS POLICIES AND PERIMETER 
 
INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND 39 
could incentivize official creditors to hold-out for eventual full repayment, free riding on the 
creditors who accepted a debt restructuring. Staff therefore proposes to restate that, once a claim 
has been determined to be OSI related, such determination is permanent.67 However, in line with 
current practice, a claim that was originally non-OSI related may be recategorized as OSI related if 
required by economic developments. 
The Common Framework as a Potential New Representative Standing Forum 
53.      The Common Framework (CF) has arisen as a new modality for collective action 
among official bilateral creditors.68 The CF is a set of principles and processes which the G20 
countries and the Paris Club endorsed in November 2020 to facilitate timely and orderly debt 
treatment for 73 low-income countries eligible for the DSSI.69, 70 However, with the first debt 
treatments under consideration, the CF may emerge as a commonly used approach for eligible 
members’ debt treatments. As noted above in Box 2, the LIOA policy provides a special status only 
to the Paris Club—due to its status as a long-standing representative forum for official creditor 
coordination and its track record of support for Fund arrangements—such that adequately 
representative Paris Club agreements can “deem away” arrears to non-participating official 
creditors.71 Thus, adequately representative CF treatments can only “deem away” arrears to non-
participants when a Paris Club creditor participates (in such cases, both the non-Paris Club and Paris 
Club financing under the CF would count to determine representativeness, as is currently the case 
in Paris Club Plus treatments).  
54.      While the Executive Board has indicated an openness to according another 
“representative standing forum” a status under the LIOA policy equivalent to that of the 
Paris Club, it is currently uncertain how the CF and its role in the international sovereign debt 
architecture will evolve. As the CF comprises the main G20 creditors, the CF is representative. 
However, a new creditor committee is established in response to each request for a debt treatment, 
a process that requires case-by-case approvals from some official creditors. Moreover, unlike the 
Paris Club, the CF does not allow for a regular ex ante monitoring of developments in debtor 
members, which can facilitate timely financing assurances when needed. Further, at this time, a 
single country case (Chad72) has received official sector financing assurances under the CF, and the 
treatment is still to be implemented. To date, the CF has not been able to deliver financing 
 
67 Similarly, if arrears are deemed away on the basis that a Paris Club agreement is representative, there would be no 
need to reassess such representativeness in subsequent programs. 
68 Extraordinary G20 Finance Ministers and Central Bank Governors’ Meeting, Statement, November 13, 2020. 
69 Id.  
70 Beaumont and Hakura (2021). 
71 The Chairman’s Summing Up— Reforming the Fund’s Policy on Non-toleration of Arrears to Official Creditors, 
December 2015. 
72 Fourth Meeting of the Creditor Committee for Chad under the Common Framework, June 2021. The Fund 
approved an ECF arrangement for Chad in December 2021: IMF Executive Board Approves New Extended Credit 
Facility ECF Arrangement for Chad. 


REVIEWS OF THE FUND’S SOVEREIGN ARREARS POLICIES AND PERIMETER 
40 
INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND 
assurances in a timely and reliable manner and has yet to deliver on its promise.73 Both G20/Paris 
Club members and Fund staff must gain more experience with successful CF debt treatments in 
order to establish the procedures necessary for the Fund’s application of its arrears and financing 
assurances policies. Staff will monitor the CF’s evolution closely and if appropriate will revert to the 
Executive Board with a stand-alone proposal to amend the LIOA policy. 
POLICY ON NON-TOLERATION OF ARREARS TO 
INTERNATIONAL FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS 
55.      The evolution of the international creditor community with new IFI entrants has 
demonstrated a need for a review of the current approach under the Fund’s arrears policies 
with respect to IFIs . With the exception of the World Bank Group, the designation of the claim 
holder as “multilateral” under the current approach is based on judgment informed by factors 
including global membership, and treatment by the Paris Club and under HIPC. Some institutions, 
such as the long-established Multilateral Development Banks (MDBs) with global membership, are 
clearly multilateral creditors under the current approach. However, an increasing share of financing 
to developing countries is extended by IFIs that may or may not have a global membership.74 While 
this share remains relatively modest on average, exposures are large in some members with high 
debt vulnerabilities. In addition, IFIs with regional membership have been proliferating in recent 
years. The existing criteria do not offer any guidance on how to treat such IFIs, since the HIPC 
process concluded for most members about ten years ago and the Paris Club has recently only 
infrequently provided a treatment following the HIPC/Multilateral Debt Relief Initiative (MDRI) 
Initiatives. 
56.      A review of the practice over the last ten years suggests that arrears to multilaterals 
have not generally prevented Fund financing from proceeding but could become a constraint 
in future OSI cases with substantial IFI exposures. To identify cases of arrears to IFIs, staff 
reviewed all use of Fund resources cases since 2010.75 In order to ensure complete coverage, staff 
cross-checked this information against data received from the World Bank Group on arrears to IFIs 
(aggregated to preserve the anonymity in the original data). Staff identified 22 staff reports that 
discussed arrears to IFIs that were either cleared shortly before the issuance of the staff report or 
that remained outstanding at the time of the approval by the Executive Board. Most cases with 
arrears to IFIs to date have been in a non-OSI context, and a Credible Plan to clear the arrears was 
assessed to be in place to enable Fund approval of the financing. More rarely, arrears to IFIs were 
fully cleared ahead of the Executive Board approval of relevant financing. In all cases where arrears 
to the World Bank Group could be identified by staff (where the Agreed Plan would have applied), 
 
73 See: The G20 Common Framework for Debt Treatments must be stepped up, December 2021.  
74 Recent Fund policy papers have documented the growing share of these creditors in lower-income economies’ 
debt stocks. See Macroeconomic Developments and Prospects in Low-Income Developing Countries, March 2018; 
The Evolution of Public Debt Vulnerabilities in Lower Income Economies, February 2020. 
75 For arrangements, only the staff report for the initial request was reviewed. 


REVIEWS OF THE FUND’S SOVEREIGN ARREARS POLICIES AND PERIMETER 
 
INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND 41 
the arrears were cleared before the Executive Board approved Fund financing. Staff was not able to 
find any case where an Agreed Plan was required to clear arrears to IFIs providing substantial 
financing. In a few recent cases involving new IFIs entrants, staff used its room for judgment to 
apply the NTP to such entrants. However, this approach is not sustainable in future OSI cases 
involving substantial exposures to such IFIs, as it would overstretch the existing approach, dilute the 
NTP, and complicate the restructuring of unsustainable debt. 
Recommendations 
57.      While the policy has worked well overall, it needs to be adapted in light of these 
developments. Specifically, the proposed reform seeks to meet three objectives. 
• 
Remove ambiguity. The policy needs to be clear about the criteria that would be used to 
decide whether new entrants benefit from the policy or not. The ambiguity of the current 
policy was less consequential prior to 2015, as the Fund’s NTP applied to sovereign arrears 
on all external claims except those held by private creditors (see Annex III). However, with 
the establishment of the LIOA policy, the NTP now effectively covers only multilateral claims 
and Direct Bilateral Claims in respect of which payment in full is contemplated under the 
program (i.e., non-OSI-related Direct Bilateral Claims). Thus, it is much more important now 
than prior to 2015 that institutions considered “multilateral creditors” and the treatment of 
their claims be characterized unambiguously. 
• 
Avoid dilution. The approach should ensure that the special treatment of claims held by 
multilateral creditors not be diluted. The value of that special treatment is reduced as the 
number of IFIs receiving that treatment increases. The current approach, and its 
ambiguities, will be difficult to sustain going forward as the number of IFIs increases. 
• 
Minimize the risk of unintended effects on IFIs.  The proposed amendments only 
address the treatment of claims under the Fund’s arrears policies and should not have 
implications for the de-facto preferred creditor status (PCS) that certain IFIs may enjoy. 
However, there is still a risk that a change in the NTP may affect perceptions of the latter, 
with serious implications for the institutions that are currently covered (or perceived to be 
covered) by the NTP. 
58.      To reconcile these objectives, staff proposes to restrict the NTP in OSI cases to two 
classes of IFIs:76  
(1) A small set defined by clearly specified mandate and functional characteristics that are 
closely linked to the Fund’s mandate. Specifically, it is proposed that this set encompass: (1) 
Regional Financing Arrangements (RFAs) and reserve currency union central banks 
 
76 In a given case, the determination of whether OSI is required would apply to claims held by both official bilateral 
creditors and IFI claims. The Fund would not micromanage from which creditors the debtor seeks contributions. 
“Contribution” here comprises, and is limited to, debt relief and new financing (e.g., loans, bond financing, 
guarantees, and grants). 


REVIEWS OF THE FUND’S SOVEREIGN ARREARS POLICIES AND PERIMETER 
42 
INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND 
(RCUCBs), whose operations have the effect of strengthening the GFSN; (2) MDBs with 
global membership, meaning that their membership includes more than 50 percent of the 
number of Fund members or more than 50 percent of the Fund’s total voting power.  
(2) For IFIs outside this set, the Fund would defer to the consensus of the official bilateral 
creditor community on whether to apply the NTP in a specific OSI case (see ¶61 for details). 
This achieves two aims. First, it makes it impossible for Fund’s arrears policies to have an 
unintended effect on the perceived PCS of specific institutions, as the treatment of IFIs 
under the Fund’s policies would exactly track the prevailing consensus among the official 
creditor community on which IFIs enjoy de facto PCS. Second, it guards against dilution, as 
official bilateral creditors have a strong interest to avoid a proliferation of preferred claims.  
For any IFIs meeting criterion (1) or (2), a 
Credible Plan would be required to clear any 
arrears (except for the World Bank Group, for 
which an Agreed Plan would always be 
required; see below).77 Furthermore, in non-
OSI cases, a Credible Plan to clear arrears to 
all IFIs with two or more sovereign members 
(and no non-sovereign members) will still be 
required under the NTP.78  
59.      In addition, staff proposes to 
simplify the application of the NTP by no 
longer requiring an “Agreed Plan” (rather than merely a “Credible Plan”) in cases where the 
IFI provides substantial financing to the Fund-supported program. As discussed above, staff 
have found no recent case in which this requirement was actually applied. This likely reflects the fact 
that IFIs can only provide financing to a member in arrears to them (under their overdue financial 
obligations policies) under very narrow circumstances, usually through grants.  
60.      Figure 3 summarizes the main features of the proposed multilateral NTP. As is clear 
from comparing Figure 1 and Figure 3, the key differences between the current and the proposed 
approach consist of (1) the application of the LIOA policy in OSI cases for IFIs no longer covered by 
the NTP, and (2) a more precise determination of what institutions are covered under the NTP. For 
IFIs covered by the NTP, the only change results from the streamlining mentioned above. 
 
77 A Credible Plan must anticipate the clearance of all arrears within the period of the Fund-supported program, but 
unlike an Agreed Plan does not require the concurrence of the creditor.  
78 Furthermore, as is currently the case (paragraph 16), the NTP would not apply to claims that are unrelated to the 
extension of financing by the IFI to the member (such as membership fees or treasury/investment operations). 
 
Treatment of IFI Claims Under the Proposed New 
Framework 
Agreed Plan: required for arrears to the World Bank 
Group. 
Credible Plan: required for arrears to IFIs if the claim 
is either non-OSI related, or (even if it is OSI-related) if 
it is related to (i) RFAs and RCUCBs, and MDBs with 
global membership or (ii) IFIs identified as being 
outside the scope of debt restructuring by a creditor 
committee based on a representative standing forum 
of official bilateral creditors. 
LIOA: applies only in OSI cases, to arrears on IFI claims 
not covered by the NTP. 


REVIEWS OF THE FUND’S SOVEREIGN ARREARS POLICIES AND PERIMETER 
 
INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND 43 
no
2. Is creditor the World Bank?
1. Is the creditor an IFI with at least 
two sovereign members (and no 
non-sovereign members)?
NTP does not apply. Depending on 
creditor, LIA or LIOA policy may apply
no
yes
LIOA policy 
applies
no
yes
3. Are the arrears OSI-related
no
yes
Credible plan to clear 
arrears is required
4. Is the IFI covered by the proposed 
NTP (RFAs, global membership, or 
based on treatment by official 
creditor committee)?
Agreed plan to clear 
arrears is required
yes
Proposed Amendment 1: Coverage of IFIs Under the NTP in OSI Cases 
61.      Certain IFIs would receive special treatment even in OSI cases. IFIs that meet any of the 
following criteria would be covered by the NTP even in OSI cases: 
• 
RFAs that form part of the GFSN and (much like the Fund) are set up to assist their 
members in resolving a BOP problem79 and RCUCBs, whose operations have the effect of 
strengthening regional financial safety nets and the GFSN.   
• 
IFIs with global membership. The current criteria used to identify multilateral creditors 
has led to the general protection of claims of the global MDBs. Such MDBs, like the Fund, 
attempt to pursue the global common interest, albeit through different financial activities. 
In most cases, they are also likely to be sources of BOP financing complementing Fund 
support. The NTP should hence continue to protect the claims of these MDBs, without 
discriminating against new global MDBs, and without allowing the value of that protection 
to be diluted. This can be achieved by defining global MDBs as IFIs with more than half of 
the number of Fund members, or a membership in excess of half of the Fund’s total voting 
 
79 More precisely, the Fund defines RFAs as “a finance mechanism backed by pooled resources through which a 
group of countries pledge common financial support to a fellow member in the event of external liquidity needs for 
balance of payment (BoP) difficulties.” See Collaboration Between Regional Financing Arrangements and the IMF, 
July 2017, at p. 6. While the list of RFAs is open to new entrants it would currently include: the Arab Monetary Fund, 
BRICS Contingent Reserve Arrangement, Chiang Mai Initiative Multilateralisation, Eurasian Fund for Stabilization and 
Development, EU-BOP Facility, ESM, European Financial Stability Mechanism, and the Latin American Reserve Fund. 
Figure 3. Decision Tree Summarizing the Proposed Multilateral Arrears Framework 
 


REVIEWS OF THE FUND’S SOVEREIGN ARREARS POLICIES AND PERIMETER 
44 
INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND 
pool. Apart from the World Bank Group, this criterion is currently met by seven IFIs  
(Table 3). 
• 
IFIs identified as being outside the scope of debt restructuring by a creditor 
committee based on a representative standing forum of official bilateral creditors, as 
recognized under the LIOA policy. This would preserve an important element of the 
current policy—the link to Paris Club treatments, as the Paris Club is currently the only 
representative standing bilateral official creditor forum recognized by the Fund.80 But 
unlike the current policy, it would be based on the treatment of IFIs in the specific case at 
hand. If , and only if that treatment cannot be decided in the case at hand (or if the creditor 
committee does not include a member of a representative standing forum), staff would 
continue to be guided by the IFI’s treatment in past cases (past Paris Club or CF treatments 
with a Paris Club creditor participating). In the absence of such precedent, the Fund would 
determine whether to apply the NTP or the LIOA policy based on the anticipated treatment 
 
80 See Box 2: The LIOA policy relevantly provides: “If an agreement is reached through the Paris Club that is 
adequately representative, the Fund would rely on its current practices […]. Should another representative standing 
forum emerge, the Fund would be open to engaging with such a forum.” 
Table 3. Twenty-Five International Financial Institutions with the Broadest Memberships 
Institution 
Type 
Members’ 
share of Fund 
votes 
Member Countries 
International Monetary Fund 
 
100.0 
190 
World Bank Group 
MDB 
100.0 
189 
Int. Fund for Agricultural Development 
MDB 
95.4 
177 
Bank for International Settlements 
Other 
86.4 
61 
European Bank for Reconstruction and Development 
MDB 
77.8 
69 
African Development Bank 
MDB 
76.3 
82 
Asian Development Bank 
MDB 
72.2 
68 
Inter-American Development Bank 
MDB 
68.5 
48 
Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank 
MDB 
62.7 
83 
Council of Europe Development Bank 
MDB 
28.4 
41 
Caribbean Development Bank 
MDB 
26.7 
28 
European Investment Bank 
MDB 
25.6 
27 
European Financial Stability Mechanism 
RFA 
25.6 
27 
Eurosystem 
RCUCB 
21.5 
19 
European Stability Mechanism 
RFA 
21.5 
19 
West African Development Bank 
MDB 
20.2 
14 
Chiang Mai Initiative Multilateralization 
RFA 
18.2 
13 
New Development Bank 
MDB 
14.2 
5 
BRICS Contingent Reserve Arrangement 
RFA 
14.2 
5 
Islamic Development Bank 
MDB 
12.4 
57 
CAF - Development Bank of Latin America 
MDB 
10.0 
19 
OPEC Fund for International Development 
MDB 
7.4 
12 
Arab Monetary Fund 
RFA 
6.0 
22 
Arab Bank for Economic Development in Africa 
MDB 
5.7 
18 
Black Sea Trade and Development Bank 
MDB 
5.4 
11 
 
Sources: IFIs’ websites and Fund staff calculations. 
 


REVIEWS OF THE FUND’S SOVEREIGN ARREARS POLICIES AND PERIMETER 
 
INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND 45 
of such IFI by a standing representative forum. As the official creditor committee is likely to 
reach a view on the treatment of an IFI even if there is no precedent based in past Paris 
Club and HIPC treatments, and that treatment is likely to be consistent across 
restructurings, ambiguity would be reduced compared to the status quo. Furthermore, the 
proposed policy would encourage a parsimonious and flexible application of the NTP, as 
the same IFI could be included under the NTP in one Fund-supported program but 
excluded in another Fund-supported program (if official bilateral creditors seek comparable 
treatment in the latter but not the former). Finally, the proposed policy change should 
reassure regional IFIs that have in the past been consistently treated as preferred creditors 
by the Paris Club. Unless an official creditor committee that includes a member of a 
representative standing forum insists on a different treatment, it would continue to benefit 
from the Fund’s NTP.  
Proposed Amendment 2. Application of the LIOA Policy to OSI-Related Arrears on Claims 
Held by IFIs Not Covered by the NTP 
62.      Staff proposes that the LIOA policy be expanded to apply to OSI-related arrears of IFIs 
not covered under the NTP. The LIOA policy would be expanded to provide for its application in 
case of OSI-related arrears on IFIs not covered by the NTP. The modalities for consent would follow 
the LIOA policy by analogy, whereby consent from the IFI to Fund financing despite the arrears 
could be conveyed directly to staff or via an Executive Director designated by the IFI. The three 
criteria under the LIOA policy would also apply, with appropriate adaptations. To the extent that the 
IFI provides substantial financing (such as grants) to the Fund-supported program, such financing 
would be taken into account for purposes of the IFI’s contribution to the OSI much like for official 
bilateral creditors.81 However, an IFI contribution to OSI would not count for purposes of calculating 
the representativeness of a collective creditor agreement of a standing forum. 
63.      In addition, for those OSI-related arrears to IFIs, staff proposes to mirror the flexibility 
in extraordinary circumstances for emergency financing cases in line with the LIOA policy. 
While the review indicated that the need for flexibility has so far been limited, staff continues to see 
circumstances in which this could become relevant. In particular, it would appear sensible to reserve 
such flexibility for emergency situations, such as in the aftermath of a natural disaster, where the 
extraordinary demands on the affected government are such that there is insufficient time for the 
debtor to undertake efforts to engage in good faith under the LIOA policy. 
Proposed Simplification: Streamlining the NTP  
64.      In practice, staff has found no case of using the “Agreed Plan” for clearance of arrears 
to IFIs providing substantial financing to the Fund-supported program. Staff also understands 
that the provision of new and existing financing to members in arrears to the IFI is substantially 
 
81 The contribution a debtor seeks from IFIs could differ from the one the debtor seeks from official bilateral 
creditors and would normally compare among IFIs subject to the LIOA, provided that the overall OSI contribution is 
consistent with program parameters. 


REVIEWS OF THE FUND’S SOVEREIGN ARREARS POLICIES AND PERIMETER 
46 
INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND 
constrained by the IFI’s own overdue financial obligations policies and is typically limited to grants, 
until arrears are cleared in full. Thus, staff proposes than an Agreed Plan will only be required for 
the clearance of arrears to the World Bank Group. 
TREATMENT OF CERTAIN CLAIMS UNDER THE FUND’S 
ARREARS POLICIES 
65.      Recent developments have raised some questions about the adequacy of the Fund’s 
approach for dealing with new instruments of official sector financing (such as bonds). These 
new instruments underline the difficulty of delineating commercial from public-policy activities of 
different types of public sector creditors. 
• 
The 2015 case of the Russian-held Ukraine Eurobond issued to its National Wealth Fund 
prompted discussions about whether such bonded debt should be excluded from the Fund’s 
definition of Direct Bilateral Claims. The Executive Board confirmed that such bonded claim was 
official in December 2015.82 The episode, however, brought into focus the issue that, had the 
facts been slightly different (e.g., the bond had more than one holder), official bondholders 
could have been in a “common voting pool” with private bondholders due to the existence of 
CACs. This could have potentially complicated both PSI and OSI, given the protections/seniority 
enjoyed by official creditors under the Fund’s arrears policies. Therefore, the systemic 
implications of including bonds with common voting pools within the Fund’s definition of 
official claims need to be examined.  
• 
Over the last decade or so, the stock of sovereign bonds held for various purposes (such as 
commercial or monetary policy) by external public-sector entities of official bilateral creditors 
(such as sovereign wealth funds (SWFs)) has surged. The volume of such claims may now be 
multiples of the stock of official bilateral loans. Thus far, these claims have generally been 
presumed not to have been acquired by the official bilateral creditor government or on its 
behalf and, therefore, as set forth in paragraph 15, have been subject to the LIA policy. 
However, for consistency across different types of entities and instruments, there is scope for 
specifying how such judgments are made. 
• 
Some RFAs explicitly recognize secondary market bond purchases as an instrument to maintain 
or restore orderly bond market conditions in member countries.83 In the case of the 
Eurosystem, secondary market purchases of euro-area sovereign bonds are an instrument of 
monetary policy implementation and transmission and thereby also indirectly contribute to 
maintain or restore orderly bond market conditions in those Fund member countries.  Unlike 
bond purchases by the above-described official bilateral entities, which typically pursue 
 
82 Status of Ukraine’s Eurobond Held by the Russian Federation, December 2015. 
83 For example, the European Stability Mechanism (ESM) has policies or facilities that envisage such intervention, 
notably through its Secondary Market Support Facility (SMSF). 


REVIEWS OF THE FUND’S SOVEREIGN ARREARS POLICIES AND PERIMETER 
 
INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND 47 
commercial objectives, these purchases serve public-policy objectives. As such, they constitute 
BOP financing-related claims or, in the case of the Eurosystem, claims which are acquired in the 
context of the euro area’s single monetary policy, but also provide de facto support to the 
GFSN and may help resolve the BOP problems of Fund members.  
• 
The classification of certain claims held by state-owned development banks and lending 
institutions has not been consistent under the Fund’s arrears policies. In some cases, those 
claims have been classified as official (lending on behalf of the government); in others, as 
private. This inconsistency undermines certainty about the perimeter of Direct Bilateral Claims. 
One example is the DSSI, in which issues of classification of public development banks arose.  
66.      Separately, private creditor groups have raised the issue of uncertainty over the 
perimeter of Direct Bilateral Claims in recent major PSIs. In staff’s consultations with private 
stakeholders, the latter generally recognized the “seniority” of Direct Bilateral Claims that are held 
for public-policy reasons. However, many felt discomfort with (i) the ambiguity surrounding the 
perimeter of Direct Bilateral Claims in restructurings (Greece 2012, Ukraine 2015) and recent G20 
initiatives (DSSI 2020); and (ii) delays by the debtor in setting the perimeter of the debt 
restructuring.  
Recommendations 
67.      Staff proposes two amendments and three restatements, as follows:  
Proposed Amendment 1. Pooled Voting Mechanism  
68.      At the time the perimeter of 
Direct Bilateral Claims was last 
discussed in 2015, staff considered two 
polar proposals from Fund members in 
regard to official claims (i.e., held by 
official bilateral creditors) held in the 
form of bonds. At one end, the possibility was raised of treating all bonds held by sovereigns—
including those held for commercial purposes—as Direct Bilateral Claims in debt restructurings. The 
ensuing discussion clarified that this is not a viable option, because it would give unwarranted 
seniority to a very large stock of otherwise commercially-motivated claims, with adverse 
implications for markets’ pricing of sovereign risk, and governments’ ability to undertake a 
sufficiently deep debt restructurings to solve their debt problems. A related concern is that this 
approach would imply that bonds held by SWFs could be given Direct Bilateral Claims status, which 
would seem to run counter to the Santiago Principles.84 
 
84 The Santiago Principles promote transparency, good governance, accountability and prudent investment practices 
whilst encouraging a more open dialogue and deeper understanding of SWF activities. See Santiago Principles, 
International Forum of Sovereign Wealth Funds, October 2008.  
Direct Bilateral Claims are those claims that are (a) held by 
a government, or an agency acting on behalf of a 
government; and (b) originate from an underlying 
transaction where the creditor government, or an agency 
acting on behalf of the government, provided or 
guaranteed financing to the borrowing member.  


REVIEWS OF THE FUND’S SOVEREIGN ARREARS POLICIES AND PERIMETER 
48 
INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND 
69.      At the other end, some Fund members argued for withholding Direct-Bilateral-Claim 
status from all bonds, including those purchased for public-policy reasons. These shareholders 
contended that the bondholder could try to seek a treatment in the Paris Club as an official creditor 
while retaining the option to participate in the PSI (“double dipping”). The tradability and collective 
payment aspects of bonds were also raised as unique characteristics that could warrant different 
treatment. While staff did not, and does not, support an instrument-based carve-out, this 
proposition raises a few issues that deserve further discussion.  
70.      As a general matter, under the Fund’s instrument-neutral approach to defining Direct 
Bilateral Claims, an exclusion based on the particular form of instrument is inherently 
arbitrary. The features present in a bond are similarly present in other types of official financing 
and may also be present in future instruments that may have similar features as bonds but are not 
called bonds. Specifically:  
• 
Double dipping—Bonds are not the only form of debt that has multiple avenues of 
enforceability. For example, bilateral loans are designed to be legally enforceable. Although 
debt restructurings, as a matter of practice, are generally done through the Paris Club or 
bilaterally, official creditors always retain the option of going through the judicial system.  
• 
Tradability—Bonds are not the only form of debt that can be traded on the market. For 
instance, official creditors retain the ability to sell off virtually every bilateral loan.  
• 
Collective payment mechanism—While bonds are instruments that have majority 
restructuring provision for payment terms, they are not the only form of debt that has a 
collective payment mechanism that would require the same payment to be made to all holders, 
whether official or private.85 However, most syndicated loans currently do not have majority 
restructuring provisions for payment terms.86  
71.      This said, bonded debt instruments do highlight an important concern regarding vote 
pooling and the uncertainty this can create for both PSI and OSI. Where the official bilateral 
creditor is part of more than one voting pool (e.g., holds an instrument subject to the same CAC as 
private bondholders and is also a member of the Paris Club or the Common Framework), this can 
complicate both restructuring processes. In particular, there would be uncertainty over the 
perimeter of debt covered in each process, restructuring terms (which depend partly on perimeter), 
and the prospects of reaching agreement (which would depend on where/how the official creditor 
votes). Moreover, the official creditor could use its ability to complicate the two processes to try 
and secure better terms from the debtor. Thus, the pooling of official and private claims could 
complicate PSIs and be costly for the debtor and the system overall.  
 
85 For example, syndicated loans have sharing provisions that require equal payment to all holders. 
86 See The International Architecture for Resolving Sovereign Debt Involving Private-Sector Creditors—Recent 
Developments, Challenges, And Reform Options, October 2020. 


REVIEWS OF THE FUND’S SOVEREIGN ARREARS POLICIES AND PERIMETER 
 
INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND 49 
72.      Staff hence proposes to remove from the definition of Direct Bilateral Claims and 
IFI/multilateral claims all claims that are contractually part of a pooled voting mechanism 
with private creditors. While this criterion would apply to any debt instrument, including 
syndicated loans,87 its application is immediately apparent with respect to bonds with CACs. This 
approach would disqualify all bonds with any CACs, including enhanced CACs or traditional CACs 
from being treated as Direct Bilateral Claims, when a private creditor acquires any bond covered by 
the enhanced CACs, or a portion of the series in the case of single-series CACs. For example, bonds 
with single-series CACs could be treated as Direct Bilateral Claims only on the strict condition that 
the creditor government (or an agency acting on its behalf) maintains continuous and full 
ownership of the entire bond series. If any part of the series were to be acquired by a private 
creditor, the entire series would be subject to the LIA policy.88, 89 
73.      To operationalize this criterion, the Fund would rely in the first instance on the 
creditor’s representation of continuous and full ownership. The Fund could challenge that 
representation but would give the creditor the benefit of any reasonable doubt. To forestall any 
disagreements with respect to the continuous ownership of the claims, borrowers could be 
encouraged to include disclosure provisions in the debt contract mandating the trustee to inform 
the debtor if a transfer of ownership occurs. Another potential (but likely rare) complication could 
occur if a debtor reopens the issuance and sells such bonds to private creditors. This would cause 
vote-pooling even absent any action by the official bilateral creditor. To solve this, contractual 
provisions could be included to prevent the bond series from being re-opened. For existing debt, 
bonds that are currently held in their entirety by an official bilateral creditor would not lose their 
official-bilateral-claim status should the debtor choose to re-open the bond issuance and the 
bilateral creditor continues to hold the entire issuance.  
74.      There is a risk that this approach could incentivize the issuance of bonds without CACs 
and undermine the Fund’s objectives on wider use of these provisions, but this is likely to be 
small. In staff’s view, official finance to sovereigns (whether in the form of bonds or not) is normally 
motivated by public-policy objectives. Accordingly, it is unlikely that official bilateral creditors will 
actually sell their official holdings on the secondary market. Indeed, insofar as the official bonds 
carry terms that are concessional, a sale of the bonds would result in a loss for the official creditor. 
The likely loss would be even greater when approaching a restructuring scenario, especially relative 
to what the official creditor may recoup in a bilateral, Paris Club, or CF process.  
 
87 As set forth in paragraph 70, most syndicated loans currently do not have majority voting provisions to amend 
payment terms. Therefore, the issue of vote pooling is currently much less prevalent for syndicated loans than for 
bonds with CACs. 
88 Such an amendment would also reflect the Paris Club principle that sovereign creditors are generally expected to 
maintain control over their official claims (i.e., an unconditional right to take action on these claims, without 
reference to third parties that could influence the restructuring of these claims). 
89 Bonds without CACs that are held by the private and official sector may not lead to vote pooling problems. 
Accordingly, the part held by the official sector could be considered a Direct Bilateral Claim. 


REVIEWS OF THE FUND’S SOVEREIGN ARREARS POLICIES AND PERIMETER 
50 
INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND 
75.      The same rationale described above also applies to instruments held by IFIs that are 
vote pooled with the private sector. Therefore, staff recommends to also exclude instruments 
that are vote pooled with the private sector from the special treatment provided to IFI claims.90 
Proposed Amendment 2. Treatment of Secondary Market Purchases by IFIs  
76.      In principle, IFI support of Fund members in BOP crises could take the form of bond 
purchases in the secondary market. In some crisis settings—namely, when debtors have not yet 
lost access to capital markets, or when private sector borrowing costs are linked to secondary 
market yields—secondary market bond purchases conducted by IFIs could result in BOP support. 
Facilities or purchase programs that are set up to undertake such purchases should be considered 
part of the GFSN. Hence, bonds purchased in the secondary market under such facilities merit 
special treatment under the Fund’s arrears policies, just like direct crisis lending to a sovereign 
would merit special treatment. This logic generally extends to sovereign bonds acquired under 
purchase programs of RCUCBs. 
77.      This said, some IFIs may take the view that certain specific types of secondary market 
purchases be treated pari passu with private claims.91 One rationale is that large-scale bond 
purchases by an IFI in the secondary market could have effects in both directions. On the one hand, 
it raises demand for and prices of bonds purchased, through a variety of channels.92 On the other, 
to the extent that the IFI is considered a de facto preferred creditor, it may de-facto subordinate 
existing private bondholders, leading to pressure on secondary market prices. Because the latter 
would contravene the objective of stabilizing bond markets, IFIs may choose to declare that they 
will not attempt to assert any PCS with respect to bonds purchased in the secondary markets. 
78.       Staff proposes to clarify that the treatment of such claims under the NTP should take 
into account the IFI’s own stated treatment of the claim. Specifically, if the creditor takes the 
view that the claim should be treated pari passu with privately-held claims, the Fund would defer to 
the IFI by giving the claim the same treatment under its arrears policies that it would give to a 
privately-held claim—i.e., the LIA policy would apply. If, however, the IFI does not assert pari passu 
status with respect to bonds purchased in the secondary market, and if its function in conducting 
such purchases is considered an important component of the GFSN (as explained above), then the 
Fund would give the claim the special protections described above for IFI claims.93 Importantly, as 
explained previously, staff proposes that any vote-pooled claims with the private sector would still 
be treated under the LIA policy, regardless of the IFI’s assertions, for the reasons discussed in 
paragraphs 67-75. 
 
90 Arrears on such claims would be treated under the LIA policy. 
91 This is true for the European Central Bank’s (ECB) OMT. See Technical features of Outright Monetary Transactions, 
September 2012. 
92 See Trebesch and Zettelmeyer (2018) for a discussion and evidence on ECB secondary market purchases of Greek 
bonds.  
93 The Fund would rely on the IFI’s assertion at the time of the application of the arrears policy. 


REVIEWS OF THE FUND’S SOVEREIGN ARREARS POLICIES AND PERIMETER 
 
INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND 51 
Restatement 1. Secondary Market Purchases by Official Bilateral Creditors  
79.      Secondary market purchases by official bilateral creditors do not qualify as Direct 
Bilateral Claims under the current LIOA policy and staff does not propose any amendments. 
By its terms, the definition limits Direct Bilateral Claims to those reflecting the provision of direct 
financing to the debtor government. Thus, only primary market purchases by the creditor 
government or entities acting on its behalf could qualify. Claims acquired in the secondary market 
by the government or entities acting on its behalf would be subject to the LIA policy (like all 
residual claims) since they do not provide new direct financing to the debtor. Furthermore, unlike 
secondary market purchases of bonds by IFIs, there is no sense that these purchases are conducted 
with the intent of providing BOP support. Rather, their motives tend to be commercial.  
Restatement 2. Budgetary Process  
80.      A few further restatements to the definition of Direct Bilateral Claims appear to be 
warranted, starting with which entities are “government” creditors. As already highlighted, 
public-sector entities like SWFs and state-owned banks have emerged as major creditors to other 
governments.  
81.      There is currently some ambiguity of whether to treat the claims held by these 
entities as part of the creditor government’s claims and thus eligible for Direct-Bilateral-
Claim status with respect to the Fund’s arrears policies. Staff proposes to restate that public 
entities that form part of the member's budgetary process are classified as part of government. The 
ambit of claims subject to the arrears policies has been kept narrow on the debtor side, and staff's 
restatement would imply a similarly narrow application on the creditor side. The definition of what is 
considered a government claim from the debtor's side is limited to claims of those public sector 
entities whose financial operations form part of the member's budgetary process (Box 6). Staff 
proposes for operational purposes to focus on a ‘budgetary process’ test on the creditor side as 
well. Almost all SWFs and state-owned banks would likely fail this test.  
Box 6. Defining the Budgetary Process 
For the purposes of the Fund’s arrears policies, arrears of a public-sector entity constitute sovereign 
arrears of the member only when the financial operations of the entity form part of the member’s 
budgetary process. The approach of treating arrears of certain public-sector entities as “sovereign” was first 
established in 1980.1 It draws the distinction between “sovereign arrears”—i.e., arrears of the government 
and of government entities whose financial operations form part of the member’s budgetary process—and 
arrears of “public sector entities independent of the government’s day-to-day budgetary controls” that 
result from government-imposed limitations on the availability of foreign exchange or on payments.  
There is no precise definition in the Fund’s policy of when “financial operations [of an entity] form 
part of a member’s budgetary process”. Rather, it is recognized that the financial arrangements of public 
entities and the relationship of these entities to the central government may differ between members and 
need to be examined on a case-by-case basis.2 Accordingly, the assessment of whether an entity’s financial 
operations form part of the budgetary process of the member is country-specific and based on the domestic 
budgetary law framework and its interpretation. In particular, ad hoc budgetary support or (occasional)  


REVIEWS OF THE FUND’S SOVEREIGN ARREARS POLICIES AND PERIMETER 
52 
INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND 
Box 6. Defining the Budgetary Process (concluded) 
coverage of losses may not indicate that the entity forms part of the budgetary process. Similarly, profit 
transfer from a state-owned enterprise to the central government would also not mean that the entity forms 
part of the budgetary process. In contrast, an entity that is a direct budgetary unit or that receives direct 
moneys from the budget would form part of the budgetary process.  
____________________________ 
1 Review of Fund Policies and Procedures on Payment Arrears, August 1980, at p. 9.  
2 Id. 
 
Restatement 3. Acting on Behalf of the Government  
82.      Claims held by a creditor entity outside the “budgetary process” could still be 
considered Direct Bilateral Claims if they were acquired explicitly “on behalf of” the 
government. The obvious example would include guarantees/indemnifications issued explicitly on 
behalf of the government by export credit agencies (ECAs) that reside outside the budgetary 
process.94 Central bank swaps for BOP support could also qualify as Direct Bilateral Claims to the 
extent the central bank were to act on behalf of the government. In these cases, while the creditor 
member’s representation—including at the Paris Club—on whether the entity acted on the 
government’s behalf would be important, the member could be asked to provide supporting 
evidence where Fund staff deem necessary. 
83.      Staff proposes restating that an assessment of whether an entity is acting “on behalf 
of the government” needs to take into account the totality of circumstances of a specific 
case. The creditor’s consistent representation on whether the entity acted on the government's 
behalf would need to be supported by unambiguous documentary evidence. In particular, 
important elements to consider would be the governance structure of the entity; whether the claim 
in question originated from explicit directions from the government; and—where relevant—the 
terms of the financing provided. In this context, claims held or guaranteed/indemnified by ECAs 
would normally pass this test, given that these institutions benefit from a sovereign mandate and 
have consistently co-operated in sovereign debt restructurings at the Paris Club. However, a claim-
by-claim analysis will always be required.  
84.      The Fund’s definition of Direct Bilateral Claims does not need to always align with 
claims treated in the Paris Club or under other representative creditors fora (such as the CF). 
While the Fund uses a claim-by-claim analysis to determine the classification of claims for purposes 
of Fund policies, the Paris Club often uses an institution-by-institution approach to encompass a 
broader scope of claims in its treatments for efficiency reasons. While it is important to maintain a 
close alignment between the Fund’s definition and the Paris Club practice, exact one-to-one 
 
94 See also the Russian National Wealth Fund’s claim on Ukraine, which was acquired on the explicit direction of the 
Russian government. Status of Ukraine’s Eurobond Held by the Russian Federation, December 2015. 


REVIEWS OF THE FUND’S SOVEREIGN ARREARS POLICIES AND PERIMETER 
 
INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND 53 
mapping may not be necessary. In fact, treatment has differed on the margins in the past without 
any material complications.  
85.      These amendments and restatements would not constitute a major departure from 
current practice (See Figure 4). Most claims that have typically been treated in the Paris Club 
(development assistance, BOP support, the bulk of ECA guarantees) would continue to be classified 
as Direct Bilateral Claims. However, these proposals would clarify the treatment of some types of 
financing that have so far not been subject to an assessment against the Fund’s definition of a 
Direct Bilateral Claim but that are becoming more important. For example, central bank swaps 
would be classified as Direct Bilateral Claims to the extent the central bank acts on behalf of the 
government for BOP purposes; while secondary market purchases of sovereign bonds for portfolio 
or reserve management purposes by central banks and SWFs would not. 
Figure 4. Determination of a Claim as a Direct Bilateral Claim 
 
 
ISSUES FOR DISCUSSION 
86.      Staff proposes that all proposed amendments enter into force immediately. If the 
Baard supports the proposed amendments, they will apply immediately to all future Fund 
disbursements, including under existing arrangements with respect to existing and future arrears.  


REVIEWS OF THE FUND’S SOVEREIGN ARREARS POLICIES AND PERIMETER 
54 
INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND 
87.      Staff seeks Directors’ views on the following issues: 
• 
Do Directors agree that the LIA policy remains broadly appropriate? Do Directors agree with 
staff’s proposals to update and sharpen the LIA policy’s guiding principles on good faith set 
forth in paragraphs 32-37? 
• 
Do Directors agree with staff’s proposal to codify the current practice into a Fund policy with 
respect to preemptive debt restructurings with enhanced debt transparency expectations 
described in paragraphs 47-48? 
• 
Do Directors agree that the LIOA policy remains broadly appropriate, and no amendments are 
necessary?  
• 
Do Directors agree with staff’s two proposed amendments and one simplification with respect 
to the treatment of arrears to IFIs, as described in paragraphs 57-64? Do Directors agree with 
staff’s proposed amendment on the treatment of arrears on secondary market purchases held 
by IFIs described in paragraphs 76-78? 
• 
Do Directors agree with staff’s one proposed amendment and the three restatements with 
respect to the definition of Direct Bilateral Claims as described in paragraphs 67-75 and 79-85? 


REVIEWS OF THE FUND’S SOVEREIGN ARREARS POLICIES AND PERIMETER 
 
INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND 55 
Annex I. The Fund’s Policies on Debt Sustainability, Market 
Access, Financing Assurances, and External Arrears 
1.      
Under Articles I(v) and V, 3(a) of the Articles of Agreement, Fund financing can only be 
provided under adequate safeguards in support of a member’s economic policies that are 
capable of resolving the member’s balance of payments problem over a timeframe consistent 
with the revolving nature of Fund financing and restore the member to medium-term 
external viability. To ensure Fund financing adheres to this standard, the Fund has established 
inter-related policies on debt sustainability, market access, financing assurances, and lending into 
arrears. This annex describes these policies, with particular focus on sovereign debt restructuring 
situations. 
A.  
Debt Sustainability 
2.      
When a member requests Fund financing, the 
Fund assesses whether the member’s policies are 
consistent with preserving debt sustainability.1 This 
assessment is based on a debt sustainability analysis (DSA) 
that is forward looking—i.e., it takes into account steps 
being taken by the member to restore sustainability over the medium term—and incorporates 
alternative scenarios and stress tests.2 The Fund is precluded from providing financing (including 
emergency assistance—see Box 3 and B) where the member’s debt is assessed to be unsustainable, 
unless the member takes steps to restore debt sustainability.3  
3.      
Fund-supported programs seek to strike an appropriate balance between adjustment 
and financing. Financing, including from the Fund, helps to smooth a member’s adjustment and 
making it less costly for both the member concerned and the international community. Fund 
financing is usually only a fraction of total financing. Other creditors, official or private, are generally 
expected to contribute to the financing of the program as well.4  
 
1 Debt is considered sustainable when a borrower is expected to be able to continue servicing its debts without an 
unrealistically large correction to its income and expenditure.  
2 As noted above, Fund financing must be provided in a manner that establishes adequate safeguards on the 
temporary use of the general resources of the Fund. Accordingly, one of the reasons why judgments regarding debt 
sustainability need to focus on the medium-term scenario (rather than just the program period) is that a 
determination must be made that the member has the capacity to repay the Fund, taking into consideration the 
maturity of all indebtedness, including indebtedness to the Fund. 
3 See, e.g., Lessons from the Crisis in Argentina, February 2005; Sovereign Debt Restructuring–Recent Developments 
and Implications for the Fund's Legal and Policy Framework, April 2013. 
4 OSI can be in the form of new financing, swaps, and debt relief. Private sector involvement takes various forms. It is 
typically reflected in assumptions about private sector capital flows (and their composition, e.g., bonds, bank loans 
and their characteristics) and rollover by creditors, based on the expected impact of the Fund-supported program on 
private sector sentiment. It can also be made more formal, such as the commitment by banks to maintain exposure. 
If debt is unsustainable, the Fund is 
precluded from providing financing 
unless the member takes steps to 
restore debt sustainability. 


REVIEWS OF THE FUND’S SOVEREIGN ARREARS POLICIES AND PERIMETER 
56 
INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND 
4.      
If debt is unsustainable (i.e., the Fund determines that debt sustainability cannot be 
preserved through credible and sustainable policy adjustment), the Fund is precluded from 
providing financing unless the member takes steps to restore sustainability.5 These steps could 
themselves restore sustainability (e.g., the provision of new concessional financing or the completion 
of a debt operation) or, where upfront restoration of sustainability is not feasible, could provide the 
Fund with the requisite assurances that the member is on track to restore sustainability. Two types 
of assurances are possible under this latter scenario: (1) where grants or highly concessional 
financing is sought from donors, assurances can be sought directly from the donors as to the 
amount and timing of the contribution; or (2) where the financing involves rescheduling—a change 
in contractual terms—the form of assurances depends on the nature of creditors, whether Paris Club 
or non-Paris Club official creditors, or private creditors (Box AI.1 and Box AI.3). The treatment of 
Paris Club creditors is a product of the long relationship of the Fund with the Paris Club (Box AI.2). 
 
5 Under the exceptional access policy, a higher degree of probability is required for the Fund to proceed with 
approval of an arrangement in cases of unsustainable debt: The steps taken by the member must render debt 
sustainable with high probability. Access Policy and Limits in the Credit Tranches and Under the Extended Fund 
Facility and on Overall Access to the Fund’s General Resources, and Exceptional Access Policy—Review and 
Modification, Decision No. 14064-(08/18), February 2008, as amended, paragraph 3(b). 
Box AI.1. Assurances on Debt Sustainability1 
When assurances with respect to contributions to restore debt sustainability are required from Paris Club 
official bilateral creditors, such assurances are provided by a Club meeting to provide a preliminary 
indication that the Club is willing to provide debt relief in anticipation of an Agreed Minute. Such a meeting 
can be arranged on reasonably short notice. If the contributions from Paris Club creditors are representative 
(i.e., a majority of contributions required from official bilateral creditors over the program period), due to 
comparability of treatment provisions in Paris Club Agreed Minutes, and due to the Fund’s arrears policies 
(allowing non-participating creditors to be “deemed away” for the purposes of the Fund’s arrears policies, 
and thus giving the authorities leverage), other creditors can be assumed to provide debt relief on the same 
terms as the Paris Club. 
When non-Paris Club official creditors constitute the key group, “specific and credible” assurances on 
financing/debt relief are required from the creditors such that debt sustainability is restored and the Fund-
supported program is fully financed. This has been understood to mean a communication from a sufficiently 
high-ranking official authorized under domestic law to commit the creditor. This communication should 
preferably be written and must show an understanding of the debtor member’s situation and the needed 
actions to restore debt sustainability in line with program parameters. The actual debt restructuring can 
come later. This parallels what is asked of Paris Club creditors. 
When a contribution from private creditors is required to restore debt sustainability, assurances are derived 
from a staff’s judgment that a credible process for debt restructuring is underway and such restructuring will 
likely deliver an outcome in line with program requirements. Relevant considerations include the 
engagement of legal and financial advisors by the member, the launching of consultations with creditors, 
and the design of a debt restructuring strategy, including the terms of the new instruments and use of 
inducements for creditor participation. When creditors with greater leverage are involved (e.g., foreign law-
governed debt, collateralized claims, or blocking positions to neutralize collective action clauses), the 
process would need to be further along to provide sufficient assurances. The Fund has indeed in some cases 
decided to approve financing only after completion of a debt exchange. 
__________________ 
1 While assurances are typically not conveyed verbatim to the Executive Board, the Executive Board must be informed of 
their existence and their substance in order to make an informed decision on Fund financing. 


REVIEWS OF THE FUND’S SOVEREIGN ARREARS POLICIES AND PERIMETER 
 
INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND 57 
Box. AI.2 Evolution of Paris Club’s Debt Treatment and Coordination with the Fund 
The Paris Club was established in 19561, with the original aims of preventing sovereign debt defaults 
and ensuring full repayment of debt. The Paris Club generally relied on debt reschedulings that were 
short-term and structured at market rates, which aimed to give countries time to recover and repay their 
debts.2 Follow-up reschedulings were often required.  
The Fund and the Paris Club adapted their practices over time, notably during the sovereign debt 
crisis of the 1980s.3 The oil price shocks of 1973 and 1979 generated huge trade surpluses for the oil-rich, 
and corresponding deficits for the oil-poor. This in turn led to high inflation, increased global liquidity and 
rising global indebtedness, leading to multiple sovereign debt crises. The debt crisis necessitated changes to 
approaches in providing debt relief, and the Fund began to work towards longer-term solutions to the debt 
crisis. Similarly, the Paris Club had started to provide rescheduling of debt on “exceptional terms,” which was 
required for certain countries with large financing gaps. Exceptional terms generally included rescheduling at 
below-market rates, with grace periods and maturity periods that were longer than the norm. 
Since 1988, the Paris Club can provide debt write-offs to low-income countries and played a key role 
in the implementation of the HIPC Initiative. While “exceptional” treatment of debt reflected a more 
concessional approach towards debtor countries, it was still anchored within a rescheduling framework. 
During a G-7 meeting in Venice in 1987, developed countries began to acknowledge the need for additional 
debt relief for poorer countries. This led to the development of the “Toronto Terms”4 in 1988, which allowed 
debt reduction of up to 33 percent for the poorest countries, with longer repayment periods or lowered 
interest rates on remaining debt. The development of the “Toronto Terms” spurred the development of 
further terms for debt reduction, culminating with wide-scale debt relief under the HIPC Initiative. Under the 
“Cologne Terms” 5, countries eligible for the HPIC Initiative were granted debt cancellation of up to 90%. The 
Paris Club played a critical role in the implementation of the HIPC Initiative for low-income countries. 
In 2003, the Paris Club adopted a new protocol – the “Evian Approach” – in considering debt relief for 
non-HIPC countries. The “Evian Approach”6 does not provide standardized terms of treatment, but a case-
by-case approach, incorporating debt sustainability considerations and the financial needs of the debtor. For 
countries facing a liquidity issue, reschedulings could be considered. For countries facing a solvency issue, 
comprehensive debt treatment—which could include principal or NPV reduction, in addition to 
reschedulings—could be granted at different stages, tied to a debtor country’s compliance with multiple 
Fund-supported programs. 
The evolution of the Paris Club’s approach to debt treatments, from providing only reschedulings to 
offering debt reduction to both HIPC and non-HIPC countries, dovetails with Fund’s focus on debt 
sustainability. The Fund expressly recognized debt sustainability as a key safeguard in 2002.7 Even prior to 
2002, the Fund’s focus was on restoring the member to medium term external viability – a concept linked to 
debt sustainability– as articulated through the financing assurances policy. 8 Given the adoption of the “Evian 
Approach” and “Cologne Terms” in the Paris Club, debt sustainability, in combination with Fund-supported 
programs, will be a key factor driving the analysis in providing debt relief. 
 
 
 
 


REVIEWS OF THE FUND’S SOVEREIGN ARREARS POLICIES AND PERIMETER 
58 
INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND 
Box. AI.2 Evolution of Paris Club’s Debt Treatment and Coordination with the Fund 
(concluded) 
_____________________ 
1 The website of the Paris Club also provides an overview of its history and development: 
https://clubdeparis.org/en/communications/page/historical-development. 
2 See Cheng, Diaz-Cassou, and Erce (2018); Cosio-Pascal (2008). 
3 For a fuller description of the sovereign debt crisis of the 1980s, see IMF, Prevention and Resolution of Sovereign Debt 
Crises, Selected Legal and Institutional Papers Series, 2018. 
4 See https://clubdeparis.org/en/communications/page/toronto-terms. 
5 See https://clubdeparis.org/en/communications/page/cologne-terms. 
6 See https://clubdeparis.org/en/communications/page/evian-approach. 
7 This was first articulated when the Exceptional Access Policy was developed 2002, whereby one of the criteria for 
exceptional access is that there is a high probability that debt will remain sustainable, based on rigorous and systemic 
analysis. Access Policy in Capital Account Crises, July 2002. 
8 While the concept of debt sustainability was not used then, the Fund recognized that there were members which had 
unsustainable debt. See page 7 of The Fund’s Policy on Financing Assurances, April 1989: “It is now clear that, for certain 
members, the restoration of balance of payments viability will require some debt or debt-service reduction in the 
medium-term. In these cases, the provision of new money on commercial terms to the exclusion of debt reduction would 
not be consistent with a return to viability or the repayment of the Fund.” 
 
Box AI.3. Debt Sustainability in Emergency Financing Cases 
Requests for emergency lending (RFIs or RCFs) in an unsustainable debt situation can be particularly 
difficult for the Fund, as it often entails a natural or health disaster layered on top of a debt crisis. 
While Fund assistance is needed urgently, upfront financing without safeguards can make the situation 
worse if the money is used to pay off existing creditors, doing nothing to help with the disaster, and making 
the resolution of the debt situation more difficult. 
The debt sustainability requirement could be met in some cases if the Fund has adequate assurances 
that the member is on track to restore sustainability, e.g., through a debt restructuring.1 Assurances 
from creditors about actions to restore debt sustainability remain critical, and the standards for such 
assurances (Box AI.1) continue to apply. A case-by-case assessment would be needed. 
In very rare cases (Iraq 2004 and Lebanon 2006), the Fund found that the requirement for adequate 
assurances (that the member is on track to restore sustainability) was met through assurances from 
official bilateral creditors to restore debt sustainability against the backdrop of concerted 
international action. Specifically, management consulted through the relevant Executive Directors with the 
majority of the relevant member’s official bilateral creditors. In those cases, the creditors (i) recognized the 
Fund's preferred creditor status in respect of the relevant member’s purchase under the emergency 
assistance, (ii) were willing to make their best efforts—given the relevant member’s continuing cooperation 
with the Fund—to provide debt relief on appropriate terms to ensure timely repayment to the Fund of the 
amounts provided under the emergency assistance, in accordance with the Fund’s preferred creditor status; 
and (iii) confirmed that, during the period of the emergency assistance, a deferral would be in place with 
respect to those obligations of the relevant member that are falling due to them.  
___________________ 
1 Sovereign Debt Restructuring–Recent Developments and Implications for the Fund's Legal and Policy Framework, April 
2013. 
 


REVIEWS OF THE FUND’S SOVEREIGN ARREARS POLICIES AND PERIMETER 
 
INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND 59 
B.  
Market Access 
5.      
Closely related to—but distinct from—the concept of debt sustainability is that of 
market access. While lack of debt sustainability normally triggers loss of market access, temporary 
loss of market access does not necessarily imply that debt is unsustainable. To address its 
underlying problems and achieve medium-term external viability, a member needs to restore 
investor confidence and re-establish its capacity to regain access to international private capital.  
6.      
The Fund’s exceptional access policy, inter alia, requires that the member has 
prospects of (re)gaining access to international private capital markets within the timeframe 
Fund resources are outstanding. In practice, whether a country is assessed to have (or be able to 
regain) market access will depend on its ability (current or prospective) to tap international capital 
markets on a sustained basis through the contracting of loans and/or issuance of securities across a 
range of maturities, regardless of the currency denomination of the instruments, and at reasonable 
interest rates. 
C.  
Financing Assurances Policy 
7.      
The Fund's financing assurances policy aims at ensuring consistency of Fund financing 
with the member's return to medium-term external viability to give the Fund assurances that 
it can be repaid by the member within the medium term. The financing assurances policy was 
developed during the 1980s debt crisis, when commercial banks were trying to limit their exposure 
to heavily indebted countries, and the Fund could no longer assume that these banks would be 
willing to assist spontaneously in the financing of Fund-supported programs for these countries. The 
policy initially required that, as prior condition to the availability of Fund assistance, other creditors 
(official and private) needed to furnish specific assurances that they would provide the necessary 
support (either through new loans or refinancing) to fill the estimated gaps in the financing of the 
program on terms consistent with the member's return to external viability.6 In the late 1980s, the 
Fund recognized that strict adherence to the receipt of explicit financing assurances effectively gave 
commercial banks a veto over Fund financing, thereby undermining the Fund’s ability to provide 
timely assistance to members that were making efforts to address their balance of payments 
problems. To realign the policy with its underlying objectives, the Fund modified the financing 
assurances policy to allow the approval of an arrangement before banks had provided assurances as 
to their willingness to support a financing package consistent with the assumptions of the program.7  
 
6 In practice, the Fund required a formal confirmation from a critical mass of banks through their advisory 
committees. A critical mass was considered to be the level of participation that made the implementation of 
financing agreement virtually certain. The share of banks that constituted a critical mass was a matter of judgment on 
a case-by-case basis, but generally over 90 percent. 
7 To address concerns about the adequacy of safeguards, the modified policy provides that such approval can be 
granted only in cases where (i) prompt Fund support is judged to be essential for program implementation, (ii) 
negotiations between the member and its creditors have begun, and (iii) it can be expected that a financing package 
consistent with external viability will be agreed within a reasonable period of time. Progress in the negotiations with 
bank creditors would be closely monitored. See Summing Up by the Chairman on Fund Involvement in the Debt 
(continued) 


REVIEWS OF THE FUND’S SOVEREIGN ARREARS POLICIES AND PERIMETER 
60 
INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND 
8.      
Under the financing assurances policy, the Fund needs to be satisfied that program 
financing is adequate to fill financing gaps: (i) during the program period to ensure viability as 
well as (ii) to ensure that the member is in a position to repay the Fund during the post-program 
period.8 
• 
In practice, the condition that the program be “fully financed” requires the following judgments 
to be made: (i) "firm commitments" of financing must be in place for the first 12 months of the 
arrangement, and (ii) there must be "good prospects" that there will be adequate financing for 
the remaining program period beyond the first 12 months. During program reviews, assurances 
on full financing of successive 12-month periods beyond the initial 12 months (or whatever 
period is left under the arrangement) must be ascertained. Specifically, the "good prospects" 
must become “firm commitments” or actual financing.9  
• 
With respect to the post-program period, staff needs to assess whether the member’s 
prospective policies deliver a projected post-program performance that adequately safeguard 
repayments to the Fund consistent with a sustainable debt path during the program period. 
Good prospects of regaining market access and debt sustainability are germane to the 
observance of the financing assurances policy. A Fund-supported program in the Fund’s General 
Resources Account (GRA) is designed to restore the member to medium term external viability 
and resolve the BOP problem within the program period.10, 11, 12  
9.      
In programs involving debt restructuring, the financing assurances policy does not 
prescribe the allocation of financing (through new financing and/or debt restructuring) to be 
provided between official and private creditors. In case the financing gap cannot be filled with 
 
Strategy, May 1989. This modification also necessitated a revision of the arrears policy by introducing the LIA policy 
to allow for the accumulation of arrears to external private creditors (see Annex III). 
8 The financing assurances policy applies to all Fund-supported programs, including those supported by Policy 
Coordination Instruments (PCI) and Policy Support Instruments (PSI). For stand-alone emergency financing (i.e., 
under the Rapid Credit Facility and Rapid Financing Instrument), the requirements under (i) are set aside given that 
there is no underlying economic program. The financing assurances policy does not apply to support under the 
Flexible Credit Line and the Short-term Liquidity Line. 
9 There is no defined meaning of the term “firm commitments”. In practice, the manner in which such commitments 
are provided varies, and whether they are characterized as “firm” is a matter of judgement. Also, while such 
commitments do not have to be in writing, they must be considered credible by management; creditors providing 
such assurances should be willing to have their commitments reflected in program documents, which will be 
eventually published. 
10 2018 Review of Program Design and Conditionality, May 2019. 
11 Under ECF arrangements under the PRGT, the protracted BOP need does not need to be resolved within the 
program period. However, any financing gaps in the post program period for an ECF arrangement need to be such 
that, notwithstanding the gaps, the Fund is assured that the member has the capacity to repay the Fund (irrespective 
of a successor arrangement), and that any gaps are consistent with a sustainable debt path. 
12 Staff would need to assess that the member has good prospects for (re)gaining access to capital markets at 
sufficient depth, maturity, and price to ensure capacity to repay the Fund and consistent with a sustainable debt path, 
taking into account all sovereign maturities falling due in the post-program period during the time repayments to 
the Fund are outstanding. As along as obligations to the Fund are outstanding, staff needs to judge that there no 
financing gaps in the post-program period at arrangement approval and each respective program review. 


REVIEWS OF THE FUND’S SOVEREIGN ARREARS POLICIES AND PERIMETER 
 
INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND 61 
new financing (from the official and/or private sector), the Fund’s policy on financing assurances 
encourages the restructuring of creditors’ claims on the country on terms compatible with balance 
of payments viability.13 Assurances about debt sustainability and financing in these cases are 
obtained as laid out above under the section on debt sustainability (Box AI.1). 
10.      The Fund always encourages members to stay current on their obligations to the 
extent possible. Sometimes, however, financing gaps are filled through the accumulation of arrears. 
In these instances, the arrears policies, discussed in the next section, set forth a framework under 
which the Fund can provide financial assistance to members despite such arrears. The ultimate goal 
of the Fund’s arrears policies is to ensure that the member will soon regularize its relations with 
creditors, thereby resolving the arrears and ensuring its medium-term viability and securing the 
financing assurance required for the post-program period. 
D.  
Arrears Policies 
11.      Recognizing the destructive nature of arrears, since 1970, the Fund has had a policy of 
non-toleration of arrears (NTP), unless a specific policy applies that enables the Fund to lend 
into sovereign arrears. These specific policies are those on Lending into sovereign Arrears (LIA) to 
private creditors—which was adopted in 1989 and last reviewed in 2002—and on Lending into 
Arrears to Official Bilateral Creditors (LIOA), which was adopted in 2015. The application of the 
specific arrears policies depends on (i) whether a sovereign debtor member (“member” or “debtor”) 
is in arrears to private sector, official bilateral, or multilateral creditors, and (ii) whether Private Sector 
Involvement (PSI) and/or Official Sector Involvement (OSI) is needed.14 The arrears policies do not 
apply to claims in dispute (Box AI.4, below). 
Box AI.4. Disputed Claims Doctrine 
The Fund’s arrears policies do not apply to arrears on claims in dispute. Under this practice, where the Fund 
accepts a member's representation that the validity or amount of a debt claim is in dispute, such disputed 
claim does not give rise to arrears for all Fund purposes.1, 2 However, such claims are taken into account (as 
a contingent claim) for purposes of determining whether adequate assurances exist for the financing of a 
Fund-supported program and the DSA. The disputed claims doctrine is grounded in the Fund’s duty of 
neutrality. As an international organization, the Fund must maintain a neutral position with respect to claims 
whose underlying validity or amounts are in dispute between members.3  
 
 
 
 
13 Sovereign Debt Restructuring–Recent Developments and Implications for the Fund's Legal and Policy Framework, 
April 2013. 
14 Where a claim is OSI-related and ultimately restructured through a legally binding agreement between the parties, 
the new (restructured) claim normally replaces the old claim through novation. Thus, if arrears arise anew under the 
restructured claim, such claim would not be considered OSI-related unless a new such determination is made by the 
Fund. 


REVIEWS OF THE FUND’S SOVEREIGN ARREARS POLICIES AND PERIMETER 
62 
INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND 
Box AI.4. Disputed Claims Doctrine (concluded) 
 
Although the Fund reserves the right to challenge a member’s representation of a dispute, it has given the 
member the benefit of any reasonable doubt in this regard. In line with this practice, staff has on rare 
occasion queried whether there was a factual basis for a member to credibly represent a dispute to the 
Fund. The considerations relevant to staff’s queries have included the record of the positions between the 
debtor and creditor, the record of statements to the Fund, the arguments made in any litigation, and the 
status of such litigation. The Executive Board makes the final determination of claims in dispute. 
________________________________ 
1 See The Role of the Fund in the Settlement of Disputes Between Members Relating to External Financial Obligations, 
May 1984, p. 8. 
2 Where only a portion of a claim is in dispute—e.g., the amount recognized by the debtor is less than the amount 
claimed by the creditor—only the difference in the amount would fall under the disputed claims doctrine; the portion of 
the claim recognized by both parties would be treated as an undisputed claim. 
3 The Role of the Fund in the Settlement of Disputes Between Members Relating to External Financial Obligations, May 
1984 and the related Summing Up, June 1984; Recent Developments in Sovereign Debt Litigation and Implications for 
Debt Restructuring and Debt Relief Processes, March 2004. 
 
12.      For both the LIA and LIOA policy, as long as there are external arrears to creditors 
(either private or official bilateral), the Fund needs to conduct a financing assurances review 
at the approval of an arrangement or emergency financing or at each program review.15 
Financing assurances reviews—which are distinct from the above-described financing assurances 
policy—provide the Fund with the opportunity to assess progress in restoring debt sustainability in a 
context where the member has incurred external arrears as well as to determine whether there are 
sufficient safeguards in place for the further provision of Fund financing in the member’s 
circumstances. In particular, the Fund needs to determine whether the member’s adjustment efforts 
are undermined by developments in debtor and creditor relationships, and whether in light of 
progress the existence of arrears is temporary and, therefore, does not undermine the medium-term 
external viability of the member’s balance of payments and its capacity to repay the Fund.16 The 
recommendation to complete the financing assurances review requires staff’s judgment that, in light 
of progress made in restructuring the member’s debt, the Fund should continue to provide the 
member with access to Fund resources. 
 
 
15 The arrears policies apply to all Fund financing instruments. They also apply to the Policy Support Instruments and 
Policy Coordination Instruments by analogy. They do not apply to SMPs. As described in the main paper, the arrears 
policies apply with some flexibility to financing under the RCF and RFI.  
16 See Summing Up by the Acting Chairman—Fund Policy on Arrears to Private Creditors—Further Considerations, 
June 1999; and Reforming the Fund’s Policy on Non-Toleration of Arrears to Official Creditors, December 2015. 


REVIEWS OF THE FUND’S SOVEREIGN ARREARS POLICIES AND PERIMETER 
 
INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND 63 
13.      The arrears policies interact in important ways with the financing assurances and debt 
sustainability policies:17 
• 
Financing assurances. As noted above, financing gaps may be filled through the accumulation of 
arrears so long as the relevant arrears policy is satisfied. 
• 
Debt sustainability. Application of the arrears policies, which are underpinned by criteria 
designed to restore debt sustainability, may provide sufficient safeguards to negate the need for 
further assurances on debt sustainability. In particular, the application of the LIA or LIOA criteria, 
including the provision of consent by the creditor Executive Director, will generally act as a 
safeguard to assure the Fund that a restructuring deal will be forthcoming that will restore debt 
sustainability.18, 19 To the extent the member makes a debt restructuring offer to creditors, such 
offer must be consistent with program parameters. As an additional safeguard, the financing 
assurances reviews required under the LIA/LIOA policies allow the Fund an opportunity at each 
program review to reassess the status of debtor-creditor negotiations and whether a 
restructuring deal is likely to be forthcoming. Thus, staff could also assess that no assurances 
regarding the restoration of debt sustainability beyond the application of the arrears policies are 
required, depending on the member’s circumstances. 
• 
However, in cases where there are significant uncertainties that the creditor(s) will restructure 
their claims (e.g., the debt is collateralized and/or there is a high legal risk that creditor action 
could severely undermine program implementation) and such restructuring is critical to 
achieving debt sustainability and medium-term viability, the Fund may still need to seek further 
assurances from the creditor(s) as laid out in Box AI.1 before approval of an arrangement or 
completion of a review to sufficiently establish safeguards for Fund resources. 
 
17 Where the member has defaulted on some, but not all, of its external claims, the standard for assurances laid out 
in the above section on debt sustainability would need to be met for all claims; the arrears policies could only be 
used to satisfy that standard for claims in default. 
18 This includes cases where, under the exceptional access policy, debt sustainability must be restored with a high 
probability. If the member’s offer had not yet been made, the Fund could proceed if an offer consistent with debt 
sustainability was expected to be forthcoming. 
19 This was explicitly recognized in The Fund’s Policy on Financing Assurances, April 1989, which stated that: “The 
member would … need to maintain a negotiating position toward its commercial bank creditors that was broadly 
consistent with the assumptions of the adjustment and financing program being supported by the international 
community.” 


REVIEWS OF THE FUND’S SOVEREIGN ARREARS POLICIES AND PERIMETER 
64 
INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND 
Annex II. Creditor Dialogue in Pre- and Post- Default Debt 
Restructuring 
Table AII.1. Creditor Dialogue in Pre- and Post- Default Debt Restructurings 
 
 


REVIEWS OF THE FUND’S SOVEREIGN ARREARS POLICIES AND PERIMETER 
 
INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND 65 
 
Table AII.1. Creditor Dialogue in Pre- and Post- Default Debt Restructurings (concluded) 
 
 
Sources: Staff reports and media reports; Asonuma, Niepelt and Ranciere (2019), Asonuma and Trebesch (2016), Cruces and Trebesch (2014), Das, 
Papaioannou and Trebesch (2012), Park and Samples (2021) 
1/ According to the LIA policy this would normally include information on the assessed economic situation/financial circumstances, outline of a viable 
program, and a comprehensive picture of the proposed treatment of claims. 
2/ Anthony, Impavido and van Selm (2020) for Barbados domestic debt episode. Staff calculations for Argentina and Ecuador (both 2020). Crusces and 
Trebesch (2013) for cases prior to 2014, Asonuma, Niepelt and Ranciere (2018) updated dataset for all remaining episodes. Weighted average (respect to 
debt outstanding) of instrument-specific NPV and market haircuts. NPV and market haircuts correspond to 1 - (PV of new bonds/PV of old bonds), and 1 
- (PV of new bonds/Face value of old bonds), respectively. 
3/ Based on Staff Reports, media reporting, and Park and Samples (2021). After application of CACs, where relevant 
4/ 83 percent participation rate of existing holders, or over 90 percent excluding US-based investors who could not participate for legal reasons.  
 


REVIEWS OF THE FUND’S SOVEREIGN ARREARS POLICIES AND PERIMETER 
66 
INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND 
Annex III. The Evolution of the Fund’s Lending into Arrears Policy 
A.  
The Pre-1989 Policy 
1.      
Prior to 1989, the Fund had a non-toleration of arrears policy with respect to all 
creditors (private, official bilateral and multilateral) including with respect to sovereign 
arrears to private creditors. To this end, the non-accumulation and elimination of arrears served as 
a general condition for the availability of Fund resources to members. The success of the policies 
was attributable, in part, to creditors’ recognition that cooperation in the financing of Fund-
supported programs was in their self-interest. 
2.      
In its original conception, however, the scope of the arrears policy was limited in two 
important respects. First, the policy’s coverage was limited to arrears on payments from residents 
to non-residents on current (and not capital) transactions; 1 and second, the policy applied to arrears 
arising from exchange restrictions and not to those arising from a government default on its own 
external obligations.2 Against the background of a growing emergence of sovereign arrears, 
however, the policy was extended in 1980 to include such arrears, recognizing that payment arrears 
incurred by governments as a result of a default are as damaging to a country’s credit standing and 
the effective functioning of the world’s payments system as jurisdictional arrears. As a result, the 
Fund aligned its position on the elimination of sovereign and jurisdictional arrears, calling for their 
clearance both in the context of Fund-supported programs and the Fund’s surveillance activities.3 
3.      
Against this background, in 1982 the Fund developed a policy on financing assurances 
to complement the arrears policy.4 Under this policy, the Fund requires, as a prior condition to the 
availability of financing under Fund arrangements, that other creditors (official and private) provide 
assurances that they would offer the necessary support (typically by restructuring of arrears and 
principal maturing during the program period and new financing) to fill the estimated gaps in the 
 
1 Current payments are defined in Article XXX(d) of the Fund’s Articles of Agreement to include not only payments 
due in connection with foreign trade and other current business, but also, and without limitation, “payments due as 
interest on loans and as net income from other investments” and “payments of moderate amount for amortization of 
loans.” 
2 The Fund has held the position that a government cannot justify non-performance either as a principal debtor or 
guarantor by pleading the exchange control that the government itself has imposed. External arrears incurred by a 
government on its own debt are not evidence of exchange restrictions and are, therefore, outside the Fund’s 
jurisdiction under Article VIII, Section 2(a). Review of Fund Policies and Procedures on Payments Arrears, August 
1980. 
3 Id.  
4 See Financing Assurances in Fund-Supported Programs, December 1987;The Fund’s Policy on Financing Assurances, 
April 1989; Concluding Remarks by the Chairman on Fund Policy on Sovereign Arrears to Private Creditors, March 
1998;and Fund Policy on Sovereign Arrears to Private Creditors, January 1998. 


REVIEWS OF THE FUND’S SOVEREIGN ARREARS POLICIES AND PERIMETER 
 
INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND 67 
financing of the program on terms consistent with the member’s return to external viability.5,6 As 
there were limits both to the degree of adjustment that could be undertaken by a member and the 
amount of financing that could be provided by the Fund, the absence of such financing assurances 
from other official and private creditors was considered to undermine both the viability of the 
program and the member’s capacity to repay the Fund. 
B.  
The 1989 Modification and the Introduction of the LIA Policy 
4.      
In 1989, the Fund introduced the policy on lending into sovereign arrears to private 
creditors (LIA) as a limited exception to its general policy of non-toleration of arrears. 
Following the debt crises, financial institutions had gradually strengthened their balance sheets by 
the late 1980s, and had become increasingly reluctant to provide financing assurances required by 
the Fund, resulting in delays in the Fund’s support for members’ adjustment programs.7 At the same 
time, the growing recognition that problems faced by many debtors were reflecting sustainability 
rather than liquidity, and that a comprehensive resolution of the debt difficulties might entail some 
debt reduction, reinforced the difficulty of reaching agreement on conventional financing packages. 
As a result of these developments, the Fund’s policy of non-toleration of arrears had the unintended 
consequence of providing private creditors with leverage over debtors and Fund arrangements. 
5.      
In view of these developments, the Fund modified its financing assurances and arrears 
policies with respect to external commercial banks to allow the approval of a Fund 
arrangement before commercial banks had provided assurances as to their willingness to 
support a financing package consistent with the program parameters. This modification of the 
policy was recognized to entail certain risks regarding the safeguard of Fund resources. To ease 
these concerns, the LIA policy required that approval of a Fund arrangement be granted only in 
cases where: (i) prompt Fund support was judged to be essential for the successful implementation 
of the member’s adjustment program; (ii) negotiations between the member and its creditors had 
begun; and (iii) it could be expected that a financing package consistent with external viability would 
be agreed upon within a reasonable amount of time. 
 
 
 
5 In practice, the Fund required a formal confirmation from a critical mass of creditor banks through their advisory 
committee. A critical mass was considered to be the level of participation that made the implementation of financing 
agreement virtually certain. The share of banks that constituted a critical mass was a matter of judgment on a case-
by-case basis, but generally was over 90 percent. During the 1980s debt crisis, the acceptance of a term sheet by 
banks holding a critical mass of principal was considered as eliminating arrears and providing adequate assurances 
regarding commercial bank financing. 
6 While, in principle, the application of the Fund’s policies on arrears and financing assurances has required that all 
private creditors participate in burden sharing, small private creditors with relatively small exposure (for example, 
bondholders and uninsured suppliers) had generally been excluded from this requirement for practical reasons. 
7 Summing Up by the Chairman on Fund Involvement in the Debt Strategy—Further Considerations, May 1998. 


REVIEWS OF THE FUND’S SOVEREIGN ARREARS POLICIES AND PERIMETER 
68 
INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND 
C.  
The 1998 and 1999 Modifications  
6.      
In 1998, the scope of debt to which the LIA policy could be applied was broadened to 
encompass international sovereign bonds and other debt to private creditors.8 Until then, the 
policy provided for lending into arrears only on debt to external commercial banks. However, as a 
result of changes in the composition of capital flows to emerging market sovereigns, international 
bonds replaced syndicated bank loans as the primary financing vehicle for sovereigns. In 1998, the 
LIA policy would include cases of arrears to sovereign bonds and Fund financing be provided on a 
case-by-case basis and only where (i) prompt Fund support was considered essential for the 
successful implementation of the member’s adjustment program; (ii) negotiations between the 
member and its private creditors had begun; and (iii) there were firm indications that the sovereign 
borrower and its private creditors would negotiate in good faith on a debt restructuring plan. The 
first two criteria replicated the first two criteria of the 1989 policy, while the third criterion was 
intended to address specific concerns with regard to bond restructuring. 
7.      
In a further discussion of the LIA policy in 1999, it was recognized that private 
creditors might delay negotiations with sovereign debtors following a default for a variety of 
reasons.9 First, the heterogeneity of the creditor base could result in coordination difficulties, 
complicating the task of assembling a representative group. Second, the creditor base might include 
a large element that had no ongoing commercial interest in the sovereign debtor. As a result, the 
incentives to negotiate in order to return the debtor to good standing in the international financial 
community may be less than for commercial bank creditors of the 1980s who were generally seen as 
having a long-term business interest in the debtor country. Finally, given the magnitude of the 
financing available to emerging market borrowers, the outcome for debtors of losing market access 
was likely to be at least as serious as in the 1980s. There was also a concern that, if any combination 
of the above were to prevail, the Fund could be precluded from lending even if the member’s 
policies were appropriate and Fund support was essential to the adjustment effort, since 
requirements (ii) and (iii) under the 1998 policy would not be met. In 1999, the Fund replaced these 
requirements with an assessment of whether the member was making good faith efforts to reach a 
collaborative agreement with its private creditors. The Fund retained the requirement for the 
criticality of prompt Fund support for the support of the authorities’ adjustment program. 
D.  
The 2002 Modification 
8.      
In 2002, the Board reviewed the application of the good faith criterion and provided 
procedural clarity in guiding the dialogue between debtors and their external private 
 
8 Concluding Remarks by the Chairman on Fund Policy on Sovereign Arrears to Private Creditors, March 1998 and 
Fund Policy on Sovereign Arrears to Private Creditors, January 1998. 
9 Summing Up by the Acting Chairman on Fund Policy on Arrears to Private Creditors—Further Considerations, June 
1999 and Fund Policy on Arrears to Private Creditors—Further Considerations, April 1999. 


REVIEWS OF THE FUND’S SOVEREIGN ARREARS POLICIES AND PERIMETER 
 
INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND 69 
creditors, including in cases where representative creditor committees had been formed.10 In 
particular, the Fund stressed the need to strike an appropriate balance between the greater clarity 
about the good faith dialogue between a debtor and their private external creditors to provide 
better guidance about the application of the LIA policy and the flexibility in applying the good faith 
criterion to accommodate the characteristics of each specific case. As under previous iterations of 
the LIA policy, all purchases made while a member has outstanding arrears to private creditors 
continue to be subject to financing assurances reviews, which will provide an opportunity for the 
Fund to monitor relations between a debtor and its external private creditors.  
9.      
Directors agreed that Fund lending into sovereign arrears to private creditors 
(including bondholders and commercial banks) should be on a case-by-case basis and only 
where: 
(i) prompt Fund support is considered essential for the successful implementation of the 
member’s adjustment program; and 
(ii) the member is pursuing appropriate policies and is making a good faith effort to reach a 
collaborative agreement with its creditors. 
10.      Directors considered that the following principles would strike an appropriate balance 
between clarity and flexibility in guiding the dialogue between debtors and their private 
external creditors. 
• 
First, when a member has reached a judgment that a restructuring of its debt is necessary, it 
should engage in an early dialogue with its creditors, which should continue until the 
restructuring is complete. 
• 
Second, the member should share relevant, non-confidential information with all creditors on a 
timely basis, which would normally include: 
o 
an explanation of the economic problems and financial circumstances that justify a debt 
restructuring; 
o 
a briefing on the broad outlines of a viable economic program to address the underlying 
problems and its implications on the broad financial parameters shaping the envelope of 
resources available for restructured claims; and 
o 
the provision of a comprehensive picture of the proposed treatment of all claims on the 
sovereign, including those of official bilateral creditors, and the elaboration of the basis on 
 
10 Fund Policy on Lending into Arrears to Private Creditors—Further Consideration of the Good Faith Criterion, July 
2002 and The Acting Chair’s Summing Up on Fund Policy on Lending into Arrears to Private Creditors—Further 
Consideration of the Good Faith Criterion, September 2002. 


REVIEWS OF THE FUND’S SOVEREIGN ARREARS POLICIES AND PERIMETER 
70 
INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND 
which the debt restructuring would restore medium-term sustainability, bearing in mind 
that not all categories of claims may need to be restructured. 
• 
Third, the member should provide creditors with an early opportunity to give input on the 
design of restructuring strategies and the design of individual instruments. 
11.      Although, as a general premise, the form of the dialogue would be left to the debtor 
and its creditors, under this approach a member in arrears would be expected to initiate a 
dialogue with its creditors prior to agreeing on a Fund-supported program consistent with 
the principles discussed above. In cases in which an organized negotiating framework is warranted 
by the complexity of the case and by the fact that creditors have been able to form a representative 
committee on a timely basis, there would be an expectation that the member would enter into good 
faith negotiations with this committee, though the unique characteristics of each case would also be 
considered. This formal negotiating framework would include, inter alia, the sharing of confidential 
information needed to enable creditors to make informed decisions on the terms of a restructuring 
(subject to adequate safeguards), and the agreement to a standstill on litigation during the 
restructuring process by creditors represented in the committee. By the same token, in less complex 
cases, where creditors have not organized a representative committee within a reasonable period, or 
where for other reasons a formal negotiation framework would not be effective, the member would 
be expected to engage creditors through a less structured dialogue. 


REVIEWS OF THE FUND’S SOVEREIGN ARREARS POLICIES AND PERIMETER 
 
INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND 71 
Annex IV. Resolution of Official Arrears 
1.      
To inform the review of the NTP and LIOA policies since 2015, staff has collected data 
on the resolution of official arrears that were subject to these policies. Data was gathered on the 
stock and creditor composition of official bilateral arrears in Fund arrangements between 2016–20, 
focusing on the stock immediately prior to each arrangement1, and at the end of 2020. The main 
sources were staff reports, supplemented by information provided by Fund country teams. 
2.      
A majority of debtor countries made some progress towards resolving their official 
bilateral arrears, but only a few resolved them fully (Table AIV.1). There were only four cases in 
which the arrears to which the LIOA/NTP applied were fully resolved, although in two of these 
arrears arose again before a subsequent Fund arrangement. In addition, eleven countries resolved 
arrears with some of their external bilateral creditors, which in most cases resulted in a substantial 
reduction in the stock of official bilateral arrears. Finally, eight debtor countries did not resolve the 
arrears with any of their official bilateral creditors, although in some of these there are ongoing 
negotiations. In this last group the arrears were generally OSI-related (often relating to the HIPC 
Initiative), and in most cases significantly predated the 2015 reforms, although there are a few 
exceptions. 
 
 
1 For Fund members with multiple Fund arrangements with official bilateral arrears during this period, the data on 
the initial stock of arrears was collected for their first Fund arrangement after 2015. 


REVIEWS OF THE FUND’S SOVEREIGN ARREARS POLICIES AND PERIMETER 
72 
INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND 
Table AIV.1. Evolution of Arrears to Official Bilateral Creditors in 
Fund Arrangements from 2016–201,2 
 
 
 
 
 
Initial Arrears 
 
End-2020 Arrears 
Debtor 
Facility, 
Approval 
OSI/Non-
OSI 
Basis for 
LIOA 
Amount 
(US$ mn) 
Date 
Creditors 
 
Amount 
(US$ mn) 
Creditors 
Original arrears fully resolved 
 
 
Barbados 
EFF, 2018 
OSI 
Consent 
1 
Sep. 2018 
CAN 
 
0 
n/a 
Gabon 
EFF, 2017; 
RFI, 2020 
non-OSI 
Non-
objection 
115 
Jun. 2017 
CAN, CHN, DEU, 
ESP, FRA, ISR, 
KOR 
 
33 
CHN 
Mongolia 
EFF, 2017 
OSI 
Consent 
6 
Apr. 2017 
CHN 
 
0 
n/a 
Suriname 
SBA, 2016 
non-OSI 
Non-
objection 
17 
Jun. 2016 
CHN 
 
584 
CHN, FRA, IND, 
ISR, ITA, NLD, 
SWE  
Some arrears clearance 
Central African 
Republic 
ECF, 2017; 
ECF, 2019; 
RCF, 2020 
OSI & 
non-OSI 
Consent; 3 
Criteria; 
Non-
objection 
192 
Dec. 2015 
ARG, GNQ, IRQ, 
LBY, SRB, TWN 
 
215 
ARG, GNQ, IRQ, 
LBY, TWN 
Chad 
ECF, 2017; 
RCF, 2020 
non-OSI 
Non-
objection 
61 
Apr. 2017 
COG, IND, SAU, 
KWT, LBY  
 
90 
COG, LBY 
Comoros 
RCF, 2020 
non-OSI 
Non-
objection 
2 
Nov. 2019 
FRA, IND, SAU, 
KWT, 
 
15 
IND 
Djibouti 
RCF, 2020 
OSI 
Emergency 
financing 
107 
Mar. 2020 
BEL, CHN, ESP, 
IRN, ITA, SAU, 
UAE 
 
16 
IRN, UAE 
The Gambia 
RCF, 2017; 
ECF, 2020; 
RCF, 2020 
OSI 
Consent; 3 
Criteria 
17 
Jun. 2017 
CHN, VEZ 
 
197 
VEZ 
Grenada 
ECF, 2016; 
RCF, 2020 
OSI 
Rep. PC; 
Consent; 3 
Criteria 
17 
Dec. 2015 
DZA, FRA, GBR, 
LBY, RUS, TTO, 
USA 
 
23 
DZA, LBY, TTO 
Guinea-Bissau 
ECF, 2016 
OSI 
Consent 
109 
Jul. 2016 
BRA, DZA, LBY, 
PAK, RUS, TWN, 
UAE 
 
39 
BRA, DZA, LBY, 
PAK, RUS 
Iraq 
SBA, 2016 
OSI 
Rep. PC 
40,563 
Dec. 2015 
BRA, EGY, JOR, 
SAU, KWT, MAR, 
PAK, POL, QAT, 
SDN, TUR, UAE 
 
40,062 
EGY, JOR, SAU, 
KWT, PAK, POL, 
QAT, SDN, TUR, 
UAE 
Jamaica 
EFF, 2016 
OSI 
Rep. PC 
44 
Dec. 2015 
IRQ 
 
21 
IRQ 
Serbia 
SBA, 2016;  
OSI 
Rep. PC 
75 
Dec. 2015 
CSK, LBY 
 
n.a.8 
LBY 
Somalia 
ECF/EFF, 
2020 
OSI 
Rep. PC 
3,708 
Dec. 2018 
BGR, DEN, DZA, 
FRA, ESP, GBR, 
IRQ, ITA, JPN, 
SAU, KWT, LBY, 
NED, NOR, ROU, 
RUS, TWN, UAE, 
USA 
 
1,421 
BGR, DZA, IRQ, 
SAU, KWT, LBY, 
ROU, RUS, UAE 


REVIEWS OF THE FUND’S SOVEREIGN ARREARS POLICIES AND PERIMETER 
 
INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND 73 
 
Table AIV.1. Evolution of Arrears to Official Bilateral Creditors in  
Fund Arrangements from 2016–20 (concluded) 
 
 
No arrears clearance 
Afghanistan 
ECF, 2016 
OSI 
Rep. PC 
10 
Dec. 2015 
IRN 
 
109 
IRN 
Burkina Faso 
ECF, 2016 
OSI 
Rep. PC 
79 
Dec. 2015 
CHN, CDI, LBY 
 
84 
CHN, CDI, LBY 
Dem. Rep. of 
Congo 
ECF, 2019 
OSI 
Rep. PC; 
Consent 
48 
Dec. 2019 
DZA, NAM, RWA 
TWN, 
 
48 
DZA, NAM, RWA 
TWN, 
 
 
Ethiopia 
ECF-EFF, 
2019; RFI, 
2020 
OSI 
Rep. PC 
538 
Dec. 2015 
BGR, LBY, SRB, 
RUS 
 
538 
BRG, LBY, SRB, 
RUS 
Guinea 
ECF, 2016; 
ECF, 2017 
OSI & 
non-OSI 
Rep. PC; 
Non-
objection 
89 
Dec. 2015 
BGR, IRQ, LBY, 
MAR, PRK, ROU, 
THA 
 
102 
BRG, IRQ, LBY, 
MAR, PRK, ROU, 
THA 
Mozambique 
RCF, 2019; 
RCF, 2020 
OSI & 
non-OSI 
Rep. PC; 
Non-
objection 
719 
Dec. 2015 
AGO, BGR, BRA, 
IRQ, LBY, POL 
 
722 
AGO, BRA, BRG, 
IRQ, LBY, POL 
Sao Tome and 
Principe 
ECF, 2019 
OSI & 
non-OSI 
Rep. PC; 
Non-
objection 
11 
Oct. 2019 
BRA, DZA, GNQ 
 
11 
BRA, DZA, GNQ 
Ukraine 
EFF, 2016; 
SBA, 2019; 
SBA, 2020 
OSI 
3 Criteria 
3,000 
Dec. 2015 
RUS 
 
3,000 
RUS 
 
1 Arrears figures are based on reporting by debtor countries, and generally do not include any accrual of additional interest. 
2 Jordan is not included, since the authorities represented a dispute as to the validity of the official arrears reported during its 2016 EFF arrangement. 
3 Gabon: Original arrears were cleared, but new arrears arose ahead of the 2020 RFI. 
 4 Suriname: Latest arrears are as of August 2021; 2016 arrears were resolved, but Suriname has since gone into restructuring.  
5 Comoros: Most arrears were regularized under DSSI, discussions with India are ongoing. 
6 Djibouti: Remaining arrears relate to technical and diplomatic issues. 
7 The Gambia: A claim where the authorities represent a dispute with Libya is not included in these figures.  
8 Serbia: The amount of arrears owed to Libya at end-2020 is not available, as it is subject to a dispute. 
9 Afghanistan: The Fund’s engagement has been paused since August 2021 as there continues to be a lack of clarity within the international community 
regarding the recognition of a government for Afghanistan. 
 
 


REVIEWS OF THE FUND’S SOVEREIGN ARREARS POLICIES AND PERIMETER 
74 
INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND 
References 
Anthony, Myrvin, Impavido, Gregorio, and van Selm, Bert, 2020, “Barbados’ 2018—19 Sovereign 
Debt Restructuring—A Sea Change?”, IMF Working Paper WP/20/34. 
 
Asonuma, Tamon and Joo, Hyungseok, 2020, “Sovereign Debt Restructurings: Delays in 
Renegotiations and Risk Averse Creditors," Journal of the European Economic Association, 
Vol.18(5), pp.2394–2440. 
 
Asonuma, Tamon, Niepelt, Dirk and Ranciere, Romain G., 2018, “Sovereign Bond Prices, Haircuts and 
Maturity”, NBER Working Paper 23864. 
 
Asonuma, Tamon and Trebesch, Christoph, 2016, “Sovereign Debt Restructurings: Preemptive or 
Post-Default”, Journal of the European Economic Association, Volume 14, Issue 1, pp. 175- 
214. 
 
Beaumont, Craig and Hakura, Dalia, 2021, “The Common Framework: Utilizing its Flexibility to 
Support Developing Countries’ Recovery”, IMF Strategy, Policy and Review, Special Series on 
Covid-19. 
 
Cheng, Gong, Diaz-Cassou, Javier, and Erce, Aitor, 2018, “Official Debt Restructurings and 
Development”, Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas, Globalization and Monetary Policy Institute, 
Working Paper no. 339.  
 
Cosio-Pascal, Enrique, 2008, “The Emerging of a Multilateral Forum for Debt Restructuring: The Paris 
Club”, United Nations Conference on Trade and Development, Discussion Papers, No. 192. 
 
Cruces, Juan J. and Trebesch, Christoph, 2013, ”Sovereign Defaults: The Price of Haircuts”, American 
Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, Volume 5 Issue 3, pp. 85-117.  
 
Das, Udaibir S., Papaioannou, Michael B. and Trebesch, Christoph, 2012, “Sovereign Debt 
Restructurings 1950–2010: Literature Survey, Data, and Stylized Facts”, IMF Working Paper 
WP/12/203. 
 
DeSieno, Timothy B., 2016, “Creditor Committees in Sovereign Debt Restructurings: Understanding 
the Benefits and Addressing Concerns”, in: Too Little, Too Late, edited by Martin Guzman, 
José Antonio Ocampo and Joseph E. Stiglitz, New York Chichester, West Sussex: Columbia 
University Press, pp. 175-186. 
 
IMF, 2013, Sovereign Debt Restructuring—Recent Developments and Implications for the Fund's 
Legal and Policy Framework (Washington). 
 


REVIEWS OF THE FUND’S SOVEREIGN ARREARS POLICIES AND PERIMETER 
 
INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND 75 
IMF, 2015, The Fund’s Lending Framework and Sovereign Debt—Further Considerations 
(Washington).  
 
IMF, 2018, Prevention and Resolution of Sovereign Debt Crises (Washington) at Prevention and 
Resolution of Sovereign Debt Crises | imfsg. 
 
IMF, 2020, The International Architecture for Resolving Sovereign Debt Involving Private-Sector 
Creditors—Recent Developments, Challenges, And Reform Options (Washington). 
 
Moody’s Investors Service, 2020, “Sovereign default and recovery rates, 1983-2019", Sovereign 
defaults series.  
 
Park, Stephen K., and Samples, Tim R., 2021, “Distrust, Disorder, and the New Governance of 
Sovereign Debt”, Harvard International Law Journal, Volume 62, Issue I, pp.175-221.  
 
Trebesch, Christoph and Zettelmeyer, Jeromin, 2018, “ECB Interventions in Distressed Sovereign 
Debt Markets: The Case of Greek Bonds”, IMF Economic Review, Volume 66, pp. 287–332. 
 


 
 
 
REVIEWS OF THE FUND'S SOVEREIGN ARREARS POLICIES 
AND PERIMETER—SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
INTRODUCTION ____________________________________________________________________________ 
2 
 
ANNEXES 
I. Consolidated Draft Executive Board Understanding of the Fund’s Arrears Policies and 
Perimeter____________________________________________________________________________________ 
3 
II. Consolidated Redlined Draft Executive Board Understanding of the Fund’s Arrears 
Policies and Perimeter ____________________________________________________________________ 10 
 
Approved By 
Yan Liu, Jeromin 
Zettelmeyer, and 
Miguel Savastano  
Prepared by an inter-departmental team led by Wolfgang 
Bergthaler (LEG). The team comprised of Julianne Ams (LEG 
lead); Peter Breuer (MCM lead), Thordur Jonasson (all MCM); 
and Marcos Chamon (SPR lead), Tom Best (SPR coordinator), 
Atif Saeed Chaudry (all SPR). Sebastian Grund and Clara 
Thiemann (all LEG), and Maximilien Kaffo, Geoffrey Keim, and 
Vivian Malta (all SPR) contributed to the paper. The team 
worked under the overall guidance provided by Tobias Adrian, 
Ceyla Pazarbasioglu, and Rhoda Weeks-Brown. 
 
 
CONTENTS 
April 25, 2022 
 
 


REVIEWS OF THE FUND’S SOVEREIGN ARREARS POLICIES AND PERIMETER 
 
2 
INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND 
INTRODUCTION 
1.      
For illustrative purposes, if all of staff’s proposals contained in the main paper are 
endorsed by the Executive Board, staff attaches to this supplement a clean (Annex 1) and 
redlined (Annex 2) version of the consolidated draft Executive Board understandings of the 
Fund’s arrears policies and perimeter. The redlined version shows the differences of the proposals 
versus current Fund policies (see Box 1 of the main paper).1 The benefit for Executive Directors of 
this approach is that the Annexes 1 and 2 consolidate current Fund policies with proposed revisions 
to enable a comprehensive view of the amended Fund’s sovereign arrears policies. After the 
Executive Board meeting and dependent on the outcome of the Executive Board considerations of 
staff’s proposals, staff will revise Annexes 1 and 2 and reissue them to the Executive Board prior to 
publication. 
2.      
In addition to the proposals made in the main staff paper, the Annexes specify an 
alternative criterion for determining whether an International Financial Institution (IFI) should 
benefit from the Fund’s non-toleration policy of arrears to IFIs (NTP) in official sector 
involvement (OSI) cases. While staff continues to believe that the proposal set forth in paragraph 
61 of the main paper represents the best solution, this alternative (see italicized language in 
paragraph 18 of Annex I) is presented as a fallback position in case staff’s proposal does not 
command consensus at the Executive Board.  
3.      
Under the alternative, the question of whether an IFI should benefit from the NTP in 
OSI cases would remain a judgment call informed by several factors. In particular, the three 
factors considered under the current approach—global membership, treatment by the Paris Club, 
and participation in the HIPC initiative (see paragraph 16 in the main paper)—would be expanded 
by two additional factors, for the reasons described in the staff paper (see paragraph 58 in 
particular), namely: 
• 
Whether the institution is a Regional Financing Arrangement (RFA) or a reserve currency union 
central bank (RCUCB) whose operations have the effect of strengthening the GFSN; and 
• 
Whether the institution is being excluded from the scope of debt restructuring by official 
bilateral creditors through a creditor committee based on a representative standing forum 
recognized under the LIOA policy in the case at hand. 
4.      
The alternative would leave all other proposed changes to the NTP unaffected. 
Specifically, the alternative refers only to Proposed Amendment 1 (paragraph 61 in the main paper). 
Proposed Amendment 2 (paragraphs 62-63) and Proposed Simplification (paragraphs 64) would 
remain unaffected.  
 
 
1 The Acting Chair’s Summing Up—Fund Policy on Lending into Arrears to Private Creditors—Further Consideration 
of the Good Faith Criterion, September 2002 (BUFF/02/142); The Acting Chair’s Summing up—Fund Policy on Arrears 
to Private Creditors—Further Considerations, June 1999 (BUFF/99/71). 


REVIEWS OF THE FUND’S SOVEREIGN ARREARS POLICIES AND PERIMETER 
 
INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND 3 
Annex I. Consolidated Draft Executive Board Understanding 
of the Fund’s Arrears Policies and Perimeter 
Introduction  
1.      
[Directors] welcomed the comprehensive review of the Fund’s policy on lending into arrears 
to private creditors, the Fund’s policy on lending into sovereign arrears to official bilateral creditors, 
and the Fund’s non-toleration of sovereign arrears policy to official bilateral and multilateral 
creditors. 
2.      
[Directors] agreed that overall, the Fund’s arrears policies have worked well in enabling the 
Fund to proceed with providing financing in cases of arrears. At the same time, [Directors] noted 
that practice in sovereign debt restructuring and the creditor landscape have evolved over the last 
20 years and certain amendments, refinements, and updates are in order. 
Lending Into Arrears (LIA) Policy 
3.      
[Directors] concurred that the Fund’s policy on lending into arrears to private creditors 
continues to provide a useful tool enabling the Fund to support a member’s adjustment efforts 
before the member has reached agreement with its private creditors on a debt restructuring. 
Specifically, [Directors] agreed that Fund lending into sovereign arrears to private creditors should 
continue to be on a case-by-case basis and only where: 
(i) 
prompt Fund support is considered essential for the successful implementation of the 
member’s adjustment program; and 
(ii) 
the member is pursuing appropriate policies and is making a good faith effort to reach a 
collaborative agreement with its creditors. 
4.      
[Directors] also agreed that Fund lending into non-sovereign arrears stemming from the 
imposition of exchange controls should continue to be on a case-by-case basis and only where: 
(i) 
prompt Fund support is considered essential for the successful implementation of the 
member’s adjustment program; and 
(ii) 
the member is pursuing appropriate policies, the member is making a good faith effort 
to facilitate a collaborative agreement between private debtors and their creditors, and a 
good prospect exists for the removal of exchange controls.  
5.      
With respect to lending into sovereign arrears to private creditors, [Directors] agreed that 
greater clarity about the good faith dialogue between a debtor and its creditors during the 
restructuring process and enhanced debt transparency could help provide better guidance about 


REVIEWS OF THE FUND’S SOVEREIGN ARREARS POLICIES AND PERIMETER 
 
4 
INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND 
the application of the Fund’s LIA policy and, more generally, promote a better framework for the 
engagement of debtors and creditors in the restructuring of sovereign debt. Greater clarity 
concerning the framework for possible debt restructuring would strengthen the capacity of investors 
to assess recovery values under alternative scenarios, thereby facilitating the pricing of risk and 
improving the functioning of the capital markets. At the same time, however, [Directors] stressed the 
need for continued flexibility in applying the “good faith” criterion to accommodate the 
characteristics of each specific case to avoid putting debtors at a disadvantage in the negotiations 
with creditors; and to avoid prolonged negotiations that could hamper the ability of the Fund to 
provide timely assistance. Indeed, any clarification of the “good faith” criterion should serve 
primarily to support the difficult judgments that will continue to have to be made in each case, and 
should be made operational in a manner that does not impair market discipline. 
6.      
[Directors] considered that the following principles would strike an appropriate balance 
between clarity and flexibility in guiding the dialogue between debtors and their private external 
creditors. 
First, when a member has reached a judgment that a restructuring of its debt is necessary, it 
should engage in an early dialogue with its creditors, which should continue until the 
restructuring is complete. 
Second, the member should share relevant information with all creditors on a timely basis, 
which would normally include: 
• 
an explanation of the economic problems and financial circumstances that justify a debt 
restructuring; 
• 
a briefing on the broad outlines of a viable economic program to address the underlying 
problems and its implications on the broad financial parameters shaping the envelope of 
resources available for restructured claims; and 
• 
the provision of a comprehensive picture of the outstanding debt stock and its terms, 
and the proposed treatment of all claims on the sovereign, including those of official 
bilateral creditors; the perimeter of claims subject to the envisaged debt restructuring; 
and the elaboration of the basis on which the debt restructuring would restore medium-
term debt sustainability, bearing in mind that not all categories of claims may need to be 
restructured. 
Third, the member should provide creditors with an early opportunity to give input on the 
design of restructuring strategies and the design of individual instruments. 
Fourth, any terms offered to the creditors by the member should be consistent with the 
parameters of the Fund-supported program. 


REVIEWS OF THE FUND’S SOVEREIGN ARREARS POLICIES AND PERIMETER 
 
INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND 5 
7.      
Although, as a general premise, the form of the dialogue would continue to be left to the 
debtor and its creditors, under this approach a member in arrears would be expected to initiate a 
dialogue with its creditors consistent with the principles discussed above. In cases in which creditors 
have been able to form a representative committee on a timely basis, there would be an expectation 
that the member would enter into good faith negotiations with this committee, though the unique 
characteristics of each case would also be considered. 
8.      
[Directors] stressed that, in going forward with the suggested approach, it would be crucial 
to strike the appropriate balance between the need to promote effective communication between a 
debtor and its creditors, and the need to retain flexibility to address the diversity of individual 
member circumstances. 
9.      
[Directors] emphasized that in assessing whether the member is making good faith efforts to 
negotiate, judgments would continue to be required in a number of important areas. These include 
a consideration of the extent to which creditor committees are sufficiently representative, and 
whether a reasonable period has elapsed to allow for the formation of representative committees. In 
the absence of such creditor committees, the member would be expected to engage creditors 
through a less structured dialogue.  
10.      [Directors] viewed the considerations laid out in the staff paper as useful inputs for helping 
to make such judgments, which would need to be made flexibly. They also noted that to the extent 
that negotiations become stalled because creditors are requesting terms that are inconsistent with 
the adjustment and financing parameters that have been established under a Fund-supported 
program, the Fund should retain the flexibility to continue to support members notwithstanding the 
lack of progress in negotiations with creditors.  
11.      [Directors] recognized that there may be circumstances where, following a default, the 
debtor enters into good faith discussions with creditors prior to the approval of a Fund 
arrangement. In these circumstances, creditors are likely to express views as to the appropriate 
dimensions of the program’s adjustment and financing parameters. While such input would be 
welcome, [Directors] emphasized that decisions on an adequate macroeconomic framework and the 
design of the financing plan or the adjustment program that could form the basis for the Fund’s 
lending into arrears will remain in the sole purview of the Fund. 
12.      [Directors] recognized that there may be emergency situations, such as in the aftermath of a 
natural disaster, where the extraordinary demands on the affected government are such that there is 
insufficient time for the debtor to undertake good faith efforts to reach agreement with its creditors. 
When a judgment has been made that such exceptional circumstances exist, the Fund may provide 
financing under the Rapid Credit Facility (RCF) or the Rapid Financing Instrument (RFI) despite 
arrears owed to private creditors. However, it would be expected that the Fund’s support provided 
to the debtor in such cases would help advance normalization of relations with private creditors and 
the resolution of arrears, so that the approval of any subsequent Fund arrangement for the member 
would again be subject to the LIA policy on lending into sovereign arrears to private creditors. 


REVIEWS OF THE FUND’S SOVEREIGN ARREARS POLICIES AND PERIMETER 
 
6 
INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND 
13.      All purchases/disbursements made while a member has outstanding arrears to private 
creditors will continue to be subject to financing reviews, which will provide an opportunity for the 
Fund to monitor relations between a debtor and its creditors, and for the Board to be kept informed 
about developments in this area at an early stage. 
14.      [Directors] noted that the policy outlined above supersedes all previous policies regarding 
lending into arrears to private creditors. 
Codifying Existing Practice into a Policy in Preemptive Restructuring Cases 
15.      [Directors] agreed that the current practice in preemptive restructuring cases remains 
appropriate. To the extent that the Fund determines that a contribution from external private 
creditors in the form of a debt restructuring will be needed to restore debt sustainability, the 
restructuring should ideally be undertaken before the approval of the Fund arrangement. However, 
there may be circumstances under which more flexibility is warranted, so that the conclusion of the 
debt operation is contemplated at a later date, normally, by the first review under the arrangement. 
In such cases, the Fund may provide financing only if it has adequate assurances that such a 
restructuring will be successful. Such assurances are obtained by a judgment that a credible process 
for restructuring is underway and will result in sufficient creditor participation to restore debt 
sustainability and close financing gaps within the macroeconomic parameters of the program, 
taking into account official sector commitments. This judgment will depend on member-specific 
circumstances, but relevant considerations to inform such judgment may include the engagement of 
legal and financial advisors by the member, the launching of consultations with creditors, and the 
design of the debt restructuring strategy, including the terms of the new instruments and use of 
inducements for creditor participation. [Directors] emphasized that the member would be expected 
to share relevant information as defined under the LIA policy with all private creditors on a timely 
basis.  
Lending Into Arrears to Official Bilateral Creditors (LIOA) Policy 
16.      [Directors] agreed that the Fund’s non-toleration of arrears policy in non-(Official Sector 
Involvement) OSI cases and the policy on lending into sovereign arrears to official bilateral creditors 
in OSI cases continues to be appropriate and no amendments are needed.  
17.      [Directors] concurred that new Fund-supported programs should continue to incorporate 
the assumption that old OSI-related claims would be restructured in line with the terms stipulated in 
the original Fund-supported program. 
International Financial Institutions 
18.      [Directors] agreed that application of the non-toleration of arrears policy with respect to 
multilaterals has worked well, but the policy needs to be updated to clarify how the policy applies to 
new International Financial Institutions (IFIs) and to ensure that the special treatment multilateral 
creditors receive under the Fund’s arrears policy is not diluted. IFIs are defined as international 


REVIEWS OF THE FUND’S SOVEREIGN ARREARS POLICIES AND PERIMETER 
 
INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND 7 
financial institutions with at least two sovereign members (and no non-sovereign member). 
Therefore, [Directors] endorsed staff’s proposal in the paper along three main lines: 
• 
First, Fund financing in the face of arrears to the World Bank Group should continue to require 
an Agreed Plan between the debtor and the World Bank to clear the arrears over a defined 
period. Fund financing in the face of arrears to any other IFI should continue to require that a 
Credible Plan be in place in cases where a contribution from the official sector is not required in 
order to restore debt sustainability (non-OSI cases). In this context, a Credible Plan is a plan that 
is credible to the Fund, and the creditor’s concurrence is not required. 
• 
Second, in cases where a contribution from the official sector is required in order to restore debt 
sustainability (OSI cases): 
o The Fund should only provide financing when a Credible Plan is in place in cases in which 
arrears are owed to (i) regional financing arrangements and reserve currency union central 
banks that form part of the global financial safety net or IFIs with global membership as defined 
in the staff paper, or (ii) IFIs being excluded from the scope of debt restructuring by official 
bilateral creditors through a creditor committee based on a representative standing forum 
recognized under the LIOA policy—either in the case at hand or as expected based on previous 
cases if no decision has been made in the current case. 
[OR (alternative formulation, see introduction) 
Where the member is in arrears to an IFI, the Fund should judge whether a Credible Plan to 
resolve such arrears is required as a condition for lending. Factors informing the Fund’s judgment 
in this regard will include: (i) global, rather than regional, membership of the institution; (ii) 
whether the institution is a regional financing arrangement or a reserve currency union central 
bank that forms part of the global financial safety net; (iii) the Paris Club’s treatment of the 
institution, (iv) participation of the institution in the Heavily Indebted Poor Countries (HIPC) 
Initiative, and (v) whether the institution is being excluded from the scope of debt restructuring by 
official bilateral creditors through a creditor committee based on a representative standing forum 
recognized under the LIOA policy in the case at hand.] 
o When arrears are owed to an IFI that does not fall under the previous bullet above, [Directors] 
agreed that the Fund’s policy on lending into official bilateral arrears should be expanded to 
apply to these cases mutatis mutandis. In these cases, the Fund policy will also provide for the 
flexibility in extraordinary circumstances for emergency financing cases consistent with the 
Fund’s policy on lending into official bilateral creditors arrears. 
[Directors] agreed that in the latter cases, the Fund would consider lending into arrears owed to an 
IFI creditor only in circumscribed circumstances where all the following criteria are satisfied: 
• 
Prompt financial support from the Fund is considered essential, and the member is pursuing 
appropriate policies; 


REVIEWS OF THE FUND’S SOVEREIGN ARREARS POLICIES AND PERIMETER 
 
8 
INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND 
• 
The debtor is making good faith efforts to reach agreement with the IFI creditor on a 
contribution consistent with the parameters of the Fund-supported program—i.e., that the 
absence of an agreement is due to the unwillingness of the creditor to provide such a 
contribution; and 
• 
The decision to provide financing despite the arrears would not have an undue negative effect 
on the Fund’s ability to mobilize official financing packages in future cases. 
19.      In assessing whether a debtor is acting in good faith, the Fund will consider, inter alia, 
whether the debtor has approached the IFI creditor to which it owes arrears bilaterally; has offered 
to engage in substantive dialogue with the IFI creditor and has sought a collaborative process with 
the creditor to reach agreement; has provided the creditor relevant information on a timely basis 
consistent with the Fund’s policy on confidentiality of information; and has offered the creditor 
terms that are consistent with the parameters of the Fund-supported program. If the debtor 
requested terms from an IFI creditor that would result in financing contributions that exceeded the 
requirements of the program it would generally not indicate good faith.  
20.      In assessing whether the Fund’s decision to lend into arrears owed to an IFI creditor would 
have an undue negative effect on the Fund’s ability to mobilize official financing packages in future 
cases, the Fund will consider the signal that such a decision would send to IFI creditors, or to official 
creditors more generally, as a group, given the specific circumstances of the case.  
21.      An IFI creditor may choose to consent to Fund financing notwithstanding arrears owed to it. 
Such consent could be conveyed to the Fund either through an Executive Director designated by the 
IFI or an authorized executive of the IFI to the Managing Director. In such cases, the Executive Board 
would not need to make a judgment as to whether the three criteria above are satisfied. The Fund 
would nevertheless continue to encourage the parties to come to an agreement during the 
program, since the regularization of arrears is an objective of any Fund-supported program and 
important for the functioning of the international financial system at large. 
22.      So long as arrears to IFI creditors remain outstanding, purchases or disbursements will be 
subject to a financing assurances review where the Executive Board will verify that all three criteria 
are satisfied and the policy continues to be met for the further use of the Fund’s resources in the 
member’s circumstances.  
Perimeter 
23.      For the purpose of determining the application of the Fund’s arrears, financing assurances 
and debt sustainability policies, [Directors] endorsed the approach proposed by staff.  
24.      Specifically, Direct Bilateral Claims will continue to be defined as those claims that are (a) 
held by a government, or an agency acting on behalf of a government; and (b) originate from an 
underlying transaction where the creditor government, or an agency acting on behalf of the 
government, provided or guaranteed financing to the debtor member.  


REVIEWS OF THE FUND’S SOVEREIGN ARREARS POLICIES AND PERIMETER 
 
INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND 9 
25.      In operationalizing this definition, [Directors] supported using the creditor member’s 
budgetary process to determine which entities form part of the creditor government. For entities 
that fall outside the government, a case-by-case analysis, taking into account the totality of the 
circumstances, would continue to be required to determine whether the entity is “acting on behalf 
of the government.” [Directors] recognized that secondary market purchases of claims by official 
bilateral creditors would not qualify as Direct Bilateral Claims, as they would not directly extend 
financing to the debtor member. 
26.      [Directors] endorsed two amendments to the classification of official claims: First, to the 
extent that the IFI purchases securities in the secondary market as part of the global financial safety 
net, such claims can be treated as claims subject to the Fund’s arrears policies as applicable to IFIs; 
however, the Fund would rely on the IFI’s own representation in this regard. Second, any Direct 
Bilateral Claims or claims held by IFIs that are contractually part of a pooled voting mechanism with 
private creditors shall be subject to the LIA policy. 
Effectiveness 
27.      The above amendments and new policies will enter into effect immediately and will apply to 
all future purchases and disbursements (including under existing arrangements), with respect to 
existing and future arrears. 
Reviews of the Arrears Policies   
28.      Finally, [Directors] agreed that the Fund’s arrears policies should be reviewed on an as 
needed basis. 
 


REVIEWS OF THE FUND’S SOVEREIGN ARREARS POLICIES AND PERIMETER 
 
10 
INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND 
Annex II. Consolidated Redlined Draft Executive Board 
Understanding of the Fund’s Arrears Policies and Perimeter 
Introduction  
1.      
[Directors] welcomed the comprehensive review of the Fund’s policy on lending into arrears 
to private creditors, the Fund’s policy on lending into sovereign arrears to official bilateral creditors, 
and the Fund’s non-toleration of sovereign arrears policy to official bilateral and multilateral 
creditors. 
2.      
[Directors] agreed that overall, the Fund’s arrears policies have worked well in enabling the 
Fund to proceed with providing financing in cases of arrears. At the same time, [Directors] noted 
that practice in sovereign debt restructuring and the creditor landscape have evolved over the last 
20 years and certain amendments, refinements, and updates are in order. 
Lending Into Arrears (LIA) Policy 
Directors welcomed the opportunity to reexamine the criteria set out earlier for Fund lending into 
arrears to private creditors stemming from sovereign defaults and from the imposition of exchange 
controls that lead to an interruption in debt-service payments by nonsovereign borrowers. 
Directors emphasized that the modification of the financing assurances and arrears policies to 
permit lending into arrears is an adaptation of existing policies to changing circumstances, and is 
intended to reinforce the Fund’s ability to promote effective balance of payments adjustment while 
providing adequate safeguards for the use of the Fund’s resources. 
Directors agreed that the Fund’s policy on lending into sovereign arrears to private creditors 
continues to provide a useful tool enabling the Fund to support a member’s adjustment efforts 
before it has reached agreement with its private creditors on a debt restructuring. The pillars of this 
policy are first, that the timely support of the member’s adjustment program is considered essential 
to help limit the scale of economic dislocation and preserve the economic value of investors’ claims; 
and second, that the debtor engages its creditors in an early and constructive dialogue to help 
secure a reasonably timely and orderly agreement that would help the country regain external 
viability. 
Directors welcomed the opportunity to review the application of the criterion requiring a member to 
make good faith efforts to reach a collaborative agreement with its creditors, in light of the 
experience with bond restructurings since the introduction of the “good faith” criterion in 1999. They 
observed that this experience, although limited, suggests that notwithstanding the ability of debtors 
to reach restructuring agreements with their creditors, the restructuring processes have in some 


REVIEWS OF THE FUND’S SOVEREIGN ARREARS POLICIES AND PERIMETER 
 
INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND 11 
cases been protracted, reflecting the complexity of each individual case, as well as different 
perspectives and concerns among debtors and creditors. 
Directors concurred that the criteria set out earlier for the case of sovereign arrears may be too 
restrictive and could lead to instances in which creditors particularly bondholders could exercise a 
de facto veto over Fund lending. They also considered that the criteria set out earlier for the case of 
nonsovereign arrears are too restrictive, as they may not take adequate account of the possibility 
that, even when both creditors and debtors are willing to participate in collaborative negotiations, 
the process of debt renegotiation may be protracted. Directors noted that in the case of 
nonsovereign arrears to private creditors, it would be important to ensure that appropriate steps are 
taken to protect creditors’ interests. One suggestion to staff in this regard was to consider the 
establishment of an escrow account into which debt-service payments in local currency to 
nonresident creditors would be made. Against the background of variations in institutional 
arrangements and members’ capacity, however, Directors considered that it would be difficult to 
specify as a criterion for lending into nonsovereign arrears the implementation of specific 
mechanisms to protect creditors’ interests; instead, this judgment would need to be made on a 
case-by-case basis. 
3.      
[Directors] agreed concurred that the Fund’s policy on lending into arrears to private 
creditors continues to provide a useful tool enabling the Fund to support a member’s adjustment 
efforts before the member has reached agreement with its private creditors on a debt restructuring. 
Specifically, [Directors] agreed that Fund lending into sovereign arrears to private creditors 
(including bondholders and commercial banks) should continue to be on a case-by-case basis and 
only where: 
(i) 
prompt Fund support is considered essential for the successful implementation of the 
member’s adjustment program; and 
(ii) 
the member is pursuing appropriate policies and is making a good faith effort to reach a 
collaborative agreement with its creditors. 
4.      
[Directors] also agreed that Fund lending into non-sovereign arrears stemming from the 
imposition of exchange controls should continue to be on a case-by-case basis and only where: 
(i) 
prompt Fund support is considered essential for the successful implementation of the 
member’s adjustment program; and 


REVIEWS OF THE FUND’S SOVEREIGN ARREARS POLICIES AND PERIMETER 
 
12 
INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND 
(ii)  
the member is pursuing appropriate policies, the member is making a good faith effort 
to facilitate a collaborative agreement between private debtors and their creditors, and a 
good prospect exists for the removal of exchange controls.  
5.      
Against this backdrop, With respect to lending into sovereign arrears to private creditors, 
[Directors] agreed that greater clarity about the good faith dialogue between a debtor and its 
creditors during the restructuring process and enhanced debt transparency could help provide 
better guidance about the application of the lending into sovereign arrears policy LIA policy and, 
more generally, promote a better framework for the engagement of debtors and creditors in the 
restructuring of sovereign debt. Greater clarity concerning the framework for possible debt 
restructuring would strengthen the capacity of investors to assess recovery values under alternative 
scenarios, thereby facilitating the pricing of risk and improving the functioning of the capital 
markets. At the same time, however, [Directors] stressed the need for continued flexibility in 
applying the “good faith” criterion to accommodate the characteristics of each specific case; to 
avoid putting debtors at a disadvantage in the negotiations with creditors; and to avoid prolonged 
negotiations that could hamper the ability of the Fund to provide timely assistance. Indeed, any 
clarification of the “good faith” criterion should serve primarily to support the difficult judgments 
that will continue to have to be made in each case, and should be made operational in a manner 
that does not impair market discipline. 
6.      
[Directors] considered that the following principles would strike an appropriate balance 
between clarity and flexibility in guiding the dialogue between debtors and their private external 
creditors. 
First, when a member has reached a judgment that a restructuring of its debt is necessary, it 
should engage in an early dialogue with its creditors, which should continue until the 
restructuring is complete. 
Second, the member should share relevant, non-confidential information with all creditors on 
a timely basis, which would normally include: 
• 
an explanation of the economic problems and financial circumstances that justify a debt 
restructuring; 
• 
a briefing on the broad outlines of a viable economic program to address the underlying 
problems and its implications on the broad financial parameters shaping the envelope of 
resources available for restructured claims; and 
• 
the provision of a comprehensive picture of the outstanding debt stock and its terms, 
and the proposed treatment of all claims on the sovereign, including those of official 
bilateral creditors; the perimeter of claims subject to the envisaged debt restructuring; 
and the elaboration of the basis on which the debt restructuring would restore medium-


REVIEWS OF THE FUND’S SOVEREIGN ARREARS POLICIES AND PERIMETER 
 
INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND 13 
term debt sustainability, bearing in mind that not all categories of claims may need to be 
restructured. 
Third, the member should provide creditors with an early opportunity to give input on the 
design of restructuring strategies and the design of individual instruments. 
Fourth, any terms offered to the creditors by the member should be consistent with the 
parameters of the Fund-supported program. 
In discussing the various approaches that would best clarify the content of a member’s good faith 
efforts in the context of the lending into arrears policy, Directors emphasized that the modalities 
guiding the debtor’s dialogue with its creditors will need to be tailored to the specific features of 
each individual case. Most Directors considered that the third approach suggested in the staff paper 
for refining the good faith criterion provides an appropriate basis for the implementation of the 
Fund’s policy, while retaining sufficient flexibility to address the diversity of individual situations. 
7.      
Although, as a general premise, the form of the dialogue would continue to be left to the 
debtor and its creditors, under this approach a member in arrears would be expected to initiate a 
dialogue with its creditors consistent with the principles discussed above. In cases in which creditors 
have been able to form a representative committee on a timely basis, there would be an expectation 
that the member would enter into good faith negotiations with this committee, though the unique 
characteristics of each case would also be considered. 
This formal negotiating framework would include, inter alia, the sharing of confidential information 
needed to enable creditors to make informed decisions on the terms of a restructuring (subject to 
adequate safeguards), and the agreement to a standstill on litigation during the restructuring 
process by creditors represented in the committee.  
8.      
[Directors] stressed that, in going forward with the suggested approach, it would be crucial 
to strike the appropriate balance between the need to promote effective communication between a 
debtor and its creditors, and the need to retain flexibility to address the diversity of individual 
country member circumstances. 
9.      
[Directors] emphasized that in assessing whether the member is making good faith efforts to 
negotiate, judgments would continue to be required in a number of important areas. These include 
a consideration of the complexity of the restructuring case, the extent to which creditor committees 
are sufficiently representative, and whether a reasonable period has elapsed to allow for the 
formation of a representative committees. By the same token, in less complex cases, where creditors 
have not organized a representative committee within a reasonable period, or where for other 
reasons a formal negotiation framework would not be effective, the member would be expected to 


REVIEWS OF THE FUND’S SOVEREIGN ARREARS POLICIES AND PERIMETER 
 
14 
INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND 
engage creditors through a less structured dialogue. In the absence of such creditor committees, the 
member would be expected to engage creditors through a less structured dialogue.  
Directors discussed a variety of factors that would need to be considered in making the proposed 
framework operational. They emphasized that in assessing whether the member is making good 
faith efforts to negotiate, judgments would continue to be required in a number of important areas. 
These include a consideration of the complexity of the restructuring case, the extent to which a 
creditor committee is sufficiently representative, and whether a reasonable period has elapsed to 
allow for the formation of a representative committee. 
10.      [Directors] viewed the considerations laid out in the staff paper as useful inputs for helping 
to make such judgments, which would need to be made flexibly. They also noted that to the extent 
that negotiations become stalled because creditors are requesting terms that are inconsistent with 
the adjustment and financing parameters that have been established under a Fund-supported 
program, the Fund should retain the flexibility to continue to support members notwithstanding the 
lack of progress in negotiations with creditors.  
11.      [Directors] recognized that there may be circumstances where, following a default, the 
debtor enters into good faith discussions with creditors prior to the approval of a Fund 
arrangement. In these circumstances, creditors are likely to express views as to the appropriate 
dimensions of the program’s adjustment and financing parameters. While such input would be 
welcome, [Directors] emphasized that it would be inappropriate for private creditors to be given a 
veto over the design of the financing plan or the design of the adjustment program decisions on an 
adequate macroeconomic framework and the design of the financing plan or the adjustment 
program that could form the basis for the Fund’s lending into arrears will remain in the sole purview 
of the Fund. 
12.      [Directors] recognized that there may be emergency situations, such as in the aftermath of a 
natural disaster, where the extraordinary demands on the affected government are such that there is 
insufficient time for the debtor to undertake good faith efforts to reach agreement with its creditors. 
When a judgment has been made that such exceptional circumstances exist, the Fund may provide 
financing under the Rapid Credit Facility (RCF) or the Rapid Financing Instrument (RFI) despite 
arrears owed to private creditors. However, it would be expected that the Fund’s support provided 
to the debtor in such cases would help advance normalization of relations with private creditors and 
the resolution of arrears, so that the approval of any subsequent Fund arrangement for the member 
would again be subject to the LIA policy on lending into sovereign arrears to private creditors. 
In both cases, all purchases by the member would be subject, as provided at present, to financing 
reviews to bring developments at an early stage to the attention of the Executive Board, and to 
provide an opportunity for the Board to consider whether adequate safeguards remain in place for 
further use of the Fund’s resources in the member’s circumstances. Specifically, such reviews would 


REVIEWS OF THE FUND’S SOVEREIGN ARREARS POLICIES AND PERIMETER 
 
INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND 15 
provide a basis to assess whether the member’s adjustment efforts are considered to be 
undermined by developments in creditor-debtor relations. 
13.      All purchases/disbursements made while a member has outstanding arrears to private 
creditors will continue to be subject to financing reviews, which will provide an opportunity for the 
Fund to monitor relations between a debtor and its creditors, and for the Board to be kept informed 
about developments in this area at an early stage. Going forward, a number of Directors also 
underscored the importance of strengthening debtor-creditor dialogue in good times, as this will 
provide a good base for advancing the required negotiation framework in times of stress. 
14.      [Directors] noted that the policy outlined above supersedes all previous policies regarding 
lending into arrears to private creditors. 
Finally, Directors noted that it would be important to monitor experience with lending into arrears 
and to keep the policy outlined above under review, so as to ensure that it achieves its objectives. 
Codifying Existing Practice into a Policy in Preemptive Restructuring Cases 
15.      [Directors] agreed that the current practice in preemptive restructuring cases remains 
appropriate. To the extent that the Fund determines that a contribution from external private 
creditors in the form of a debt restructuring will be needed to restore debt sustainability, the 
restructuring should ideally be undertaken before the approval of the Fund arrangement. However, 
there may be circumstances under which more flexibility is warranted, so that the conclusion of the 
debt operation is contemplated at a later date, normally, by the first review under the arrangement. 
In such cases, the Fund may provide financing only if it has adequate assurances that such a 
restructuring will be successful. Such assurances are obtained by a judgment that a credible process 
for restructuring is underway and will result in sufficient creditor participation to restore debt 
sustainability and close financing gaps within the macroeconomic parameters of the program, 
taking into account official sector commitments. This judgment will depend on member-specific 
circumstances, but relevant considerations to inform such judgment may include the engagement of 
legal and financial advisors by the member, the launching of consultations with creditors, and the 
design of the debt restructuring strategy, including the terms of the new instruments and use of 
inducements for creditor participation. [Directors] emphasized that the member would be expected 
to share relevant information as defined under the LIA policy with all private creditors on a timely 
basis.  
Lending Into Arrears to Official Bilateral Creditors (LIOA) Policy 
16.      [Directors] agreed that the Fund’s non-toleration of arrears policy in non-Official Sector 
Involvement (OSI) cases and the policy on lending into sovereign arrears to official bilateral creditors 
in OSI cases continues to be appropriate and no amendments are needed.  


REVIEWS OF THE FUND’S SOVEREIGN ARREARS POLICIES AND PERIMETER 
 
16 
INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND 
17.      [Directors] concurred that new Fund-supported programs should continue to incorporate 
the assumption that old OSI-related claims would be restructured in line with the terms stipulated in 
the original Fund-supported program. 
International Financial Institutions 
18.      [Directors] agreed that application of the non-toleration of arrears policy with respect to 
multilaterals has worked well, but the policy needs to be updated  to clarify how the policy applies 
to new International Financial Institutions (IFIs) and to ensure that the special treatment multilateral 
creditors receive under the Fund’s arrears policy is not diluted. IFIs are defined as international 
financial institutions with at least two sovereign members (and no non-sovereign member). 
Therefore, [Directors] endorsed staff’s proposal in the paper along three main lines: 
• First, Fund financing in the face of arrears to the World Bank Group should continue to require an 
Agreed Plan between the debtor and the World Bank to clear the arrears over a defined period. 
Fund financing in the face of arrears to any other IFI should continue to require that a Credible 
Plan be in place in cases where a contribution from the official sector is not required in order to 
restore debt sustainability (non-OSI cases). In this context, a Credible Plan is a plan that is credible 
to the Fund, and the creditor’s concurrence is not required. 
• Second, in cases where a contribution from the official sector is required in order to restore debt 
sustainability (OSI cases): 
o The Fund should only provide financing when a Credible Plan is in place in cases in which 
arrears are owed to (i) regional financing arrangements and reserve currency union central 
banks that form part of the global financial safety net or IFIs with global membership as defined 
in the staff paper, or (ii) IFIs being excluded from the scope of debt restructuring by official 
bilateral creditors through a creditor committee based on a representative standing forum 
recognized under the LIOA policy—either in the case at hand or as expected based on previous 
cases if no decision has been made in the current case. 
[OR (alternative formulation, see introduction) 
Where the member is in arrears to an IFI, the Fund should judge whether a Credible Plan to 
resolve such arrears is required as a condition for lending. Factors informing the Fund’s judgment 
in this regard will include: (i) global, rather than regional, membership of the institution; (ii) 
whether the institution is a regional financing arrangement or a reserve currency union central 
bank that forms part of the global financial safety net; (iii) the Paris Club’s treatment of the 
institution, (iv) participation of the institution in the Heavily Indebted Poor Countries (HIPC) 
Initiative, and (v) whether the institution is being excluded from the scope of debt restructuring by 


REVIEWS OF THE FUND’S SOVEREIGN ARREARS POLICIES AND PERIMETER 
 
INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND 17 
official bilateral creditors through a creditor committee based on a representative standing forum 
recognized under the LIOA policy in the case at hand.] 
o When arrears are owed to an IFI that does not fall under the previous bullet above, [Directors] 
agreed that the Fund’s policy on lending into official bilateral arrears should be expanded to 
apply to these cases mutatis mutandis. In these cases, the Fund policy will also provide for the 
flexibility in extraordinary circumstances for emergency financing cases consistent with the 
Fund’s policy on lending into official bilateral creditors arrears. 
[Directors] agreed that in the latter cases, the Fund would consider lending into arrears owed to an 
IFI creditor only in circumscribed circumstances where all the following criteria are satisfied: 
• 
Prompt financial support from the Fund is considered essential, and the member is pursuing 
appropriate policies; 
• 
The debtor is making good faith efforts to reach agreement with the IFI creditor on a 
contribution consistent with the parameters of the Fund-supported program—i.e., that the 
absence of an agreement is due to the unwillingness of the creditor to provide such a 
contribution; and 
• 
The decision to provide financing despite the arrears would not have an undue negative effect 
on the Fund’s ability to mobilize official financing packages in future cases. 
19.      In assessing whether a debtor is acting in good faith, the Fund will consider, inter alia, 
whether the debtor has approached the IFI creditor to which it owes arrears bilaterally; has offered 
to engage in substantive dialogue with the IFI creditor and has sought a collaborative process with 
the creditor to reach agreement; has provided the creditor relevant information on a timely basis 
consistent with the Fund’s policy on confidentiality of information; and has offered the creditor 
terms that are consistent with the parameters of the Fund-supported program. If the debtor 
requested terms from an IFI creditor that would result in financing contributions that exceeded the 
requirements of the program it would generally not indicate good faith.  
20.      In assessing whether the Fund’s decision to lend into arrears owed to an IFI creditor would 
have an undue negative effect on the Fund’s ability to mobilize official financing packages in future 
cases, the Fund will consider the signal that such a decision would send to IFI creditors, or to official 
creditors more generally, as a group, given the specific circumstances of the case.  
21.      An IFI creditor may choose to consent to Fund financing notwithstanding arrears owed to it. 
Such consent could be conveyed to the Fund either through an Executive Director designated by the 
IFI or an authorized executive of the IFI to the Managing Director. In such cases, the Executive Board 
would not need to make a judgment as to whether the three criteria above are satisfied. The Fund 


REVIEWS OF THE FUND’S SOVEREIGN ARREARS POLICIES AND PERIMETER 
 
18 
INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND 
would nevertheless continue to encourage the parties to come to an agreement during the 
program, since the regularization of arrears is an objective of any Fund-supported program and 
important for the functioning of the international financial system at large. 
22.      So long as arrears to IFI creditors remain outstanding, purchases or disbursements will be 
subject to a financing assurances review where the Executive Board will verify that all three criteria 
are satisfied and the policy continues to be met for the further use of the Fund’s resources in the 
member’s circumstances.  
Perimeter 
23.      For the purpose of determining the application of the Fund’s arrears, financing assurances 
and debt sustainability policies, [Directors] endorsed the approach proposed by staff.  
24.      Specifically, Direct Bilateral Claims will continue to be defined as those claims that are (a) 
held by a government, or an agency acting on behalf of a government; and (b) originate from an 
underlying transaction where the creditor government, or an agency acting on behalf of the 
government, provided or guaranteed financing to the debtor member.  
25.      In operationalizing this definition, [Directors] supported using the creditor member’s 
budgetary process to determine which entities form part of the creditor government. For entities 
that fall outside the government, a case-by-case analysis, taking into account the totality of the 
circumstances, would continue to be required to determine whether the entity is “acting on behalf 
of the government.” [Directors] recognized that secondary market purchases of claims by official 
bilateral creditors would not qualify as Direct Bilateral Claims, as they would not directly extend 
financing to the debtor member. 
26.      [Directors] endorsed two amendments to the classification of official claims: First, to the 
extent that the IFI purchases securities in the secondary market as part of the global financial safety 
net, such claims can be treated as claims subject to the Fund’s arrears policies as applicable to IFIs; 
however, the Fund would rely on the IFI’s own representation in this regard. Second, any Direct 
Bilateral Claims or claims held by IFIs that are contractually part of a pooled voting mechanism with 
private creditors shall be subject to the LIA policy. 
Effectiveness 
27.      The above amendments and new policies will enter into effect immediately and will apply to 
all future purchases and disbursements (including under existing arrangements), with respect to 
existing and future arrears. 
Reviews of the Arrears Policies   
28.      Finally, [Directors] agreed that the Fund’s arrears policies should be reviewed on an as 
needed basis. 


 
 
 
REVIEWS OF THE FUND'S SOVEREIGN ARREARS POLICIES 
AND PERIMETER—SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
INTRODUCTION ____________________________________________________________________________ 
2 
 
ANNEXES 
I. Consolidated Executive Board Understanding of the Fund’s Arrears Policies and 
Perimeter____________________________________________________________________________________ 
3 
II. Comparison Against Supplement 1 _____________________________________________________ 12 
III. Comparison Against Relevant Fund Policies In Effect Before May 4, 2022 _____________ 21 
 
Approved By 
Yan Liu, Jeromin 
Zettelmeyer, and 
Miguel Savastano  
Prepared by an inter-departmental team led by Wolfgang 
Bergthaler (LEG). The team comprised of Julianne Ams (LEG 
lead); Peter Breuer (MCM lead), Thordur Jonasson (all MCM); 
and Marcos Chamon (SPR lead), Tom Best (SPR coordinator), 
Atif Saeed Chaudry (all SPR). Sebastian Grund and Clara 
Thiemann (all LEG), and Maximilien Kaffo, Geoffrey Keim, and 
Vivian Malta (all SPR) contributed to the paper. The team 
worked under the overall guidance provided by Tobias Adrian, 
Ceyla Pazarbasioglu, and Rhoda Weeks-Brown. 
 
 
CONTENTS 
May 12, 2022 
 
 


REVIEWS OF THE FUND’S SOVEREIGN ARREARS POLICIES AND PERIMETER 
 
2 
INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND 
INTRODUCTION 
1.      
Staff attaches to this supplement a clean (Annex 1) and redlined (Annexes 2 and 3) 
version of the consolidated Executive Board understandings of the Fund’s arrears policies and 
perimeter. These understandings have been updated to reflect the May 4, 2022 Executive Board 
meeting on and to include the full version of the Lending Into Official Arrears policy, which had 
previously been excluded. Annex 2 shows the differences from the version circulated in Supplement 
1, and Annex 3 shows the differences between the proposals and Fund policies in effect before the 
May 4, 2022 Executive Board meeting (see Box 1 of the main paper).  
 


REVIEWS OF THE FUND’S SOVEREIGN ARREARS POLICIES AND PERIMETER 
 
INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND 3 
Annex I. Consolidated Executive Board Understanding of the 
Fund’s Arrears Policies and Perimeter 
Introduction  
1.      
Directors welcomed the comprehensive review of the Fund’s policy on lending into arrears 
to private creditors, the Fund’s policy on lending into sovereign arrears to official bilateral creditors, 
and the Fund’s non-toleration of sovereign arrears policy to official bilateral and multilateral 
creditors. 
2.      
Directors agreed that overall, the Fund’s arrears policies have worked well in enabling the 
Fund to proceed with providing financing in cases of arrears. At the same time, they noted that 
practice in sovereign debt restructuring and the creditor landscape have evolved over the last 20 
years and certain updates are in order. 
Lending Into Arrears (LIA) Policy 
3.      
Directors concurred that the Fund’s policy on lending into arrears to private creditors 
continues to provide a useful tool enabling the Fund to support a member’s adjustment efforts 
before the member has reached agreement with its private creditors on a debt restructuring. 
Specifically, Directors agreed that Fund lending into sovereign arrears to private creditors should 
continue to be on a case-by-case basis and only where: 
(i) 
prompt Fund support is considered essential for the successful implementation of the 
member’s adjustment program; and 
(ii) 
the member is pursuing appropriate policies and is making a good faith effort to reach a 
collaborative agreement with its creditors. 
4.      
Directors also agreed that Fund lending into non-sovereign arrears stemming from the 
imposition of exchange controls should continue to be on a case-by-case basis and only where: 
(i) 
prompt Fund support is considered essential for the successful implementation of the 
member’s adjustment program; and 
(ii) 
the member is pursuing appropriate policies, the member is making a good faith effort 
to facilitate a collaborative agreement between private debtors and their creditors, and a 
good prospect exists for the removal of exchange controls.  
5.      
With respect to lending into sovereign arrears to private creditors, Directors agreed that 
greater clarity about the good faith dialogue between a debtor and its creditors during the 
restructuring process and enhanced debt transparency could help provide better guidance about 


REVIEWS OF THE FUND’S SOVEREIGN ARREARS POLICIES AND PERIMETER 
 
4 
INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND 
the application of the Fund’s LIA policy and, more generally, promote a better framework for the 
engagement of debtors and creditors in the restructuring of sovereign debt. Greater clarity 
concerning the framework for possible debt restructuring would strengthen the capacity of investors 
to assess recovery values under alternative scenarios, thereby facilitating the pricing of risk and 
improving the functioning of the capital markets. At the same time, however, Directors stressed the 
need for continued flexibility in applying the “good faith” criterion to accommodate the 
characteristics of each specific case to avoid putting debtors at a disadvantage in the negotiations 
with creditors; and to avoid prolonged negotiations that could hamper the ability of the Fund to 
provide timely assistance. Indeed, any clarification of the “good faith” criterion should serve 
primarily to support the difficult judgments that will continue to have to be made in each case, and 
should be made operational in a manner that does not impair market discipline. 
6.      
Directors considered that the following principles would strike an appropriate balance 
between clarity and flexibility in guiding the dialogue between debtors and their private external 
creditors. 
First, when a member has reached a judgment that a restructuring of its debt is necessary, it 
should engage in an early dialogue with its creditors, which should continue until the 
restructuring is complete. 
Second, the member should share relevant information with all creditors on a timely basis, 
which would generally be aligned with what the member would be required to share under 
the Debt Limits Policy and normally include: 
• 
an explanation of the economic problems and financial circumstances that justify a debt 
restructuring; 
• 
a briefing on the broad outlines of a viable economic program to address the underlying 
problems and its implications on the broad financial parameters shaping the envelope of 
resources available for restructured claims; and 
• 
the provision of a comprehensive picture of the outstanding debt stock and its terms, 
and the proposed treatment of all claims on the sovereign, including those of official 
bilateral creditors; the perimeter of claims subject to the envisaged debt restructuring; 
and the elaboration of the basis on which the debt restructuring would restore medium-
term debt sustainability, bearing in mind that not all categories of claims may need to be 
restructured. 
Third, the member should provide creditors with an early opportunity to give input on the 
design of restructuring strategies and the design of individual instruments. 


REVIEWS OF THE FUND’S SOVEREIGN ARREARS POLICIES AND PERIMETER 
 
INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND 5 
Fourth, any terms offered to the creditors by the member should be consistent with the 
parameters of the Fund-supported program. 
7.      
Although, as a general premise, the form of the dialogue would continue to be left to the 
debtor and its creditors, under this approach a member in arrears would be expected to initiate a 
dialogue with its creditors consistent with the principles discussed above. In cases in which creditors 
have been able to form a representative committee on a timely basis, there would be an expectation 
that the member would enter into good faith negotiations with this committee, though the unique 
characteristics of each case would also be considered. 
8.      
Directors stressed that, in going forward with the suggested approach, it would be crucial to 
strike the appropriate balance between the need to promote effective communication between a 
debtor and its creditors, and the need to retain flexibility to address the diversity of individual 
member circumstances. 
9.      
Directors emphasized that in assessing whether the member is making good faith efforts to 
negotiate, judgments would continue to be required in a number of important areas. These include 
a consideration of the extent to which creditor committees are sufficiently representative, and 
whether a reasonable period has elapsed to allow for the formation of representative committees. In 
the absence of such creditor committees, the member would be expected to engage creditors 
through a less structured dialogue.  
10.      Directors viewed the considerations laid out in the staff paper as useful inputs for helping to 
make such judgments, which would need to be made flexibly. They also noted that to the extent 
that negotiations become stalled because creditors are requesting terms that are inconsistent with 
the adjustment and financing parameters that have been established under a Fund-supported 
program, the Fund should retain the flexibility to continue to support members notwithstanding the 
lack of progress in negotiations with creditors.  
11.      Directors recognized that there may be circumstances where, following a default, the debtor 
enters into good faith discussions with creditors prior to the approval of a Fund arrangement. In 
these circumstances, creditors are likely to express views as to the appropriate dimensions of the 
program’s adjustment and financing parameters. While such input would be welcome, Directors 
emphasized that decisions on an adequate macroeconomic framework and the design of the 
financing plan or the adjustment program that could form the basis for the Fund’s lending into 
arrears will remain in the sole purview of the Fund. 
12.      Directors recognized that there may be emergency situations, such as in the aftermath of a 
natural disaster, where the extraordinary demands on the affected government are such that there is 
insufficient time for the debtor to undertake good faith efforts to reach agreement with its creditors. 
When a judgment has been made that such exceptional circumstances exist, the Fund may provide 
financing under the Rapid Credit Facility (RCF) or the Rapid Financing Instrument (RFI) despite 
arrears owed to private creditors. However, it would be expected that the Fund’s support provided 
to the debtor in such cases would help advance normalization of relations with private creditors and 


REVIEWS OF THE FUND’S SOVEREIGN ARREARS POLICIES AND PERIMETER 
 
6 
INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND 
the resolution of arrears, so that the approval of any subsequent Fund arrangement for the member 
would again be subject to the LIA policy on lending into sovereign arrears to private creditors. 
13.      All purchases and disbursements made while a member has outstanding arrears to private 
creditors will continue to be subject to financing reviews, which will provide an opportunity for the 
Fund to monitor relations between a debtor and its creditors, and for the Board to be kept informed 
about developments in this area at an early stage. 
14.      The policy outlined above supersedes all previous policies regarding lending into arrears to 
private creditors. 
Codifying Existing Practice into a Policy in Preemptive Restructuring Cases 
15.      Directors agreed that the current practice in preemptive restructuring cases remains 
appropriate. To the extent that the Fund determines that a contribution from external private 
creditors in the form of a debt restructuring will be needed to restore debt sustainability, the 
restructuring should ideally be undertaken before the approval of the Fund arrangement. However, 
there may be circumstances under which more flexibility is warranted, so that the conclusion of the 
debt operation is contemplated at a later date, normally, by the first review under the arrangement. 
In such cases, the Fund may provide financing only if it has adequate assurances that such a 
restructuring will be successful. Such assurances are obtained by a judgment that a credible process 
for restructuring is underway and will result in sufficient creditor participation to restore debt 
sustainability and close financing gaps within the macroeconomic parameters of the program, 
taking into account official sector commitments. This judgment will depend on member-specific 
circumstances, but relevant considerations to inform such judgment may include the engagement of 
legal and financial advisors by the member, the launching of consultations with creditors, and the 
design of the debt restructuring strategy, including the terms of the new instruments and use of 
inducements for creditor participation. Directors welcomed the recommendation to add an 
expectation that the member would be expected to share relevant information as defined under the 
LIA policy with all private creditors on a timely basis.  
Lending Into Arrears to Official Bilateral Creditors (LIOA) Policy 
16.      Directors broadly agreed that the Fund’s non-toleration of arrears policy in non-(Official 
Sector Involvement) OSI cases and the policy on lending into sovereign arrears to official bilateral 
creditors in OSI cases continues to be appropriate and no amendments are needed. Most Directors 
agreed that more experience is needed with the Common Framework (CF) and welcomed staff’s 
plan to closely monitor the CF’s evolution and revert to the Board on whether it emerges as a new 
representative standing forum. 
17.      The LIOA policy is as follows: 
If an agreement is reached through the Paris Club that is adequately representative, the Fund 
would rely on its current practices—i.e., arrears would be considered eliminated (for purposes 


REVIEWS OF THE FUND’S SOVEREIGN ARREARS POLICIES AND PERIMETER 
 
INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND 7 
of the application of this policy) for both participating and non-participating creditors when 
financing assurances are received from the Paris Club in anticipation of an Agreed Minute. 
Should another representative standing forum emerge, the Fund would be open to engaging 
with such a forum. 
In circumstances where an adequately representative agreement has not been reached 
through the Paris Club, the Fund would consider lending into arrears owed to an official 
bilateral creditor only in circumscribed circumstances where all the following criteria are 
satisfied: 
• 
Prompt financial support from the Fund is considered essential, and the member is 
pursuing appropriate policies; 
• 
The debtor is making good faith efforts to reach agreement with the creditor on a 
contribution consistent with the parameters of the Fund-supported program—i.e., 
that the absence of an agreement is due to the unwillingness of the creditor to 
provide such a contribution; and 
• 
The decision to provide financing despite the arrears would not have an undue 
negative effect on the Fund’s ability to mobilize official financing packages in future 
cases.  
In applying the above criteria, the Fund will need to exercise judgment based on case-specific 
circumstances. In exercising this judgment, the Board will be guided by the following 
considerations: 
First, an agreement will be considered “adequately representative” when it provides a majority 
of the total financing contributions required from official bilateral creditors over the program 
period. “Contribution” here comprises, and is limited to, debt relief and new financing (e.g. 
loans, bond financing, guarantees, and grants). 
Second, in assessing whether a debtor is acting in good faith, the Fund will consider, inter alia, 
whether the debtor has approached the creditor to which it owes arrears either bilaterally or 
through a relevant grouping of official bilateral creditors, recognizing that the latter may take 
several forms, including ad hoc creditor committees; has offered to engage in substantive 
dialogue with the creditor and has sought a collaborative process with the creditor to reach 
agreement; has provided the creditor relevant information on a timely basis consistent with 
the Fund’s policy on confidentiality of information; and has offered the creditor terms that are 
consistent with the parameters of the Fund-supported program. If the debtor requested terms 
from an official bilateral creditor that would result in financing contributions that exceeded the 
requirements of the program it would generally not indicate good faith. Finally, an assessment 
of the second criterion would also take into consideration the extent to which a creditor is 
being asked to make a contribution that is disproportionate relative to other official bilateral 
creditors. 


REVIEWS OF THE FUND’S SOVEREIGN ARREARS POLICIES AND PERIMETER 
 
8 
INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND 
Third, in assessing whether the Fund’s decision to lend into arrears owed to an official bilateral 
creditor would have an undue negative effect on the Fund’s ability to mobilize official 
financing packages in future cases, the Fund will consider the signal that such a decision 
would send to official bilateral creditors as a group, given the specific circumstances of the 
case. In particular, this criterion would normally not be satisfied where the creditor or group of 
creditors that has not reached agreement with the debtor accounts for an adequately 
representative share, i.e., a majority, of total financing contributions required from official 
bilateral creditors over the program period, as defined above. Separately, an assessment of 
whether the third criterion is satisfied would take into consideration the creditor’s track record 
of providing contributions in past debt restructurings under Fund-supported programs, even if 
the creditor does not account for an adequately representative share of total financing 
contributions.  
An official bilateral creditor may choose to consent to Fund financing notwithstanding arrears 
owed to it. In such cases, the Board would not need to make a judgment as to whether the 
three criteria above are satisfied. The Fund would nevertheless continue to encourage the 
parties to come to an agreement during the program, since the regularization of arrears is an 
objective of any Fund-supported program and important for the functioning of the 
international financial system at large. 
There may be emergency situations, such as in the aftermath of a natural disaster, where the 
extraordinary demands on the affected government are such that there is insufficient time for 
the debtor to undertake good faith efforts to reach agreement with its creditors. When a 
judgment has been made that such exceptional circumstances exist, the Fund may provide 
financing under the Rapid Credit Facility (RCF) or the Rapid Financing Instrument (RFI) despite 
arrears owed to official bilateral creditors and without assessing whether the three criteria 
above have been satisfied or obtaining the creditor’s consent. However, it would be expected 
that the Fund’s support provided to the debtor in such cases would help advance 
normalization of relations with official bilateral creditors and the resolution of arrears, so that 
the approval of any subsequent Fund arrangement for the member would again be subject to 
all three criteria set out above.  
So long as unresolved arrears owed to official bilateral creditors are outstanding, every 
purchase or disbursement made available after the approval of the arrangement will be 
subject to a financing assurances review by the Board and verification that all three criteria are 
satisfied to determine whether this policy continues to be met for the further use of the Fund’s 
resources in the member’s circumstances. 
18.      Directors concurred that new Fund-supported programs should continue to incorporate the 
assumption that old OSI-related claims would be restructured in line with the terms stipulated in the 
original Fund-supported program. 
 


REVIEWS OF THE FUND’S SOVEREIGN ARREARS POLICIES AND PERIMETER 
 
INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND 9 
International Financial Institutions 
19.      Directors agreed that application of the non-toleration of arrears policy with respect to 
multilaterals has worked well, but the policy needs to be updated to clarify how the policy applies to 
new International Financial Institutions (IFIs) and to ensure that the special treatment multilateral 
creditors receive under the Fund’s arrears policy is not diluted. IFIs are defined as international 
financial institutions with at least two sovereign members (and no non-sovereign member). While 
many Directors expressed a preference for staff’s original proposal on this issue (in SM/22/47), 
which would reduce scope for judgement in this area and provide for more clarity, a number of 
Directors could not support staff’s original proposal. In the end, most Directors went along with the 
alternative approach set out in Supplement 1 in light of staff’s expectation that implementation of 
the approach described in Supplement 1 would not fundamentally differ from that in the original 
proposal. Therefore, Directors endorsed the following: 
First, Fund financing in the face of arrears to the World Bank Group should continue to require 
an Agreed Plan between the debtor and the World Bank to clear the arrears over a defined 
period. Fund financing in the face of arrears to any other IFI should continue to require that a 
Credible Plan be in place in cases where a contribution from the official sector is not required in 
order to restore debt sustainability (non-OSI cases). In this context, a Credible Plan is a plan that 
is credible to the Fund, and the creditor’s concurrence is not required. 
Second, in cases where a contribution from the official sector is required in order to restore debt 
sustainability (OSI cases): 
• 
Where the member is in arrears to an IFI, the Fund should judge whether a Credible Plan to 
resolve such arrears is required as a condition for lending. Factors informing the Fund’s 
judgment in this regard will include: (i) global, rather than regional, membership of the 
institution; (ii) whether the institution is a regional financing arrangement or a reserve 
currency union central bank that forms part of the global financial safety net; (iii) the Paris 
Club’s treatment of the institution, (iv) participation of the institution in the Heavily Indebted 
Poor Countries (HIPC) Initiative, and (v) whether the institution is being excluded from the 
scope of debt restructuring by official bilateral creditors through a creditor committee based 
on a representative standing forum recognized under the LIOA policy in the case at hand. 
• 
When arrears are owed to an IFI that does not fall under the previous bullet above, Directors 
agreed that the LIOA policy should be expanded to apply to these cases mutatis mutandis. 
In these cases, the Fund policy will also provide for the flexibility in extraordinary 
circumstances for emergency financing cases consistent with the LIOA policy. 
In the latter cases, the Fund would consider lending into arrears owed to an IFI creditor only in 
circumscribed circumstances where all the following criteria are satisfied: 
• 
Prompt financial support from the Fund is considered essential, and the member is pursuing 
appropriate policies; 


REVIEWS OF THE FUND’S SOVEREIGN ARREARS POLICIES AND PERIMETER 
 
10 
INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND 
• 
The debtor is making good faith efforts to reach agreement with the IFI creditor on a 
contribution consistent with the parameters of the Fund-supported program—i.e., that the 
absence of an agreement is due to the unwillingness of the creditor to provide such a 
contribution; and 
• 
The decision to provide financing despite the arrears would not have an undue negative 
effect on the Fund’s ability to mobilize official financing packages in future cases. 
20.      In assessing whether a debtor is acting in good faith, the Fund will consider, inter alia, 
whether the debtor has approached the IFI creditor to which it owes arrears bilaterally; has offered 
to engage in substantive dialogue with the IFI creditor and has sought a collaborative process with 
the creditor to reach agreement; has provided the creditor relevant information on a timely basis 
consistent with the Fund’s policy on confidentiality of information; and has offered the creditor 
terms that are consistent with the parameters of the Fund-supported program. If the debtor 
requested terms from an IFI creditor that would result in financing contributions that exceeded the 
requirements of the program it would generally not indicate good faith.  
21.      In assessing whether the Fund’s decision to lend into arrears owed to an IFI creditor would 
have an undue negative effect on the Fund’s ability to mobilize official financing packages in future 
cases, the Fund will consider the signal that such a decision would send to IFI creditors, or to official 
creditors more generally, as a group, given the specific circumstances of the case.  
22.      An IFI creditor may choose to consent to Fund financing notwithstanding arrears owed to it. 
Such consent could be conveyed to the Fund either through an Executive Director designated by the 
IFI or an authorized executive of the IFI to the Managing Director. In such cases, the Executive Board 
would not need to make a judgment as to whether the three criteria above are satisfied. The Fund 
would nevertheless continue to encourage the parties to come to an agreement during the 
program, since the regularization of arrears is an objective of any Fund-supported program and 
important for the functioning of the international financial system at large. 
23.      So long as arrears to IFI creditors remain outstanding, purchases or disbursements will be 
subject to a financing assurances review where the Executive Board will verify that all three criteria 
are satisfied and the policy continues to be met for the further use of the Fund’s resources in the 
member’s circumstances.  
Perimeter 
24.      For the purpose of determining the application of the Fund’s arrears, financing assurances 
and debt sustainability policies, Directors broadly agreed with the approach proposed by staff.  
25.      Specifically, Direct Bilateral Claims will continue to be defined as those claims that are (a) 
held by a government, or an agency acting on behalf of a government; and (b) originate from an 
underlying transaction where the creditor government, or an agency acting on behalf of the 
government, provided or guaranteed financing to the debtor member.  


REVIEWS OF THE FUND’S SOVEREIGN ARREARS POLICIES AND PERIMETER 
 
INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND 11 
26.      In operationalizing this definition, Directors supported using the creditor member’s 
budgetary process to determine which entities form part of the creditor government. For entities 
that fall outside the government, a case-by-case analysis, taking into account the totality of the 
circumstances, would continue to be required to determine whether the entity is “acting on behalf 
of the government.” Directors recognized that secondary market purchases of claims by official 
bilateral creditors would not qualify as Direct Bilateral Claims, as they would not directly extend 
financing to the debtor member. 
27.      Directors endorsed two amendments to the classification of official claims: First, to the 
extent that the IFI purchases securities in the secondary market as part of the global financial safety 
net, such claims can be treated as claims subject to the Fund’s arrears policies as applicable to IFIs; 
however, the Fund would rely on the IFI’s own representation in this regard. Second, any Direct 
Bilateral Claims or claims held by IFIs that are contractually part of a pooled voting mechanism with 
private creditors shall be subject to the LIA policy. 
Effectiveness 
28.      The above amendments and new policies will enter into effect immediately and will apply to 
all future purchases and disbursements (including under existing arrangements), with respect to 
existing and future arrears. 
Reviews of the Arrears Policies   
29.      Directors agreed that the Fund’s arrears policies should be reviewed on an as needed basis. 


REVIEWS OF THE FUND’S SOVEREIGN ARREARS POLICIES AND PERIMETER 
 
12 
INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND 
Annex II. Comparison Against Supplement 1 
Introduction  
1.      
[Directors] welcomed the comprehensive review of the Fund’s policy on lending into arrears 
to private creditors, the Fund’s policy on lending into sovereign arrears to official bilateral 
creditors, and the Fund’s non-toleration of sovereign arrears policy to official bilateral and 
multilateral creditors. 
2.      
[Directors] agreed that overall, the Fund’s arrears policies have worked well in enabling the 
Fund to proceed with providing financing in cases of arrears. At the same time, [Directors]they noted 
that practice in sovereign debt restructuring and the creditor landscape have evolved over the last 
20 years and certain amendments, refinements, and updates are in order. 
Lending Into Arrears (LIA) Policy 
3.      
[Directors] concurred that the Fund’s policy on lending into arrears to private creditors 
continues to provide a useful tool enabling the Fund to support a member’s adjustment efforts 
before the member has reached agreement with its private creditors on a debt restructuring. 
Specifically, [Directors] agreed that Fund lending into sovereign arrears to private creditors should 
continue to be on a case-by-case basis and only where: 
(iii) 
prompt Fund support is considered essential for the successful implementation of the 
member’s adjustment program; and 
(iv) 
the member is pursuing appropriate policies and is making a good faith effort to reach a 
collaborative agreement with its creditors. 
4.      
[Directors] also agreed that Fund lending into non-sovereign arrears stemming from the 
imposition of exchange controls should continue to be on a case-by-case basis and only where: 
(iii) 
prompt Fund support is considered essential for the successful implementation of the 
member’s adjustment program; and 
(iv) 
the member is pursuing appropriate policies, the member is making a good faith effort 
to facilitate a collaborative agreement between private debtors and their creditors, and a 
good prospect exists for the removal of exchange controls.  
5.      
With respect to lending into sovereign arrears to private creditors, Directors agreed that 
greater clarity about the good faith dialogue between a debtor and its creditors during the 
restructuring process and enhanced debt transparency could help provide better guidance about 
the application of the Fund’s LIA policy and, more generally, promote a better framework for the 
engagement of debtors and creditors in the restructuring of sovereign debt. Greater clarity 


REVIEWS OF THE FUND’S SOVEREIGN ARREARS POLICIES AND PERIMETER 
 
INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND 13 
concerning the framework for possible debt restructuring would strengthen the capacity of investors 
to assess recovery values under alternative scenarios, thereby facilitating the pricing of risk and 
improving the functioning of the capital markets. At the same time, however, [Directors] stressed the 
need for continued flexibility in applying the “good faith” criterion to accommodate the 
characteristics of each specific case to avoid putting debtors at a disadvantage in the negotiations 
with creditors; and to avoid prolonged negotiations that could hamper the ability of the Fund to 
provide timely assistance. Indeed, any clarification of the “good faith” criterion should serve 
primarily to support the difficult judgments that will continue to have to be made in each case, and 
should be made operational in a manner that does not impair market discipline. 
6.      
[Directors] considered that the following principles would strike an appropriate balance 
between clarity and flexibility in guiding the dialogue between debtors and their private external 
creditors. 
First, when a member has reached a judgment that a restructuring of its debt is necessary, it 
should engage in an early dialogue with its creditors, which should continue until the 
restructuring is complete. 
Second, the member should share relevant information with all creditors on a timely basis, 
which would generally be aligned with what the member would be required to share under 
the Debt Limits Policy and normally include: 
• 
an explanation of the economic problems and financial circumstances that justify a 
debt restructuring; 
• 
a briefing on the broad outlines of a viable economic program to address the 
underlying problems and its implications on the broad financial parameters shaping 
the envelope of resources available for restructured claims; and 
• 
the provision of a comprehensive picture of the outstanding debt stock and its terms, 
and the proposed treatment of all claims on the sovereign, including those of official 
bilateral creditors; the perimeter of claims subject to the envisaged debt restructuring; 
and the elaboration of the basis on which the debt restructuring would restore 
medium-term debt sustainability, bearing in mind that not all categories of claims 
may need to be restructured. 
Third, the member should provide creditors with an early opportunity to give input on the 
design of restructuring strategies and the design of individual instruments. 
Fourth, any terms offered to the creditors by the member should be consistent with the 
parameters of the Fund-supported program. 


REVIEWS OF THE FUND’S SOVEREIGN ARREARS POLICIES AND PERIMETER 
 
14 
INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND 
7.      
Although, as a general premise, the form of the dialogue would continue to be left to the 
debtor and its creditors, under this approach a member in arrears would be expected to initiate a 
dialogue with its creditors consistent with the principles discussed above. In cases in which creditors 
have been able to form a representative committee on a timely basis, there would be an expectation 
that the member would enter into good faith negotiations with this committee, though the unique 
characteristics of each case would also be considered. 
8.      
[Directors] stressed that, in going forward with the suggested approach, it would be crucial 
to strike the appropriate balance between the need to promote effective communication between a 
debtor and its creditors, and the need to retain flexibility to address the diversity of individual 
member circumstances. 
9.      
[Directors] emphasized that in assessing whether the member is making good faith efforts to 
negotiate, judgments would continue to be required in a number of important areas. These include 
a consideration of the extent to which creditor committees are sufficiently representative, and 
whether a reasonable period has elapsed to allow for the formation of representative committees. In 
the absence of such creditor committees, the member would be expected to engage creditors 
through a less structured dialogue.  
10.      [Directors] viewed the considerations laid out in the staff paper as useful inputs for helping 
to make such judgments, which would need to be made flexibly. They also noted that to the extent 
that negotiations become stalled because creditors are requesting terms that are inconsistent with 
the adjustment and financing parameters that have been established under a Fund-supported 
program, the Fund should retain the flexibility to continue to support members notwithstanding the 
lack of progress in negotiations with creditors.  
11.      [Directors] recognized that there may be circumstances where, following a default, the 
debtor enters into good faith discussions with creditors prior to the approval of a Fund 
arrangement. In these circumstances, creditors are likely to express views as to the appropriate 
dimensions of the program’s adjustment and financing parameters. While such input would be 
welcome, [Directors] emphasized that decisions on an adequate macroeconomic framework and the 
design of the financing plan or the adjustment program that could form the basis for the Fund’s 
lending into arrears will remain in the sole purview of the Fund. 
12.      [Directors] recognized that there may be emergency situations, such as in the aftermath of a 
natural disaster, where the extraordinary demands on the affected government are such that there is 
insufficient time for the debtor to undertake good faith efforts to reach agreement with its creditors. 
When a judgment has been made that such exceptional circumstances exist, the Fund may provide 
financing under the Rapid Credit Facility (RCF) or the Rapid Financing Instrument (RFI) despite 
arrears owed to private creditors. However, it would be expected that the Fund’s support provided 
to the debtor in such cases would help advance normalization of relations with private creditors and 
the resolution of arrears, so that the approval of any subsequent Fund arrangement for the member 
would again be subject to the LIA policy on lending into sovereign arrears to private creditors. 


REVIEWS OF THE FUND’S SOVEREIGN ARREARS POLICIES AND PERIMETER 
 
INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND 15 
13.      All purchases/ and disbursements made while a member has outstanding arrears to private 
creditors will continue to be subject to financing reviews, which will provide an opportunity for the 
Fund to monitor relations between a debtor and its creditors, and for the Board to be kept informed 
about developments in this area at an early stage. 
14.      [Directors] noted that tThe policy outlined above supersedes all previous policies regarding 
lending into arrears to private creditors. 
Codifying Existing Practice into a Policy in Preemptive Restructuring Cases 
15.      [Directors] agreed that the current practice in preemptive restructuring cases remains 
appropriate. To the extent that the Fund determines that a contribution from external private 
creditors in the form of a debt restructuring will be needed to restore debt sustainability, the 
restructuring should ideally be undertaken before the approval of the Fund arrangement. However, 
there may be circumstances under which more flexibility is warranted, so that the conclusion of the 
debt operation is contemplated at a later date, normally, by the first review under the arrangement. 
In such cases, the Fund may provide financing only if it has adequate assurances that such a 
restructuring will be successful. Such assurances are obtained by a judgment that a credible process 
for restructuring is underway and will result in sufficient creditor participation to restore debt 
sustainability and close financing gaps within the macroeconomic parameters of the program, 
taking into account official sector commitments. This judgment will depend on member-specific 
circumstances, but relevant considerations to inform such judgment may include the engagement of 
legal and financial advisors by the member, the launching of consultations with creditors, and the 
design of the debt restructuring strategy, including the terms of the new instruments and use of 
inducements for creditor participation. [Directors] welcomed the recommendation to add an 
expectation emphasized that the member would be expected to share relevant information as 
defined under the LIA policy with all private creditors on a timely basis.  
Lending Into Arrears to Official Bilateral Creditors (LIOA) Policy 
16.      [Directors] broadly agreed that the Fund’s non-toleration of arrears policy in non-(Official 
Sector Involvement) OSI cases and the policy on lending into sovereign arrears to official bilateral 
creditors in OSI cases continues to be appropriate and no amendments are needed. Most Directors 
agreed that more experience is needed with the Common Framework (CF) and welcomed staff’s 
plan to closely monitor the CF’s evolution and revert to the Board on whether it emerges as a new 
representative standing forum. 
17.      The LIOA policy is as follows: 
If an agreement is reached through the Paris Club that is adequately representative, the Fund 
would rely on its current practices—i.e., arrears would be considered eliminated (for purposes 
of the application of this policy) for both participating and non-participating creditors when 
financing assurances are received from the Paris Club in anticipation of an Agreed Minute. 


REVIEWS OF THE FUND’S SOVEREIGN ARREARS POLICIES AND PERIMETER 
 
16 
INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND 
Should another representative standing forum emerge, the Fund would be open to engaging 
with such a forum. 
In circumstances where an adequately representative agreement has not been reached 
through the Paris Club, the Fund would consider lending into arrears owed to an official 
bilateral creditor only in circumscribed circumstances where all the following criteria are 
satisfied: 
• 
Prompt financial support from the Fund is considered essential, and the member is 
pursuing appropriate policies; 
• 
The debtor is making good faith efforts to reach agreement with the creditor on a 
contribution consistent with the parameters of the Fund-supported program—i.e., 
that the absence of an agreement is due to the unwillingness of the creditor to 
provide such a contribution; and 
• 
The decision to provide financing despite the arrears would not have an undue 
negative effect on the Fund’s ability to mobilize official financing packages in future 
cases.  
In applying the above criteria, the Fund will need to exercise judgment based on case-specific 
circumstances. In exercising this judgment, the Board will be guided by the following 
considerations: 
First, an agreement will be considered “adequately representative” when it provides a majority 
of the total financing contributions required from official bilateral creditors over the program 
period. “Contribution” here comprises, and is limited to, debt relief and new financing (e.g. 
loans, bond financing, guarantees, and grants). 
Second, in assessing whether a debtor is acting in good faith, the Fund will consider, inter alia, 
whether the debtor has approached the creditor to which it owes arrears either bilaterally or 
through a relevant grouping of official bilateral creditors, recognizing that the latter may take 
several forms, including ad hoc creditor committees; has offered to engage in substantive 
dialogue with the creditor and has sought a collaborative process with the creditor to reach 
agreement; has provided the creditor relevant information on a timely basis consistent with 
the Fund’s policy on confidentiality of information; and has offered the creditor terms that are 
consistent with the parameters of the Fund-supported program. If the debtor requested terms 
from an official bilateral creditor that would result in financing contributions that exceeded the 
requirements of the program it would generally not indicate good faith. Finally, an assessment 
of the second criterion would also take into consideration the extent to which a creditor is 
being asked to make a contribution that is disproportionate relative to other official bilateral 
creditors. 


REVIEWS OF THE FUND’S SOVEREIGN ARREARS POLICIES AND PERIMETER 
 
INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND 17 
Third, in assessing whether the Fund’s decision to lend into arrears owed to an official bilateral 
creditor would have an undue negative effect on the Fund’s ability to mobilize official 
financing packages in future cases, the Fund will consider the signal that such a decision 
would send to official bilateral creditors as a group, given the specific circumstances of the 
case. In particular, this criterion would normally not be satisfied where the creditor or group of 
creditors that has not reached agreement with the debtor accounts for an adequately 
representative share, i.e., a majority, of total financing contributions required from official 
bilateral creditors over the program period, as defined above. Separately, an assessment of 
whether the third criterion is satisfied would take into consideration the creditor’s track record 
of providing contributions in past debt restructurings under Fund-supported programs, even if 
the creditor does not account for an adequately representative share of total financing 
contributions.  
An official bilateral creditor may choose to consent to Fund financing notwithstanding arrears 
owed to it. In such cases, the Board would not need to make a judgment as to whether the 
three criteria above are satisfied. The Fund would nevertheless continue to encourage the 
parties to come to an agreement during the program, since the regularization of arrears is an 
objective of any Fund-supported program and important for the functioning of the 
international financial system at large. 
There may be emergency situations, such as in the aftermath of a natural disaster, where the 
extraordinary demands on the affected government are such that there is insufficient time for 
the debtor to undertake good faith efforts to reach agreement with its creditors. When a 
judgment has been made that such exceptional circumstances exist, the Fund may provide 
financing under the Rapid Credit Facility (RCF) or the Rapid Financing Instrument (RFI) despite 
arrears owed to official bilateral creditors and without assessing whether the three criteria 
above have been satisfied or obtaining the creditor’s consent. However, it would be expected 
that the Fund’s support provided to the debtor in such cases would help advance 
normalization of relations with official bilateral creditors and the resolution of arrears, so that 
the approval of any subsequent Fund arrangement for the member would again be subject to 
all three criteria set out above.  
So long as unresolved arrears owed to official bilateral creditors are outstanding, every 
purchase or disbursement made available after the approval of the arrangement will be 
subject to a financing assurances review by the Board and verification that all three criteria are 
satisfied to determine whether this policy continues to be met for the further use of the Fund’s 
resources in the member’s circumstances. 
18.      [Directors] concurred that new Fund-supported programs should continue to incorporate 
the assumption that old OSI-related claims would be restructured in line with the terms stipulated in 
the original Fund-supported program. 
International Financial Institutions 


REVIEWS OF THE FUND’S SOVEREIGN ARREARS POLICIES AND PERIMETER 
 
18 
INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND 
19.      [Directors] agreed that application of the non-toleration of arrears policy with respect to 
multilaterals has worked well, but the policy needs to be updated to clarify how the policy applies to 
new International Financial Institutions (IFIs) and to ensure that the special treatment multilateral 
creditors receive under the Fund’s arrears policy is not diluted. IFIs are defined as international 
financial institutions with at least two sovereign members (and no non-sovereign member). While 
many Directors expressed a preference for staff’s original proposal on this issue (in SM/22/47), 
which would reduce scope for judgement in this area and provide for more clarity, a number of 
Directors could not support staff’s original proposal. In the end, most Directors went along with the 
alternative approach set out in Supplement 1 in light of staff’s expectation that implementation of 
the approach described in Supplement 1 would not fundamentally differ from that in the original 
proposal. Therefore, [Directors] endorsed staff’s proposal in the paper along three main lines the 
following: 
First, Fund financing in the face of arrears to the World Bank Group should continue to require 
an Agreed Plan between the debtor and the World Bank to clear the arrears over a defined 
period. Fund financing in the face of arrears to any other IFI should continue to require that a 
Credible Plan be in place in cases where a contribution from the official sector is not required in 
order to restore debt sustainability (non-OSI cases). In this context, a Credible Plan is a plan that 
is credible to the Fund, and the creditor’s concurrence is not required. 
Second, in cases where a contribution from the official sector is required in order to restore debt 
sustainability (OSI cases): 
o 
The Fund should only provide financing when a Credible Plan is in place in cases in 
which arrears are owed to (i) regional financing arrangements and reserve currency 
union central banks that form part of the global financial safety net or IFIs with global 
membership as defined in the staff paper, or (ii) IFIs being excluded from the scope of 
debt restructuring by official bilateral creditors through a creditor committee based on 
a representative standing forum recognized under the LIOA policy—either in the case at 
hand or as expected based on previous cases if no decision has been made in the 
current case. 
[OR (alternative formulation, see introduction) 
• 
Where the member is in arrears to an IFI, the Fund should judge whether a Credible Plan to 
resolve such arrears is required as a condition for lending. Factors informing the Fund’s 
judgment in this regard will include: (i) global, rather than regional, membership of the 
institution; (ii) whether the institution is a regional financing arrangement or a reserve 
currency union central bank that forms part of the global financial safety net; (iii) the Paris 
Club’s treatment of the institution, (iv) participation of the institution in the Heavily Indebted 
Poor Countries (HIPC) Initiative, and (v) whether the institution is being excluded from the 
scope of debt restructuring by official bilateral creditors through a creditor committee based 
on a representative standing forum recognized under the LIOA policy in the case at hand.] 


REVIEWS OF THE FUND’S SOVEREIGN ARREARS POLICIES AND PERIMETER 
 
INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND 19 
• 
When arrears are owed to an IFI that does not fall under the previous bullet above, 
[Directors] agreed that the Fund’s LIOA policy on lending into official bilateral arrears should 
be expanded to apply to these cases mutatis mutandis. In these cases, the Fund policy will 
also provide for the flexibility in extraordinary circumstances for emergency financing cases 
consistent with the Fund’s LIOA policy on lending into official bilateral creditors arrears. 
[Directors] agreed that iIn the latter cases, the Fund would consider lending into arrears owed to 
an IFI creditor only in circumscribed circumstances where all the following criteria are satisfied: 
• 
Prompt financial support from the Fund is considered essential, and the member is pursuing 
appropriate policies; 
• 
The debtor is making good faith efforts to reach agreement with the IFI creditor on a 
contribution consistent with the parameters of the Fund-supported program—i.e., that the 
absence of an agreement is due to the unwillingness of the creditor to provide such a 
contribution; and 
• 
The decision to provide financing despite the arrears would not have an undue negative 
effect on the Fund’s ability to mobilize official financing packages in future cases. 
20.      In assessing whether a debtor is acting in good faith, the Fund will consider, inter alia, 
whether the debtor has approached the IFI creditor to which it owes arrears bilaterally; has offered 
to engage in substantive dialogue with the IFI creditor and has sought a collaborative process with 
the creditor to reach agreement; has provided the creditor relevant information on a timely basis 
consistent with the Fund’s policy on confidentiality of information; and has offered the creditor 
terms that are consistent with the parameters of the Fund-supported program. If the debtor 
requested terms from an IFI creditor that would result in financing contributions that exceeded the 
requirements of the program it would generally not indicate good faith.  
21.      In assessing whether the Fund’s decision to lend into arrears owed to an IFI creditor would 
have an undue negative effect on the Fund’s ability to mobilize official financing packages in future 
cases, the Fund will consider the signal that such a decision would send to IFI creditors, or to official 
creditors more generally, as a group, given the specific circumstances of the case.  
22.      An IFI creditor may choose to consent to Fund financing notwithstanding arrears owed to it. 
Such consent could be conveyed to the Fund either through an Executive Director designated by the 
IFI or an authorized executive of the IFI to the Managing Director. In such cases, the Executive Board 
would not need to make a judgment as to whether the three criteria above are satisfied. The Fund 
would nevertheless continue to encourage the parties to come to an agreement during the 
program, since the regularization of arrears is an objective of any Fund-supported program and 
important for the functioning of the international financial system at large. 
23.      So long as arrears to IFI creditors remain outstanding, purchases or disbursements will be 
subject to a financing assurances review where the Executive Board will verify that all three criteria 


REVIEWS OF THE FUND’S SOVEREIGN ARREARS POLICIES AND PERIMETER 
 
20 
INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND 
are satisfied and the policy continues to be met for the further use of the Fund’s resources in the 
member’s circumstances.  
Perimeter 
24.      For the purpose of determining the application of the Fund’s arrears, financing assurances 
and debt sustainability policies, [Directors] endorsed broadly agreed with the approach proposed by 
staff.  
25.      Specifically, Direct Bilateral Claims will continue to be defined as those claims that are (a) 
held by a government, or an agency acting on behalf of a government; and (b) originate from an 
underlying transaction where the creditor government, or an agency acting on behalf of the 
government, provided or guaranteed financing to the debtor member.  
26.      In operationalizing this definition, [Directors] supported using the creditor member’s 
budgetary process to determine which entities form part of the creditor government. For entities 
that fall outside the government, a case-by-case analysis, taking into account the totality of the 
circumstances, would continue to be required to determine whether the entity is “acting on behalf 
of the government.” [Directors] recognized that secondary market purchases of claims by official 
bilateral creditors would not qualify as Direct Bilateral Claims, as they would not directly extend 
financing to the debtor member. 
27.      [Directors] endorsed two amendments to the classification of official claims: First, to the 
extent that the IFI purchases securities in the secondary market as part of the global financial safety 
net, such claims can be treated as claims subject to the Fund’s arrears policies as applicable to IFIs; 
however, the Fund would rely on the IFI’s own representation in this regard. Second, any Direct 
Bilateral Claims or claims held by IFIs that are contractually part of a pooled voting mechanism with 
private creditors shall be subject to the LIA policy. 
Effectiveness 
28.      The above amendments and new policies will enter into effect immediately and will apply to 
all future purchases and disbursements (including under existing arrangements), with respect to 
existing and future arrears. 
Reviews of the Arrears Policies   
29.      Finally, [Directors] agreed that the Fund’s arrears policies should be reviewed on an as 
needed basis. 
 


REVIEWS OF THE FUND’S SOVEREIGN ARREARS POLICIES AND PERIMETER 
 
INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND 21 
Annex III. Comparison Against Relevant Fund Policies In 
Effect Before May 4, 2022 
Introduction  
1.      
Directors welcomed the comprehensive review of the Fund’s policy on lending into arrears 
to private creditors, the Fund’s policy on lending into sovereign arrears to official bilateral creditors, 
and the Fund’s non-toleration of sovereign arrears policy to official bilateral and multilateral 
creditors. 
2.      
Directors agreed that overall, the Fund’s arrears policies have worked well in enabling the 
Fund to proceed with providing financing in cases of arrears. At the same time, they noted that 
practice in sovereign debt restructuring and the creditor landscape have evolved over the last 20 
years and certain updates are in order. 
Lending Into Arrears (LIA) Policy 
Directors welcomed the opportunity to reexamine the criteria set out earlier for Fund lending into 
arrears to private creditors stemming from sovereign defaults and from the imposition of exchange 
controls that lead to an interruption in debt-service payments by nonsovereign borrowers. 
Directors emphasized that the modification of the financing assurances and arrears policies to 
permit lending into arrears is an adaptation of existing policies to changing circumstances, and is 
intended to reinforce the Fund’s ability to promote effective balance of payments adjustment while 
providing adequate safeguards for the use of the Fund’s resources. 
Directors agreed that the Fund’s policy on lending into sovereign arrears to private creditors 
continues to provide a useful tool enabling the Fund to support a member’s adjustment efforts 
before it has reached agreement with its private creditors on a debt restructuring. The pillars of this 
policy are first, that the timely support of the member’s adjustment program is considered essential 
to help limit the scale of economic dislocation and preserve the economic value of investors’ claims; 
and second, that the debtor engages its creditors in an early and constructive dialogue to help 
secure a reasonably timely and orderly agreement that would help the country regain external 
viability. 
Directors welcomed the opportunity to review the application of the criterion requiring a member to 
make good faith efforts to reach a collaborative agreement with its creditors, in light of the 
experience with bond restructurings since the introduction of the “good faith” criterion in 1999. They 
observed that this experience, although limited, suggests that notwithstanding the ability of debtors 
to reach restructuring agreements with their creditors, the restructuring processes have in some 


REVIEWS OF THE FUND’S SOVEREIGN ARREARS POLICIES AND PERIMETER 
 
22 
INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND 
cases been protracted, reflecting the complexity of each individual case, as well as different 
perspectives and concerns among debtors and creditors. 
Directors concurred that the criteria set out earlier for the case of sovereign arrears may be too 
restrictive and could lead to instances in which creditors particularly bondholders could exercise a 
de facto veto over Fund lending. They also considered that the criteria set out earlier for the case of 
nonsovereign arrears are too restrictive, as they may not take adequate account of the possibility 
that, even when both creditors and debtors are willing to participate in collaborative negotiations, 
the process of debt renegotiation may be protracted. Directors noted that in the case of 
nonsovereign arrears to private creditors, it would be important to ensure that appropriate steps are 
taken to protect creditors’ interests. One suggestion to staff in this regard was to consider the 
establishment of an escrow account into which debt-service payments in local currency to 
nonresident creditors would be made. Against the background of variations in institutional 
arrangements and members’ capacity, however, Directors considered that it would be difficult to 
specify as a criterion for lending into nonsovereign arrears the implementation of specific 
mechanisms to protect creditors’ interests; instead, this judgment would need to be made on a 
case-by-case basis. 
3.      
Directors agreed concurred that the Fund’s policy on lending into arrears to private creditors 
continues to provide a useful tool enabling the Fund to support a member’s adjustment efforts 
before the member has reached agreement with its private creditors on a debt restructuring. 
Specifically, Directors agreed that Fund lending into sovereign arrears to private creditors (including 
bondholders and commercial banks) should continue to be on a case-by-case basis and only where: 
(i) 
prompt Fund support is considered essential for the successful implementation of the 
member’s adjustment program; and 
(ii) 
the member is pursuing appropriate policies and is making a good faith effort to reach a 
collaborative agreement with its creditors. 
4.      
Directors also agreed that Fund lending into non-sovereign arrears stemming from the 
imposition of exchange controls should continue to be on a case-by-case basis and only where: 
(i) 
prompt Fund support is considered essential for the successful implementation of the 
member’s adjustment program; and 
(ii)  
the member is pursuing appropriate policies, the member is making a good faith effort 
to facilitate a collaborative agreement between private debtors and their creditors, and a 
good prospect exists for the removal of exchange controls.  


REVIEWS OF THE FUND’S SOVEREIGN ARREARS POLICIES AND PERIMETER 
 
INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND 23 
5.      
Against this backdrop, With respect to lending into sovereign arrears to private creditors, 
Directors agreed that greater clarity about the good faith dialogue between a debtor and its 
creditors during the restructuring process and enhanced debt transparency could help provide 
better guidance about the application of the lending into sovereign arrears policy LIA policy and, 
more generally, promote a better framework for the engagement of debtors and creditors in the 
restructuring of sovereign debt. Greater clarity concerning the framework for possible debt 
restructuring would strengthen the capacity of investors to assess recovery values under alternative 
scenarios, thereby facilitating the pricing of risk and improving the functioning of the capital 
markets. At the same time, however, Directors stressed the need for continued flexibility in applying 
the “good faith” criterion to accommodate the characteristics of each specific case; to avoid putting 
debtors at a disadvantage in the negotiations with creditors; and to avoid prolonged negotiations 
that could hamper the ability of the Fund to provide timely assistance. Indeed, any clarification of 
the “good faith” criterion should serve primarily to support the difficult judgments that will continue 
to have to be made in each case, and should be made operational in a manner that does not impair 
market discipline. 
6.      
Directors considered that the following principles would strike an appropriate balance 
between clarity and flexibility in guiding the dialogue between debtors and their private external 
creditors. 
First, when a member has reached a judgment that a restructuring of its debt is necessary, it 
should engage in an early dialogue with its creditors, which should continue until the 
restructuring is complete. 
Second, the member should share relevant, non-confidential information with all creditors on 
a timely basis, which would generally be aligned with what the member would be required 
to share under the Debt Limits Policy and normally include: 
• 
an explanation of the economic problems and financial circumstances that justify a 
debt restructuring; 
• 
a briefing on the broad outlines of a viable economic program to address the 
underlying problems and its implications on the broad financial parameters shaping 
the envelope of resources available for restructured claims; and 
• 
the provision of a comprehensive picture of the outstanding debt stock and its terms, 
and the proposed treatment of all claims on the sovereign, including those of official 
bilateral creditors; the perimeter of claims subject to the envisaged debt restructuring; 
and the elaboration of the basis on which the debt restructuring would restore 
medium-term debt sustainability, bearing in mind that not all categories of claims 
may need to be restructured. 


REVIEWS OF THE FUND’S SOVEREIGN ARREARS POLICIES AND PERIMETER 
 
24 
INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND 
Third, the member should provide creditors with an early opportunity to give input on the 
design of restructuring strategies and the design of individual instruments. 
Fourth, any terms offered to the creditors by the member should be consistent with the 
parameters of the Fund-supported program. 
In discussing the various approaches that would best clarify the content of a member’s good faith 
efforts in the context of the lending into arrears policy, Directors emphasized that the modalities 
guiding the debtor’s dialogue with its creditors will need to be tailored to the specific features of 
each individual case. Most Directors considered that the third approach suggested in the staff paper 
for refining the good faith criterion provides an appropriate basis for the implementation of the 
Fund’s policy, while retaining sufficient flexibility to address the diversity of individual situations. 
7.      
Although, as a general premise, the form of the dialogue would continue to be left to the 
debtor and its creditors, under this approach a member in arrears would be expected to initiate a 
dialogue with its creditors consistent with the principles discussed above. In cases in which creditors 
have been able to form a representative committee on a timely basis, there would be an expectation 
that the member would enter into good faith negotiations with this committee, though the unique 
characteristics of each case would also be considered. 
This formal negotiating framework would include, inter alia, the sharing of confidential information 
needed to enable creditors to make informed decisions on the terms of a restructuring (subject to 
adequate safeguards), and the agreement to a standstill on litigation during the restructuring 
process by creditors represented in the committee.  
8.      
Directors stressed that, in going forward with the suggested approach, it would be crucial to 
strike the appropriate balance between the need to promote effective communication between a 
debtor and its creditors, and the need to retain flexibility to address the diversity of individual 
country member circumstances. 
9.      
Directors emphasized that in assessing whether the member is making good faith efforts to 
negotiate, judgments would continue to be required in a number of important areas. These include 
a consideration of the complexity of the restructuring case, the extent to which creditor committees 
are sufficiently representative, and whether a reasonable period has elapsed to allow for the 
formation of a representative committees. By the same token, in less complex cases, where creditors 
have not organized a representative committee within a reasonable period, or where for other 
reasons a formal negotiation framework would not be effective, the member would be expected to 
engage creditors through a less structured dialogue. In the absence of such creditor committees, the 
member would be expected to engage creditors through a less structured dialogue.  


REVIEWS OF THE FUND’S SOVEREIGN ARREARS POLICIES AND PERIMETER 
 
INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND 25 
Directors discussed a variety of factors that would need to be considered in making the proposed 
framework operational. They emphasized that in assessing whether the member is making good 
faith efforts to negotiate, judgments would continue to be required in a number of important areas. 
These include a consideration of the complexity of the restructuring case, the extent to which a 
creditor committee is sufficiently representative, and whether a reasonable period has elapsed to 
allow for the formation of a representative committee. 
10.      Directors viewed the considerations laid out in the staff paper as useful inputs for helping to 
make such judgments, which would need to be made flexibly. They also noted that to the extent 
that negotiations become stalled because creditors are requesting terms that are inconsistent with 
the adjustment and financing parameters that have been established under a Fund-supported 
program, the Fund should retain the flexibility to continue to support members notwithstanding the 
lack of progress in negotiations with creditors.  
11.      Directors recognized that there may be circumstances where, following a default, the debtor 
enters into good faith discussions with creditors prior to the approval of a Fund arrangement. In 
these circumstances, creditors are likely to express views as to the appropriate dimensions of the 
program’s adjustment and financing parameters. While such input would be welcome, Directors 
emphasized that it would be inappropriate for private creditors to be given a veto over the design of 
the financing plan or the design of the adjustment program decisions on an adequate 
macroeconomic framework and the design of the financing plan or the adjustment program that 
could form the basis for the Fund’s lending into arrears will remain in the sole purview of the Fund. 
12.      Directors recognized that there may be emergency situations, such as in the aftermath of a 
natural disaster, where the extraordinary demands on the affected government are such that there is 
insufficient time for the debtor to undertake good faith efforts to reach agreement with its creditors. 
When a judgment has been made that such exceptional circumstances exist, the Fund may provide 
financing under the Rapid Credit Facility (RCF) or the Rapid Financing Instrument (RFI) despite 
arrears owed to private creditors. However, it would be expected that the Fund’s support provided 
to the debtor in such cases would help advance normalization of relations with private creditors and 
the resolution of arrears, so that the approval of any subsequent Fund arrangement for the member 
would again be subject to the LIA policy on lending into sovereign arrears to private creditors. 
In both cases, all purchases by the member would be subject, as provided at present, to financing 
reviews to bring developments at an early stage to the attention of the Executive Board, and to 
provide an opportunity for the Board to consider whether adequate safeguards remain in place for 
further use of the Fund’s resources in the member’s circumstances. Specifically, such reviews would 
provide a basis to assess whether the member’s adjustment efforts are considered to be 
undermined by developments in creditor-debtor relations. 


REVIEWS OF THE FUND’S SOVEREIGN ARREARS POLICIES AND PERIMETER 
 
26 
INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND 
13.      All purchases and disbursements made while a member has outstanding arrears to private 
creditors will continue to be subject to financing reviews, which will provide an opportunity for the 
Fund to monitor relations between a debtor and its creditors, and for the Board to be kept informed 
about developments in this area at an early stage. Going forward, a number of Directors also 
underscored the importance of strengthening debtor-creditor dialogue in good times, as this will 
provide a good base for advancing the required negotiation framework in times of stress. 
14.      The policy outlined above supersedes all previous policies regarding lending into arrears to 
private creditors. 
Finally, Directors noted that it would be important to monitor experience with lending into arrears 
and to keep the policy outlined above under review, so as to ensure that it achieves its objectives. 
Codifying Existing Practice into a Policy in Preemptive Restructuring Cases 
15.      Directors agreed that the current practice in preemptive restructuring cases remains 
appropriate. To the extent that the Fund determines that a contribution from external private 
creditors in the form of a debt restructuring will be needed to restore debt sustainability, the 
restructuring should ideally be undertaken before the approval of the Fund arrangement. However, 
there may be circumstances under which more flexibility is warranted, so that the conclusion of the 
debt operation is contemplated at a later date, normally, by the first review under the arrangement. 
In such cases, the Fund may provide financing only if it has adequate assurances that such a 
restructuring will be successful. Such assurances are obtained by a judgment that a credible process 
for restructuring is underway and will result in sufficient creditor participation to restore debt 
sustainability and close financing gaps within the macroeconomic parameters of the program, 
taking into account official sector commitments. This judgment will depend on member-specific 
circumstances, but relevant considerations to inform such judgment may include the engagement of 
legal and financial advisors by the member, the launching of consultations with creditors, and the 
design of the debt restructuring strategy, including the terms of the new instruments and use of 
inducements for creditor participation. Directors welcomed the recommendation to add an 
expectation that the member would be expected to share relevant information as defined under the 
LIA policy with all private creditors on a timely basis.  
Lending Into Arrears to Official Bilateral Creditors (LIOA) Policy 
16.      Directors broadly agreed that the Fund’s non-toleration of arrears policy in non-Official 
Sector Involvement (OSI) cases and the policy on lending into sovereign arrears to official bilateral 
creditors in OSI cases continues to be appropriate and no amendments are needed. Most Directors 
agreed that more experience is needed with the Common Framework (CF) and welcomed staff’s 
plan to closely monitor the CF’s evolution and revert to the Board on whether it emerges as a new 
representative standing forum. 
17.      The LIOA policy is as follows: 


REVIEWS OF THE FUND’S SOVEREIGN ARREARS POLICIES AND PERIMETER 
 
INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND 27 
If an agreement is reached through the Paris Club that is adequately representative, the Fund 
would rely on its current practices—i.e., arrears would be considered eliminated (for purposes 
of the application of this policy) for both participating and non-participating creditors when 
financing assurances are received from the Paris Club in anticipation of an Agreed Minute. 
Should another representative standing forum emerge, the Fund would be open to engaging 
with such a forum. 
In circumstances where an adequately representative agreement has not been reached 
through the Paris Club, the Fund would consider lending into arrears owed to an official 
bilateral creditor only in circumscribed circumstances where all the following criteria are 
satisfied: 
• 
Prompt financial support from the Fund is considered essential, and the member is 
pursuing appropriate policies; 
• 
The debtor is making good faith efforts to reach agreement with the creditor on a 
contribution consistent with the parameters of the Fund-supported program—i.e., 
that the absence of an agreement is due to the unwillingness of the creditor to 
provide such a contribution; and 
• 
The decision to provide financing despite the arrears would not have an undue 
negative effect on the Fund’s ability to mobilize official financing packages in future 
cases.  
In applying the above criteria, the Fund will need to exercise judgment based on case-specific 
circumstances. In exercising this judgment, the Board will be guided by the following 
considerations: 
First, an agreement will be considered “adequately representative” when it provides a majority 
of the total financing contributions required from official bilateral creditors over the program 
period. “Contribution” here comprises, and is limited to, debt relief and new financing (e.g. 
loans, bond financing, guarantees, and grants). 
Second, in assessing whether a debtor is acting in good faith, the Fund will consider, inter alia, 
whether the debtor has approached the creditor to which it owes arrears either bilaterally or 
through a relevant grouping of official bilateral creditors, recognizing that the latter may take 
several forms, including ad hoc creditor committees; has offered to engage in substantive 
dialogue with the creditor and has sought a collaborative process with the creditor to reach 
agreement; has provided the creditor relevant information on a timely basis consistent with 
the Fund’s policy on confidentiality of information; and has offered the creditor terms that are 
consistent with the parameters of the Fund-supported program. If the debtor requested terms 
from an official bilateral creditor that would result in financing contributions that exceeded the 
requirements of the program it would generally not indicate good faith. Finally, an assessment 
of the second criterion would also take into consideration the extent to which a creditor is 


REVIEWS OF THE FUND’S SOVEREIGN ARREARS POLICIES AND PERIMETER 
 
28 
INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND 
being asked to make a contribution that is disproportionate relative to other official bilateral 
creditors. 
Third, in assessing whether the Fund’s decision to lend into arrears owed to an official bilateral 
creditor would have an undue negative effect on the Fund’s ability to mobilize official 
financing packages in future cases, the Fund will consider the signal that such a decision 
would send to official bilateral creditors as a group, given the specific circumstances of the 
case. In particular, this criterion would normally not be satisfied where the creditor or group of 
creditors that has not reached agreement with the debtor accounts for an adequately 
representative share, i.e., a majority, of total financing contributions required from official 
bilateral creditors over the program period, as defined above. Separately, an assessment of 
whether the third criterion is satisfied would take into consideration the creditor’s track record 
of providing contributions in past debt restructurings under Fund-supported programs, even if 
the creditor does not account for an adequately representative share of total financing 
contributions.  
An official bilateral creditor may choose to consent to Fund financing notwithstanding arrears 
owed to it. In such cases, the Board would not need to make a judgment as to whether the 
three criteria above are satisfied. The Fund would nevertheless continue to encourage the 
parties to come to an agreement during the program, since the regularization of arrears is an 
objective of any Fund-supported program and important for the functioning of the 
international financial system at large. 
There may be emergency situations, such as in the aftermath of a natural disaster, where the 
extraordinary demands on the affected government are such that there is insufficient time for 
the debtor to undertake good faith efforts to reach agreement with its creditors. When a 
judgment has been made that such exceptional circumstances exist, the Fund may provide 
financing under the Rapid Credit Facility (RCF) or the Rapid Financing Instrument (RFI) despite 
arrears owed to official bilateral creditors and without assessing whether the three criteria 
above have been satisfied or obtaining the creditor’s consent. However, it would be expected 
that the Fund’s support provided to the debtor in such cases would help advance 
normalization of relations with official bilateral creditors and the resolution of arrears, so that 
the approval of any subsequent Fund arrangement for the member would again be subject to 
all three criteria set out above.  
This policy will enter into effect immediately and will apply to all future purchases or 
disbursements (including under existing arrangements), with respect to existing and future 
arrears. Further, So long as unresolved arrears owed to official bilateral creditors are 
outstanding, every purchase or disbursement made available after the approval of the 
arrangement will be subject to a financing assurances review by the Board and verification that 
all three criteria are satisfied to determine whether this policy continues to be met for the 
further use of the Fund’s resources in the member’s circumstances. 


REVIEWS OF THE FUND’S SOVEREIGN ARREARS POLICIES AND PERIMETER 
 
INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND 29 
18.      Directors concurred that new Fund-supported programs should continue to incorporate the 
assumption that old OSI-related claims would be restructured in line with the terms stipulated in the 
original Fund-supported program. 
International Financial Institutions 
19.      Directors agreed that application of the non-toleration of arrears policy with respect to 
multilaterals has worked well, but the policy needs to be updated to clarify how the policy applies to 
new International Financial Institutions (IFIs) and to ensure that the special treatment multilateral 
creditors receive under the Fund’s arrears policy is not diluted. IFIs are defined as international 
financial institutions with at least two sovereign members (and no non-sovereign member). While 
many Directors expressed a preference for staff’s original proposal on this issue (in SM/22/47), 
which would reduce scope for judgement in this area and provide for more clarity, a number of 
Directors could not support staff’s original proposal. In the end, most Directors went along with the 
alternative approach set out in Supplement 1 in light of staff’s expectation that the implementation 
of the approach described in Supplement 1 would not fundamentally differ from that in the original 
proposal. Therefore, Directors endorsed the following: 
First, Fund financing in the face of arrears to the World Bank Group should continue to require 
an Agreed Plan between the debtor and the World Bank to clear the arrears over a defined 
period. Fund financing in the face of arrears to any other IFI should continue to require that a 
Credible Plan be in place in cases where a contribution from the official sector is not required 
in order to restore debt sustainability (non-OSI cases). In this context, a Credible Plan is a plan 
that is credible to the Fund, and the creditor’s concurrence is not required. 
Second, in cases where a contribution from the official sector is required in order to restore 
debt sustainability (OSI cases): 
• 
Where the member is in arrears to an IFI, the Fund should judge whether a Credible Plan 
to resolve such arrears is required as a condition for lending. Factors informing the Fund’s 
judgment in this regard will include: (i) global, rather than regional, membership of the 
institution; (ii) whether the institution is a regional financing arrangement or a reserve 
currency union central bank that forms part of the global financial safety net; (iii) the Paris 
Club’s treatment of the institution, (iv) participation of the institution in the Heavily 
Indebted Poor Countries (HIPC) Initiative, and (v) whether the institution is being excluded 
from the scope of debt restructuring by official bilateral creditors through a creditor 
committee based on a representative standing forum recognized under the LIOA policy in 
the case at hand. 


REVIEWS OF THE FUND’S SOVEREIGN ARREARS POLICIES AND PERIMETER 
 
30 
INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND 
• 
When arrears are owed to an IFI that does not fall under the previous bullet above, 
Directors agreed that the LIOA policy should be expanded to apply to these cases mutatis 
mutandis. In these cases, the Fund policy will also provide for the flexibility in 
extraordinary circumstances for emergency financing cases consistent with the LIOA 
policy. 
In the latter cases, the Fund would consider lending into arrears owed to an IFI creditor only 
in circumscribed circumstances where all the following criteria are satisfied: 
• 
Prompt financial support from the Fund is considered essential, and the member is 
pursuing appropriate policies; 
• 
The debtor is making good faith efforts to reach agreement with the IFI creditor on a 
contribution consistent with the parameters of the Fund-supported program—i.e., that 
the absence of an agreement is due to the unwillingness of the creditor to provide such a 
contribution; and 
• 
The decision to provide financing despite the arrears would not have an undue negative 
effect on the Fund’s ability to mobilize official financing packages in future cases. 
20.      In assessing whether a debtor is acting in good faith, the Fund will consider, inter alia, 
whether the debtor has approached the IFI creditor to which it owes arrears bilaterally; has offered 
to engage in substantive dialogue with the IFI creditor and has sought a collaborative process with 
the creditor to reach agreement; has provided the creditor relevant information on a timely basis 
consistent with the Fund’s policy on confidentiality of information; and has offered the creditor 
terms that are consistent with the parameters of the Fund-supported program. If the debtor 
requested terms from an IFI creditor that would result in financing contributions that exceeded the 
requirements of the program it would generally not indicate good faith.  
21.      In assessing whether the Fund’s decision to lend into arrears owed to an IFI creditor would 
have an undue negative effect on the Fund’s ability to mobilize official financing packages in future 
cases, the Fund will consider the signal that such a decision would send to IFI creditors, or to official 
creditors more generally, as a group, given the specific circumstances of the case.  
22.      An IFI creditor may choose to consent to Fund financing notwithstanding arrears owed to it. 
Such consent could be conveyed to the Fund either through an Executive Director designated by the 
IFI or an authorized executive of the IFI to the Managing Director. In such cases, the Executive Board 
would not need to make a judgment as to whether the three criteria above are satisfied. The Fund 
would nevertheless continue to encourage the parties to come to an agreement during the 
program, since the regularization of arrears is an objective of any Fund-supported program and 
important for the functioning of the international financial system at large. 


REVIEWS OF THE FUND’S SOVEREIGN ARREARS POLICIES AND PERIMETER 
 
INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND 31 
23.      So long as arrears to IFI creditors remain outstanding, purchases or disbursements will be 
subject to a financing assurances review where the Executive Board will verify that all three criteria 
are satisfied and the policy continues to be met for the further use of the Fund’s resources in the 
member’s circumstances.  
Perimeter 
24.      For the purpose of determining the application of the Fund’s arrears, financing assurances 
and debt sustainability policies, Directors broadly agreed with the approach proposed by staff.  
25.      Specifically, Direct Bilateral Claims will continue to be defined as those claims that are (a) 
held by a government, or an agency acting on behalf of a government; and (b) originate from an 
underlying transaction where the creditor government, or an agency acting on behalf of the 
government, provided or guaranteed financing to the debtor member.  
26.      In operationalizing this definition, Directors supported using the creditor member’s 
budgetary process to determine which entities form part of the creditor government. For entities 
that fall outside the government, a case-by-case analysis, taking into account the totality of the 
circumstances, would continue to be required to determine whether the entity is “acting on behalf 
of the government.” Directors recognized that secondary market purchases of claims by official 
bilateral creditors would not qualify as Direct Bilateral Claims, as they would not directly extend 
financing to the debtor member. 
27.      Directors endorsed two amendments to the classification of official claims: First, to the 
extent that the IFI purchases securities in the secondary market as part of the global financial safety 
net, such claims can be treated as claims subject to the Fund’s arrears policies as applicable to IFIs; 
however, the Fund would rely on the IFI’s own representation in this regard. Second, any Direct 
Bilateral Claims or claims held by IFIs that are contractually part of a pooled voting mechanism with 
private creditors shall be subject to the LIA policy. 
Effectiveness 
28.      The above amendments and new policies will enter into effect immediately and will apply to 
all future purchases and disbursements (including under existing arrangements), with respect to 
existing and future arrears. 
Reviews of the Arrears Policies   
29.      Directors agreed that the Fund’s arrears policies should be reviewed on an as needed basis.