AbbVie News Center
Campaigns
Help Close the "Confidence Gap" By Backing Your Favorite BOTOX® Cosmetic Grant Recipients
With Women-Led Startups Receiving Less Than Three Percent of Venture Capital Funding1, Your Support Can Help Bridge the Gap and Empower Women
Entrepreneurs
IRVINE, Calif., Sept. 24, 2024 /PRNewswire/ -- Allergan Aesthetics, an AbbVie company (NYSE: ABBV) is proud to announce the next exciting phase of its 2024
BOTOX® Cosmetic grant program dedicated to uplifting women entrepreneurs. This chapter kicks off with crowdfunding campaigns for each recipient, offering the
community a chance to rally behind 20 inspiring women and support their businesses as they strive to achieve their dreams.
"Women-owned businesses continue to receive on average less than three percent of all venture capital funding1. With so few resources and funding available,
crowdfunding is a key opportunity for these entrepreneurs to grow their businesses," said Carrie Strom, President, Allergan Aesthetics and Senior Vice President, AbbVie.
"Many women-owned businesses focus on bettering their communities and have a significant influence on job creation, innovation, and overall economic prosperity2. By
supporting grant recipients through their crowdfunding campaigns, we can drive impact and empower confidence in these entrepreneurs and beyond." 
In its second year, the BOTOX® Cosmetic grant program continued its mission and awarded $25,000 grants to women entrepreneurs. Beyond financial support, these
women participated in a transformative bootcamp led by BOTOX® Cosmetic and Deepica Mutyala, founder of Live Tinted. The bootcamp included small group workshops
dedicated to honing valuable skills such as brand building, strategic planning, and marketing, as well as one-on-one coaching and mentorship with industry experts. The
grant recipients also gained access to coaching through the partnership between BOTOX® Cosmetic and IFundWomen, further equipping them with the tools needed to
navigate the challenges of crowdfunding and grow their businesses.
"Crowdfunding helped me turn my vision for my business into a reality. I am excited to see this year's cohort of entrepreneurs kickstart their campaigns," said Maria
Palacio, Founder of Progeny Coffee and 2023 BOTOX® Cosmetic grant recipient. "Every contribution adds up, and when people believe in your vision enough to donate—
even a small amount—it validates and encourages you to continue pursuing your dream. Your support, no matter the size, truly makes a difference."
These crowdfunding campaigns are more than just a way to raise funds; they are a platform to highlight each entrepreneur's stories, passion, and drive. By contributing,
individuals can play a crucial role in helping to close the "Confidence Gap" and empower the women leaders of tomorrow.
"The crowdfunding aspect of the BOTOX® Cosmetic grant program goes beyond just financial support—it's about building a powerful community around our businesses,"
said Līhau Willing, Founder of Iwi Nails and 2024 BOTOX® Cosmetic grant recipient. "Being part of this program has been an amazing experience. It's incredibly
inspiring to see the community, championed by BOTOX® Cosmetic, truly believe in our vision and actively join us on our journey to success."
Feedback from last year's grant recipients revealed that the crowdfunding component significantly spurred meaningful business growth, showcasing its potential as a
powerful tool for raising capital. However, it also highlighted the complexities and dedication required to run a successful campaign. This year, the program further
enhances support by arming entrepreneurs with the knowledge and skills necessary to navigate these challenges and steer their businesses confidently toward success.
The 2024 grant recipients have been on a journey of mentorship and community-building, learning from a diverse group of experts, including past recipients, Allergan
Aesthetics executives, and trailblazing women founders from the aesthetics industry. They participated in the IFundWomen 10-week online Crowdfunding Accelerator


Program, strengthening their business pitches and preparing to launch their campaigns. Each entrepreneur offers unique incentives for different contribution levels, with no
minimum donation required. Supporters can choose to contribute publicly or anonymously.
To support the grant recipients' crowdfunding campaigns, visit IFundWomen.com/BOTOXCosmetic. To learn more about this empowering initiative, visit
BotoxCosmetic.com/RealImpact. Follow @botoxcosmetic on Instagram and YouTube to discover how you can help close the "Confidence Gap" for women entrepreneurs.
Join us in making a real impact today!
About Allergan Aesthetics
At Allergan Aesthetics, an AbbVie company, we develop, manufacture, and market a portfolio of leading aesthetics brands and products. Our aesthetics portfolio includes
facial injectables, body contouring, plastics, skin care, and more. Our goal is to consistently provide our customers with innovation, education, exceptional service, and a
commitment to excellence, all with a personal touch. For more information, visit www.allerganaesthetics.com.
About AbbVie
AbbVie's mission is to discover and deliver innovative medicines and solutions that solve serious health issues today and address the medical challenges of tomorrow. We
strive to have a remarkable impact on people's lives across several key therapeutic areas – immunology, oncology, neuroscience, and eye care – and products and services
in our Allergan Aesthetics portfolio. For more information about AbbVie, please visit us at www.abbvie.com. Follow @abbvie on LinkedIn, Facebook, Instagram, X
(formerly Twitter), and YouTube.
About IFundWomen
IFundWomen is the go-to funding marketplace for entrepreneurs, with a mission to close the money gap for women-owned businesses through its proprietary mix of
capital, coaching, and connections. Since its founding, IFundWomen has empowered its members to raise $278M in early-stage capital and to create 55,000 new jobs,
helping fuel the small businesses economy. IFundWomen's marketplace offers its members multiple access points to capital, including crowdfunding, enterprise-brokered
grants, collateral-free loans, and the best funding of all – revenue, through its newest product, IFundWomen ServicesX, a marketplace connecting independent business
services experts to customers. To learn more about IFundWomen, please visit www.ifundwomen.com. Follow @ifundwomen on LinkedIn, Instagram, Facebook, Twitter,
and TikTok.
BOTOX® COSMETIC IMPORTANT SAFETY INFORMATION AND APPROVED USES
IMPORTANT SAFETY INFORMATION
BOTOX® Cosmetic may cause serious side effects that can be life threatening. Get medical help right away if you have any of these problems any time (hours to
weeks) after injection of BOTOX® Cosmetic:
Problems swallowing, speaking, or breathing, due to weakening of associated muscles, can be severe and result in loss of life. You are at the highest risk if these
problems are pre-existing before injection. Swallowing problems may last for several months.
Spread of toxin effects. The effect of botulinum toxin may affect areas away from the injection site and cause serious symptoms including: loss of strength and all-
over muscle weakness, double vision, blurred vision and drooping eyelids, hoarseness or change or loss of voice, trouble saying words clearly, loss of bladder
control, trouble breathing, and trouble swallowing.
BOTOX® Cosmetic dosing units are not the same as, or comparable to, any other botulinum toxin product.
There has not been a confirmed serious case of spread of toxin effect when BOTOX® Cosmetic has been used at the recommended dose to treat frown lines, crow's feet
lines, and/or forehead lines.


BOTOX® Cosmetic may cause loss of strength or general muscle weakness, vision problems, or dizziness within hours to weeks of taking BOTOX® Cosmetic. If this
happens, do not drive a car, operate machinery, or do other dangerous activities.
Serious and/or immediate allergic reactions have been reported. They include: itching, rash, red itchy welts, wheezing, asthma symptoms, or dizziness or feeling faint.
Get medical help right away if you are wheezing or have asthma symptoms, or if you become dizzy or faint.
Do not receive BOTOX® Cosmetic if you: are allergic to any of the ingredients in BOTOX® Cosmetic (see Medication Guide for ingredients); had an allergic reaction to
any other botulinum toxin product such as Myobloc® (rimabotulinumtoxinB), Dysport® (abobotulinumtoxinA), or Xeomin® (incobotulinumtoxinA); have a skin infection
at the planned injection site.
Tell your doctor about all your muscle or nerve conditions, such as ALS or Lou Gehrig's disease, myasthenia gravis, or Lambert-Eaton syndrome, as you may be at
increased risk of serious side effects including difficulty swallowing and difficulty breathing from typical doses of BOTOX® Cosmetic.
Tell your doctor about all your medical conditions, including: plans to have surgery; had surgery on your face; have trouble raising your eyebrows; drooping eyelids; any
other abnormal facial change; are pregnant or plan to become pregnant (it is not known if BOTOX® Cosmetic can harm your unborn baby); are breast-feeding or plan to (it
is not known if BOTOX® Cosmetic passes into breast milk).
Tell your doctor about all the medicines you take, including prescription and over-the-counter medicines, vitamins, and herbal supplements. Using BOTOX® Cosmetic
with certain other medicines may cause serious side effects. Do not start any new medicines until you have told your doctor that you have received BOTOX®
Cosmetic in the past.
Tell your doctor if you have received any other botulinum toxin product in the last 4 months; have received injections of botulinum toxin such as Myobloc®, Dysport®, or
Xeomin® in the past (tell your doctor exactly which product you received); have recently received an antibiotic by injection; take muscle relaxants; take an allergy or cold
medicine; take a sleep medicine; take aspirin-like products or blood thinners.
Other side effects of BOTOX® Cosmetic include: dry mouth; discomfort or pain at the injection site; tiredness; headache; neck pain; and eye problems: double vision,
blurred vision, decreased eyesight, drooping eyelids and eyebrows, swelling of your eyelids and dry eyes.
Approved Uses
BOTOX® Cosmetic is a prescription medicine that is injected into muscles and used to temporarily improve the look of moderate to severe forehead lines, crow's feet lines,
and frown lines between the eyebrows in adults.
For more information refer to the Medication Guide or talk with your doctor.
To report a side effect, please call Allergan at 1-800-678-1605.
Please see BOTOX® Cosmetic full Product Information including Boxed Warning and Medication Guide.
References:
1. PitchBook. US VC Female Founders Dashboard. 2024 https://pitchbook.com/news/articles/the-vc-female-founders-dashboard 


2. Talisman Wealth Advisors. Empowering Women Entrepreneurs: Unveiling the Advantages of Women-Owned Minority Businesses. 2024
https://www.talismanwealthadvisors.com/empowering-women-entrepreneurs-unveiling-the-advantages-of-women-owned-minority-businesses 
© 2024 AbbVie. All rights reserved. BOTOX Cosmetic and its designs are trademarks of Allergan Holdings France SAS, an AbbVie company, or its affiliates.
 
SOURCE AbbVie
For further information: Investors: Liz Shea, Liz.Shea@AbbVie.com, (847) 935-2211, or Media: Ember Garrett, Ember.Garrett@allergan.com, (714) 246-3525
Additional assets available online:  Video (1)
https://news.abbvie.com/2024-09-24-Empowering-Women-Entrepreneurs-2024-BOTOX-R-onabotulinumtoxinA-Cosmetic-Grant-Recipients-Kick-Off-Crowdfunding-
Campaigns


AbbVie News Center
AbbVie Receives Positive CHMP Opinion for Mirvetuximab Soravtansine (ELAHERE®) for the Treatment of Certain Adult Ovarian
Cancer
NORTH CHICAGO, Ill., Sept. 20, 2024 /PRNewswire/ -- AbbVie (NYSE: ABBV) today announced that the European Medicines Agency's (EMA) Committee for
Medicinal Products for Human Use (CHMP) has adopted a positive opinion recommending the marketing authorization of mirvetuximab soravtansine (ELAHERE®) for
the treatment of adult patients with folate receptor alpha (FRα)-positive, platinum-resistant and high-grade serous epithelial ovarian, fallopian tube or primary peritoneal
cancer who have received one to three prior treatment regimens. Patients with ovarian cancer are often diagnosed with late-stage disease, undergo surgery and are then
primarily treated with platinum-based chemotherapy. Over time patients may become resistant to platinum-based treatment and will require another therapy. The CHMP's
opinion is supported by results of the Phase 3 MIRASOL clinical trial and the European Commission decision on this indication for mirvetuximab soravtansine is
anticipated later this year.
"Following many years of development by the ImmunoGen team that is now part of AbbVie, we are hopeful to make mirvetuximab soravtansine available to eligible
patients with ovarian cancer in the European Union. This positive opinion recognizes the unmet need for certain patients with platinum-resistant ovarian cancer,"
said Roopal Thakkar, M.D., executive vice president, research and development, chief scientific officer, AbbVie.
ELAHERE® (mirvetuximab soravtansine-gynx) was granted full FDA approval in the United States in March 2024. Marketing authorization submissions for
mirvetuximab soravtansine are under review in multiple other countries.
ABOUT THE PHASE 3 MIRASOL TRIAL
MIRASOL is a global Phase 3 open-label, randomized, controlled trial that enrolled 453 patients to compare the efficacy and safety of mirvetuximab soravtansine with the
investigator's choice of single-agent chemotherapy (weekly paclitaxel, pegylated liposomal doxorubicin, or topotecan) in the treatment of platinum-resistant, high-grade
serous ovarian cancer whose tumors express high levels of FRα (≥75% of cells with ≥2+ staining intensity). Participants had previously received one to three lines of prior
therapy. The primary endpoint was investigator-assessed progression-free survival (PFS). Key secondary endpoints included objective response rate (ORR) and overall
survival (OS).
Results of the study were previously shared in June 2023. More information can be found on www.clinicaltrials.gov (NCT 04209855).  
About Ovarian Cancer
Ovarian cancer is one of the leading causes of death from gynecological cancers. According to the World Ovarian Cancer Coalition, in 2022 more than 320,000 women
worldwide were diagnosed with ovarian cancer. By 2050 the annual incidence will have risen to nearly half a million, an increase of 55 percent. Most patients present with
late-stage disease and will typically undergo surgery followed by platinum-based chemotherapy. Unfortunately, the majority of patients eventually develop platinum-
resistant disease, which is difficult to treat. In this setting, standard of care single-agent chemotherapies are associated with decreased efficacy and tolerability.
About Mirvetuximab Soravtansine 
Mirvetuximab soravtansine is a first-in-class ADC comprising a folate receptor-alpha binding antibody, cleavable linker, and the maytansinoid payload DM4, a potent
tubulin inhibitor designed to kill the targeted cancer cells.
Mirvetuximab soravtansine is not approved in the EU. 
ELAHERE® (mirvetuximab soravtansine-gynx) U.S. INDICATION and IMPORTANT SAFETY INFORMATION 
ELAHERE® is indicated for the treatment of adult patients with folate receptor-alpha (FRα) positive, platinum-resistant epithelial ovarian, fallopian tube, or primary


peritoneal cancer, who have received one to three prior systemic treatment regimens. Select patients for therapy based on an FDA-approved test.
IMPORTANT SAFETY INFORMATION 
WARNING: OCULAR TOXICITY 
ELAHERE can cause severe ocular toxicities, including visual impairment, keratopathy, dry eye, photophobia, eye pain, and uveitis. 
Conduct an ophthalmic exam including visual acuity and slit lamp exam prior to initiation of ELAHERE, every other cycle for the first 8 cycles, and as clinically
indicated. 
Administer prophylactic artificial tears and ophthalmic topical steroids. 
Withhold ELAHERE for ocular toxicities until improvement and resume at the same or reduced dose. 
Discontinue ELAHERE for Grade 4 ocular toxicities. 
WARNINGS and PRECAUTIONS 
Ocular Disorders 
ELAHERE can cause severe ocular adverse reactions, including visual impairment, keratopathy (corneal disorders), dry eye, photophobia, eye pain, and uveitis. 
Ocular adverse reactions occurred in 59% of patients with ovarian cancer treated with ELAHERE. Eleven percent (11%) of patients experienced Grade 3 ocular adverse
reactions, including blurred vision, keratopathy (corneal disorders), dry eye, cataract, photophobia, and eye pain; two patients (0.3%) experienced Grade 4 events
(keratopathy and cataract). The most common (≥5%) ocular adverse reactions were blurred vision (48%), keratopathy (36%), dry eye (27%), cataract (16%), photophobia
(14%), and eye pain (10%).  
The median time to onset for first ocular adverse reaction was 5.1 weeks (range: 0.1 to 68.6). Of the patients who experienced ocular events, 53% had complete resolution;
38% had partial improvement (defined as a decrease in severity by one or more grades from the worst grade at last follow up). Ocular adverse reactions led to permanent
discontinuation of ELAHERE in 1% of patients.  
Premedication and use of lubricating and ophthalmic topical steroid eye drops during treatment with ELAHERE are recommended. Advise patients to avoid use of contact
lenses during treatment with ELAHERE unless directed by a healthcare provider.  
Refer patients to an eye care professional for an ophthalmic exam including visual acuity and slit lamp exam prior to treatment initiation, every other cycle for the first 8
cycles, and as clinically indicated. Promptly refer patients to an eye care professional for any new or worsening ocular signs and symptoms. 
Monitor for ocular toxicity and withhold, reduce, or permanently discontinue ELAHERE based on severity and persistence of ocular adverse reactions. 
Pneumonitis 
Severe, life-threatening, or fatal interstitial lung disease (ILD), including pneumonitis, can occur in patients treated with ELAHERE. 
Pneumonitis occurred in 10% of patients treated with ELAHERE, including 1% with Grade 3 events and 1 patient (0.1%) with a Grade 4 event. One patient (0.1%) died
due to respiratory failure in the setting of pneumonitis and lung metastases. One patient (0.1%) died due to respiratory failure of unknown etiology. Pneumonitis led to
permanent discontinuation of ELAHERE in 3% of patients. 
Monitor patients for pulmonary signs and symptoms of pneumonitis, which may include hypoxia, cough, dyspnea, or interstitial infiltrates on radiologic exams. Infectious,
neoplastic, and other causes for such symptoms should be excluded through appropriate investigations. Withhold ELAHERE for patients who develop persistent or
recurrent Grade 2 pneumonitis until symptoms resolve to ≤ Grade 1 and consider dose reduction. Permanently discontinue ELAHERE in all patients with Grade 3 or 4
pneumonitis. Patients who are asymptomatic may continue dosing of ELAHERE with close monitoring. 


Peripheral Neuropathy (PN) 
Peripheral neuropathy occurred in 36% of patients with ovarian cancer treated with ELAHERE across clinical trials; 3% of patients experienced Grade 3 peripheral
neuropathy. Peripheral neuropathy adverse reactions included peripheral neuropathy (20%), peripheral sensory neuropathy (9%), paraesthesia (6%), neurotoxicity (3%),
hypoaesthesia (1%), peripheral motor neuropathy (0.9%), polyneuropathy (0.3%), and peripheral sensorimotor neuropathy (0.1%). Monitor patients for signs and
symptoms of neuropathy, such as paresthesia, tingling or a burning sensation, neuropathic pain, muscle weakness, or dysesthesia. For patients experiencing new or
worsening PN, withhold dosage, dose reduce, or permanently discontinue ELAHERE based on the severity of PN. 
Embryo-Fetal Toxicity 
Based on its mechanism of action, ELAHERE can cause embryo-fetal harm when administered to a pregnant woman because it contains a genotoxic compound (DM4) and
affects actively dividing cells. 
Advise pregnant women of the potential risk to a fetus. Advise females of reproductive potential to use effective contraception during treatment with ELAHERE and for 7
months after the last dose. 
ADVERSE REACTIONS 
The most common (≥20 %) adverse reactions, including lab abnormalities, were increased aspartate aminotransferase, fatigue, increased alanine aminotransferase, blurred
vision, nausea, increased alkaline phosphatase, diarrhea, abdominal pain, keratopathy, peripheral neuropathy, musculoskeletal pain, decreased lymphocytes, decreased
platelets, decreased magnesium, decreased hemoglobin, dry eye, constipation, decreased leukocytes, vomiting, decreased albumin, decreased appetite, and decreased
neutrophils. 
DRUG INTERACTIONS 
DM4 is a CYP3A4 substrate. Closely monitor patients for adverse reactions with ELAHERE when used concomitantly with strong CYP3A4 inhibitors.  
USE IN SPECIAL POPULATIONS
Lactation 
Advise women not to breastfeed during treatment with ELAHERE and for 1 month after the last dose. 
Hepatic Impairment 
Avoid use of ELAHERE in patients with moderate or severe hepatic impairment (total bilirubin >1.5 ULN). 
Please see full Prescribing Information, including BOXED WARNING 
About AbbVie in Oncology
At AbbVie, we are committed to transforming standards of care for patients living with difficult-to-treat cancers. We are advancing a dynamic pipeline of investigational
therapies across a range of cancer types in both blood cancers and solid tumors. We are focusing on creating targeted medicines that either impede the reproduction of
cancer cells or enable their elimination. We achieve this through various, targeted treatment modalities including Antibody Drug Conjugates (ADCs), Immuno-Oncology,
bi-specific antibody and CAR-T platforms.  Our dedicated and experienced team joins forces with innovative partners to accelerate the delivery of potential breakthrough
medicines.
Today, our expansive oncology portfolio comprises of approved and investigational treatments for a wide range of blood and solid tumors. We are evaluating more than 20
investigational medicines in multiple clinical trials across some of the world's most widespread and debilitating cancers. As we work to have a remarkable impact on
people's lives, we are committed to exploring solutions to help patients obtain access to our cancer medicines. For more information, please visit
http://www.abbvie.com/oncology.


About AbbVie
AbbVie's mission is to discover and deliver innovative medicines and solutions that solve serious health issues today and address the medical challenges of tomorrow. We
strive to have a remarkable impact on people's lives across several key therapeutic areas – immunology, oncology, neuroscience, and eye care – and products and services
in our Allergan Aesthetics portfolio. For more information about AbbVie, please visit us at www.abbvie.com. Follow @abbvie on LinkedIn, Facebook, Instagram, X
(formerly Twitter), and YouTube.
Forward-Looking Statements
Some statements in this news release are, or may be considered, forward-looking statements for purposes of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995. The words
"believe," "expect," "anticipate," "project" and similar expressions and uses of future or conditional verbs, generally identify forward-looking statements. AbbVie cautions
that these forward-looking statements are subject to risks and uncertainties that may cause actual results to differ materially from those expressed or implied in the
forward-looking statements. Such risks and uncertainties include, but are not limited to, challenges to intellectual property, competition from other products, difficulties
inherent in the research and development process, adverse litigation or government action, and changes to laws and regulations applicable to our industry. Additional
information about the economic, competitive, governmental, technological and other factors that may affect AbbVie's operations is set forth in Item 1A, "Risk Factors," of
AbbVie's 2023 Annual Report on Form 10-K, which has been filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission, as updated by its subsequent Quarterly Reports on Form
10-Q. AbbVie undertakes no obligation, and specifically declines, to release publicly any revisions to forward-looking statements as a result of subsequent events or
developments, except as required by law.
 
SOURCE AbbVie
For further information: Contacts: US Media: Ilke Limoncu, Email: ilke.limoncu@abbvie.com; Global Media: Dana Harville, Email: dana.harville@abbvie.com; Investors:
Todd Bosse, Email: todd.bosse@abbvie.com
https://news.abbvie.com/2024-09-20-AbbVie-Receives-Positive-CHMP-Opinion-for-Mirvetuximab-Soravtansine-ELAHERE-R-for-the-Treatment-of-Certain-Adult-
Ovarian-Cancer


AbbVie News Center
AbbVie Submits Biologics License Application to the FDA for Telisotuzumab Vedotin (Teliso-V) in Previously Treated Non-Small Cell
Lung Cancer
- Teliso-V is an investigational antibody-drug conjugate (ADC) for patients with previously treated nonsquamous non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) with c-Met protein
overexpression.
- Biologics License Application (BLA) submission for accelerated approval is supported by data from the Phase 2 LUMINOSITY trial (M14-239). Review of the BLA will
be conducted under FDA's Oncology Center of Excellence (OCE) Real-Time Oncology Review (RTOR) program. 
- There are currently no approved anti-cancer therapies specifically for c-Met overexpressing NSCLC and if approved Teliso-V would be the first-in-class therapy for this
patient population. 
NORTH CHICAGO, Ill., Sept. 27, 2024 /PRNewswire/ -- AbbVie (NYSE: ABBV) today announced submission of a Biologics License Application (BLA) to the U.S. Food
and Drug Administration (FDA) for accelerated approval of telisotuzumab vedotin (Teliso-V) in adult patients with previously treated, locally advanced or metastatic
epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) wild type, nonsquamous non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) with c-Met protein overexpression.
Approximately 85% of lung cancers are classified as NSCLC1 and despite advances in treatment, lung cancer remains the leading cause of cancer-related deaths throughout
the world.2 The c-Met protein is a receptor tyrosine kinase found to be overexpressed in approximately 25% of advanced EGFR wild type, nonsquamous NSCLC
patients3 and is associated with a poor prognosis.4,5,6 Teliso-V is being evaluated within this patient population who currently have very limited treatment options. 
"Patients with non-small cell lung cancer have unmet medical needs and oncologists are looking for new treatment options for these patients who unfortunately have a poor
prognosis," said Roopal Thakkar, M.D., executive vice president, research and development, chief scientific officer, AbbVie. "We are hopeful that Teliso-V will be a
differentiated treatment for certain patients as we look to  elevate the standards of care in oncology."
In December 2021, Teliso-V was granted Breakthrough Therapy Designation by the FDA. The BLA submission is supported by data from Phase 2 LUMINOSITY trial
(Study M14-239), an ongoing study designed to characterize the safety and efficacy of Teliso-V in c-Met overexpressing NSCLC populations. Data from the
LUMINOSITY study were recently presented at the 2024 American Society of Clinical Oncology congress and topline data from this trial were shared in 2023. Teliso-V is
being further evaluated as a monotherapy in patients with previously treated c-Met overexpressing NSCLC in the randomized Phase 3 confirmatory global study TeliMET
NSCLC-01. Enrollment in the study is underway and continues across global clinical trial sites. Additional information on clinical trials for Teliso-V is available
at www.clinicaltrials.gov.
About Telisotuzumab Vedotin (Teliso-V)
Teliso-V is an investigational, first-in-class, c-Met protein directed antibody-drug conjugate (ADC) designed to target c-Met overexpressing tumors. c-Met is a receptor
tyrosine kinase that can be overexpressed in many solid tumors including NSCLC. Further information on clinical trials for Teliso-V is available
at https://clinicaltrials.gov/. Teliso-V is not approved by any health regulatory authority.
About the LUMINOSITY Trial
The LUMINOSITY trial (M14-239), is an ongoing Phase 2 study designed to identify the target NSCLC populations that overexpress c-Met best suited for Teliso-V
monotherapy in the second-line or third-line setting, and then to expand the groups to further evaluate efficacy in the selected populations. The endpoints include overall
response rate (ORR), duration of response (DoR), disease control rate (DCR) and progression-free survival (PFS) per independent central review (ICR) as well as overall
survival (OS). 


About AbbVie in Oncology
At AbbVie, we are committed to transforming standards of care for patients living with difficult-to-treat cancers. We are advancing a dynamic pipeline of investigational
therapies across a range of cancer types in both blood cancers and solid tumors. We are focusing on creating targeted medicines that either impede the reproduction of
cancer cells or enable their elimination. We achieve this through various, targeted treatment modalities including antibody-drug conjugates (ADCs), immuno-oncology, bi-
specific antibody and CAR-T platforms. Our dedicated and experienced team joins forces with innovative partners to accelerate the delivery of potential breakthrough
medicines.
Today, our expansive oncology portfolio comprises approved and investigational treatments for a wide range of blood and solid tumors. We are evaluating more than 20
investigational medicines in multiple clinical trials across some of the world's most widespread and debilitating cancers. As we work to have a remarkable impact on
people's lives, we are committed to exploring solutions to help patients obtain access to our cancer medicines. For more information, please
visit http://www.abbvie.com/oncology.
About AbbVie
AbbVie's mission is to discover and deliver innovative medicines and solutions that solve serious health issues today and address the medical challenges of tomorrow. We
strive to have a remarkable impact on people's lives across several key therapeutic areas – immunology, oncology, neuroscience, and eye care – and products and services
in our Allergan Aesthetics portfolio. For more information about AbbVie, please visit us at www.abbvie.com. Follow @abbvie on LinkedIn, Facebook, Instagram, X
(formerly Twitter), and YouTube.
Forward-Looking Statements
Some statements in this news release are, or may be considered, forward-looking statements for purposes of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995. The words
"believe," "expect," "anticipate," "project" and similar expressions and uses of future or conditional verbs, generally identify forward-looking statements. AbbVie cautions
that these forward-looking statements are subject to risks and uncertainties that may cause actual results to differ materially from those expressed or implied in the
forward-looking statements. Such risks and uncertainties include, but are not limited to, challenges to intellectual property, competition from other products, difficulties
inherent in the research and development process, adverse litigation or government action, and changes to laws and regulations applicable to our industry. Additional
information about the economic, competitive, governmental, technological and other factors that may affect AbbVie's operations is set forth in Item 1A, "Risk Factors," of
AbbVie's 2023 Annual Report on Form 10-K, which has been filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission, as updated by its subsequent Quarterly Reports on Form
10-Q. AbbVie undertakes no obligation, and specifically declines, to release publicly any revisions to forward-looking statements as a result of subsequent events or
developments, except as required by law.  
References:
1 National Cancer Institute. Non-small cell lung cancer treatment – health professional version. https://www.cancer.gov/types/lung/hp/non-small-cell-lung-treatment-
pdq#_37_toc. Accessed December 8, 2021.
2 Bray F, Laversanne M, Sung H, Ferlay J, Siegel RL, Soerjomataram I, et al. Global cancer statistics 2022: GLOBOCAN estimates of incidence and mortality worldwide
for 36 cancers in 185 countries. CA: A Cancer Journal for Clinicians. 2024;74(3):229-63.
3 Ansell PJ, Baijal S, Liede A, et al. Prevalence and Characterization of c-MET–Overexpressing Non-small Cell Lung Cancer (NSCLC) Across Clinical Trial Samples and
Real-world Patient Cohorts From the City of Hope National Medical Center. Cancer Research UK (CRUK) - Lung Cancer Conference; Manchester, UK2022.
4 Liang H, Wang M. MET Oncogene in Non-Small Cell Lung Cancer: Mechanism of MET Dysregulation and Agents Targeting the HGF/c-Met Axis. Onco Targets Ther.
2020;13:2491-510.
5 Park S, Choi YL, Sung CO, et al. High MET copy number and MET overexpression: poor outcome in non-small cell lung cancer patients. Histol Histopathol.
2012;27(2):197-207.
6 Guo B, Cen H, Tan X, et al. Prognostic value of MET gene copy number and protein expression in patients with surgically resected non-small cell lung cancer: a meta-
analysis of published literatures. PLoS One. 2014;9(6):e99399.


 
SOURCE AbbVie
For further information: U.S. Media: Ilke Limoncu, ilke.limoncu@abbvie.com; Global Media: Marianne Ostrogorski, marianne.ostrogorski@abbvie.com; Investors: Liz
Shea, liz.shea@abbvie.com
https://news.abbvie.com/2024-09-27-AbbVie-Submits-Biologics-License-Application-to-the-FDA-for-Telisotuzumab-Vedotin-Teliso-V-in-Previously-Treated-Non-Small-
Cell-Lung-Cancer


AbbVie News Center
AbbVie Announces Late-Breaking Data at AAN Supporting Long-Term Safety and Efficacy of Atogepant (QULIPTA®) for Preventive
Treatment of Migraine
-     Interim analysis of an ongoing 156-week extension study supports long-term safety, tolerability and efficacy of atogepant 60 mg to prevent chronic and episodic
migraine
-     Seventy percent of subjects achieved ≥50% reduction in monthly migraine days at Weeks 13-16 and this was consistent during the 48 weeks of open-label
treatment
-     Findings will be showcased in an oral presentation at the American Academy of Neurology (AAN) Annual Meeting Scientific Platform Session for Emerging
Science
NORTH CHICAGO, Ill., April 12, 2024 /PRNewswire/ -- AbbVie (NYSE: ABBV) today announced an interim analysis of an ongoing Phase 3, open-label 156-week
extension study evaluating the long-term safety and tolerability of oral atogepant for the prevention of migraine in participants with chronic or episodic migraine. The
overall long-term safety results were consistent with the known safety profile of atogepant in chronic and episodic migraine, and no new safety signals were identified.
These results also support improvements in key efficacy outcomes, including reduction in monthly acute medication use days.
"Migraine is a debilitating neurological disease that can have a significant impact on day-to-day life," said Sait Ashina, MD, assistant professor of neurology and anesthesia
at Harvard Medical School, director of the Comprehensive Headache Center at Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center in Boston, and lead author of the study. "As the first
report of one-year atogepant data in patients with chronic migraine, this builds on the long-term observed safety and efficacy in the episodic migraine population and
demonstrates atogepant's ability to reduce migraine days and acute medication use across the spectrum of the disease."
The extension study included participants who had enrolled in the Phase 3 PROGRESS and ELEVATE clinical trials with a baseline monthly migraine day burden of 14.5
days and completed these studies. Key findings from the interim analysis include:
Monthly migraine days improved on average by 8.5 days at Weeks 13-16 and this was consistent over 48 weeks. Similar improvements were observed for monthly
headache days and monthly acute medication use days.
Seventy percent of subjects achieved ≥50% reduction in monthly migraine days at Weeks 13-16 and this was consistent during the 48 weeks of open-label treatment.
Overall safety results were consistent with the known safety profile of atogepant 60 mg, and no new safety signals were identified.
The most common treatment-emergent adverse events (≥5%) were COVID-19 (28.7%), nasopharyngitis (10.9%), and constipation (8.2%).
"We understand that migraine is a complex disease and AbbVie is steadfast in our commitment to alleviating the considerable burden facing migraine patients," said Dawn
Carlson, vice president, neuroscience development, AbbVie. "Patients should accept nothing less than migraine freedom, and the long-term safety and efficacy shown in
this interim analysis marks another step toward that goal."  
Atogepant, also known as QULIPTA® in the U.S. and AQUIPTA® in the European Union (EU), is approved in 45 countries. It is an oral calcitonin gene-related peptide
(CGRP) receptor antagonist proven to prevent both episodic and chronic migraine in adults.
AbbVie will continue to pursue additional regulatory submissions for atogepant across international markets.
About Study 3101-312-002
Study 3101-312-002 is an ongoing Phase 3, multicenter, open-label 156-week extension study evaluating the long-term safety and tolerability of oral atogepant for the
prevention of migraine in participants with chronic or episodic migraine. The primary objective was to evaluate safety and tolerability in all participants who received ≥1


dose of study intervention in the extension study (N = 595). Efficacy was evaluated by eDiary at Weeks 13-16, 29-32 and 45-48. The modified intention-to-treat population
included participants who received ≥1 dose of atogepant and had ≥1 evaluable post-baseline 4-week period of eDiary data (N=524). Pre-specified efficacy endpoints
included in the late-breaking data included change from baseline in monthly migraine days, monthly headache days, monthly acute medication use days and the proportion
of participants with ≥ 50% improvement in monthly migraine days. The current interim analysis was performed after all study participants completed the efficacy data
collection portion of the study at Week 52 or early termination. More information can be found on www.clinicaltrials.gov (NCT04686136).
About the ELEVATE Study
The ELEVATE study was a global, randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial assessing the safety, tolerability, and efficacy of atogepant 60 mg once daily (QD)
compared with placebo for the preventive treatment of episodic migraine in adult participants who have been failed by two to four classes of oral preventive treatments. The
primary endpoint was the change from baseline in mean monthly migraine days (MMDs) across 12 weeks. Secondary endpoints included achievement of more than 50%
reduction in MMDs, change from baseline in mean monthly headache days (MHDs), and change from baseline in acute medication use days across 12 weeks. More
information can be found on www.clinicaltrials.gov (NCT04740827).
About the PROGRESS Study
The PROGRESS study was a global, randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled Phase 3 trial assessing the efficacy, safety, and tolerability of atogepant for the
preventive treatment of chronic migraine. Adults with a 1-year or longer history of chronic migraine were randomly assigned (1:1:1) to receive oral atogepant 30 mg twice
a day (not a U.S. FDA-approved dose), oral atogepant 60 mg once a day, or placebo. The primary endpoint was change from baseline in mean monthly migraine days
(MMDs) across the 12-week treatment period. Key secondary endpoints for all regions included proportion of participants with at least a 50% reduction in MMDs across
the 12-week treatment period, change from baseline in mean monthly headache days (MHDs) across the 12-week treatment period, and change from baseline in mean
monthly acute medication use days across the 12-week treatment period. More information can be found on www.clinicaltrials.gov (NCT03855137).
About Atogepant (QULIPTA®)
Atogepant is an orally administered, CGRP receptor antagonist specifically developed for the preventive treatment of migraine in adults. CGRP and its receptors are
expressed in regions of the nervous system associated with migraine pathophysiology. Studies have shown that CGRP levels are elevated during migraine attacks and
selective CGRP receptor antagonists confer clinical benefit in migraine.
Atogepant, known as AQUIPTA® in the European Union, was approved by the European Commission in August 2023 for the prevention of episodic or chronic migraine in
adults with 4 or more monthly migraine days (MMDs).
IMPORTANT SAFETY INFORMATION
Do not take QULIPTA if you have had an allergic reaction to atogepant or any ingredients in QULIPTA.
Before taking QULIPTA, tell your healthcare provider about all your medical conditions, including if you:
Have kidney problems or are on dialysis
Have liver problems
Are pregnant or plan to become pregnant. It is not known if QULIPTA will harm your unborn baby
Are breastfeeding or plan to breastfeed. It is not known if QULIPTA passes into your breast milk. Talk to your healthcare provider about the best way to feed your
baby while taking QULIPTA
Tell your healthcare provider about all the medicines you take, including prescription and over-the-counter medicines, vitamins, and herbal supplements. QULIPTA
may affect the way other medicines work, and other medicines may affect how QULIPTA works. Your healthcare provider may need to change the dose of QULIPTA when
taken with certain other medicines.


QULIPTA can cause serious allergic reactions, like anaphylaxis, that can happen when you take QULIPTA or days after. Stop taking QULIPTA and get emergency medical
help right away if you get any of the following symptoms, which may be part of a serious allergic reaction: swelling of the face, lips, or tongue; itching; trouble breathing;
hives; or rash.
The most common side effects of QULIPTA are nausea, constipation, and fatigue/sleepiness. These are not all the possible side effects of QULIPTA.
QULIPTA is available in 10 mg, 30 mg, and 60 mg tablets.
You are encouraged to report negative side effects of prescription drugs to the FDA. Visit www.fda.gov/medwatch or call 1-800-FDA-1088.
If you are having difficulty paying for your medicine, AbbVie may be able to help. Visit AbbVie.com/myAbbVieAssist to learn more.
Please see full Prescribing Information.
Globally, prescribing information varies; refer to the individual country product label for complete information.
About Migraine and Chronic Migraine
Migraine is a complex neurological disease with recurrent attacks that are often incapacitating and characterized by severe, throbbing headache pain as well as
compounding associated symptoms like extreme sensitivity to light, sound or nausea.1 It is highly prevalent, affecting more than 1 billion people worldwide, including
nearly 40 million people in the United States alone, and is the highest cause of disability worldwide for people under 50 years of age.2-5
People living with chronic migraine experience headaches or migraine for 15 or more days per month, with at least eight of those days associated with migraine.6 It is
differentiated from episodic migraine, which is characterized by 0-14 headache days per month,7 by its more debilitating disease profile including greater prevalence of
comorbid conditions as well as higher frequency of headache and migraine days.7-9 Individuals with chronic migraine experience frequent disabling migraine attacks,
preventing them from performing daily activities and significantly affecting their quality of life. This results in substantial societal and familial burden.10-14 Significant
direct and indirect costs are also associated with chronic migraine, leading to economic burden for patients and healthcare systems.15-17
About AbbVie in Migraine
AbbVie is the only company with three prescription treatments designed to meet patient needs across the full spectrum of migraine to help patients living with this
debilitating disease.
At AbbVie, we are committed to empowering people living with migraine disease. We advance science that enables healthcare providers to care for people impacted across
the spectrum of migraine. Through education and partnerships with the migraine community, we strive to help those with migraine navigate barriers to care, access
effective treatments and reduce the impact of migraine on their lives.
About AbbVie in Neuroscience
At AbbVie, our commitment to preserving personhood of people around the world living with neurological and psychiatric disorders is unwavering. With more than three
decades of experience in neuroscience, we are providing meaningful treatment options today and advancing innovation for the future. AbbVie's Neuroscience portfolio
consists of approved treatments in neurological conditions, including migraine, movement disorders, and psychiatric disorders, along with a robust pipeline of
transformative therapies. We have made a strong investment in research and are committed to building a deeper understanding of neurological and psychiatric disorders.
Every challenge makes us more determined and drives us to discover and deliver advancements for those impacted by these conditions, their care partners, and clinicians.
For more information, visit www.abbvie.com.


About AbbVie
AbbVie's mission is to discover and deliver innovative medicines and solutions that solve serious health issues today and address the medical challenges of tomorrow. We
strive to have a remarkable impact on people's lives across several key therapeutic areas – immunology, oncology, neuroscience, and eye care – and products and services
in our Allergan Aesthetics portfolio. For more information about AbbVie, please visit us at www.abbvie.com. Follow @abbvie on LinkedIn, Facebook, Instagram, X
(formerly Twitter), and YouTube.
Forward-Looking Statements 
Some statements in this news release are, or may be considered, forward-looking statements for purposes of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995. The words
"believe," "expect," "anticipate," "project" and similar expressions and uses of future or conditional verbs, generally identify forward-looking statements. AbbVie cautions
that these forward-looking statements are subject to risks and uncertainties that may cause actual results to differ materially from those expressed or implied in the
forward-looking statements. Such risks and uncertainties include, but are not limited to, challenges to intellectual property, competition from other products, difficulties
inherent in the research and development process, adverse litigation or government action, and changes to laws and regulations applicable to our industry. Additional
information about the economic, competitive, governmental, technological and other factors that may affect AbbVie's operations is set forth in Item 1A, "Risk Factors," of
AbbVie's 2023 Annual Report on Form 10-K, which has been filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission, as updated by its subsequent Quarterly Reports on Form
10-Q. AbbVie undertakes no obligation, and specifically declines, to release publicly any revisions to forward-looking statements as a result of subsequent events or
developments, except as required by law.
US-QLP-240094
References:
1. Headache Classification Committee of the International Headache Society (IHS) The International Classification of Headache Disorders, 3rd edition. Cephalalgia.
2018;38:1-211.
2. Amiri P, Kazeminasab S, Nejadghaderi SA, Mohammadinasab R, Pourfathi H, Araj-Khodaei M, Sullman MJM, Kolahi AA, Safiri S. Migraine: A Review on Its
History, Global Epidemiology, Risk Factors, and Comorbidities. Front Neurol. 2022 Feb 23;12:800605. doi: 10.3389/fneur.2021.800605. PMID: 35281991; PMCID:
PMC8904749.
3. Steiner, T. J., Stovner, L. J., Vos, T., Jensen, R., & Katsarava, Z. Migraine is first cause of disability in under 50s: Will health politicians now take notice? J Headache
Pain. 2018;19:17.
4. AbbVie. Data on File: ABVRRTI73750
5. Katsarava Z, Buse DC, Manack AN, Lipton RB. Defining the differences between episodic migraine and chronic migraine. Curr Pain Headache Rep. 2012;16:86-92.
6. Headache Classification Committee of the International Headache Society (IHS) The International Classification of Headache Disorders, 3rd edition. Cephalalgia.
2018;38:1-211.
7. Katsarava Z, Buse DC, Manack AN, Lipton RB. Defining the differences between episodic migraine and chronic migraine. Curr Pain Headache Rep. 2012;16:86-92.
8. Buse DC, Manack A, Serrano DC, et al. Sociodemographic and comorbidity profiles of chronic migraine and episodic migraine sufferers. J Neurol Neurosurg
Psychiatry. 2010;81:428-432.
9. Adams AM, Serrano D, Buse DC, et al. The impact of chronic migraine: The Chronic Migraine Epidemiology and Outcomes (CaMEO) Study methods and baseline
results. Cephalalgia. 2015;35(7) 563-578.
10. Blumenfeld A, Varon S, Wilcox TK, et al. Disability, HRQoL and resource use among chronic and episodic migraineurs: results from the International Burden of
Migraine Study (IBMS). Cephalalgia. 2011;31:301-315.
11. Lantéri-Minet M, Duru G, Mudge M, Cottrell S. Quality of life impairment, disability and economic burden associated with chronic daily headache, focusing on
chronic migraine with or without medication overuse: a systematic review. Cephalalgia. 2011;31:837-850.
12. Buse DC, Scher AI, Dodick DW, et al. Impact of migraine on the family: perspectives of people with migraine and their spouse/domestic partner in the CaMEO
Study. Mayo Clin Proc. 2016;91:596-611.
13. Buse DC, Powers SW, Gelfand AA, et al. Adolescent perspectives on the burden of a parent's migraine: results from the CaMEO study. Headache. 2018;58:512-524.


14. Buse DC, Murray S, Dumas PK, et al. Life with migraine, effect on relationships, career and finances, and overall health and well-being results of the Chronic
Migraine Epidemiology and Outcomes (CaMEO) Study. Cephalalgia. 2018;38(Suppl 1):9-10.
15. Messali A, Sanderson JC, Blumenfeld AM, et al. Direct and indirect costs of chronic and episodic migraine in the United States: a web-based survey. Headache.
2016;56:306-322.
16. Sanderson JC, Devine EB, Lipton RB, et al. Headache-related health resource utilization in chronic and episodic migraine across six countries. J Neurol Neurosurg
Psychiatry. 2013;84:1309-1317.
17. Blumenfeld AM, Varon SF, Wilcox TK, et al. Disability, HRQoL and resource use among chronic and episodic migraineurs: Results from the International Burden of
Migraine Study (IBMS). Cephalalgia. 2011;31:301-315.
 
 
SOURCE AbbVie
For further information: Contact(s): U.S. Media: Sara Sanders, +1 (973) 307-6145, sara.sanders@abbvie.com; Global Media: Marianne Ostrogorski, +1 (224) 240-6336,
marianne.ostrogorski@abbvie.com; Investors: Liz Shea, +1 (847) 935-2211, liz.shea@abbvie.com
https://news.abbvie.com/2024-04-12-AbbVie-Announces-Late-Breaking-Data-at-AAN-Supporting-Long-Term-Safety-and-Efficacy-of-Atogepant-QULIPTA-R-for-
Preventive-Treatment-of-Migraine


AbbVie News Center
AbbVie Provides U.S. Regulatory Update on ABBV-951 (Foscarbidopa/Foslevodopa)
U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) issues Complete Response Letter (CRL) for ABBV-951 based on observations from an inspection that did not involve
ABBV-951 at one of AbbVie's third-party manufacturing facilities
The CRL does not identify any issues related to the safety, efficacy or labeling of ABBV-951, including the device, and does not request that AbbVie conduct
additional efficacy or safety trials related to the drug or device-related testing
AbbVie continues to work with the FDA to bring ABBV-951 to patients in the U.S. as quickly as possible
NORTH CHICAGO, Ill., June 25, 2024 /PRNewswire/ -- AbbVie (NYSE: ABBV) today announced it received a Complete Response Letter (CRL) from the U.S. Food and
Drug Administration (FDA) for the New Drug Application (NDA) for ABBV-951 (foscarbidopa/foslevodopa) for the treatment of motor fluctuations in adults with
advanced Parkinson's disease.
In its letter, the FDA cited observations that were identified during inspection of a third-party manufacturer listed in the New Drug Application (NDA). The inspection at
the facility did not involve ABBV-951 or any AbbVie medicine.
"There remains a tremendous unmet need for treatment options for patients living with advanced Parkinson's disease in the United States," said Roopal Thakkar, M.D.,
senior vice president, chief medical officer, global therapeutics, AbbVie. "We are focused on working with the FDA to bring this important therapy to patients as soon as
possible."
The CRL does not identify any issues related to the safety, efficacy or labeling of ABBV-951, including the device. The CRL does not request that AbbVie conduct
additional efficacy and safety trials related to the drug or device-related testing.
About ABBV-951
ABBV-951 (foscarbidopa/foslevodopa) is a solution of carbidopa and levodopa prodrugs for 24-hour continuous subcutaneous infusion for the treatment of motor
fluctuations in adults with advanced Parkinson's disease. ABBV-951 has been approved in 34 countries and over 2,100 patients worldwide have started treatment. AbbVie
continues to work with regulatory authorities around the world to bring ABBV-951 to people living with advanced Parkinson's disease.
About AbbVie
AbbVie's mission is to discover and deliver innovative medicines and solutions that solve serious health issues today and address the medical challenges of tomorrow. We
strive to have a remarkable impact on people's lives across several key therapeutic areas – immunology, oncology, neuroscience, and eye care – and products and services
in our Allergan Aesthetics portfolio. For more information about AbbVie, please visit us at www.abbvie.com. Follow @abbvie on LinkedIn, Facebook, Instagram, X
(formerly Twitter), and YouTube.
AbbVie Forward-Looking Statements 
Some statements in this news release are, or may be considered, forward-looking statements for purposes of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995. The words
"believe," "expect," "anticipate," "project" and similar expressions and uses of future or conditional verbs, generally identify forward-looking statements. AbbVie cautions
that these forward-looking statements are subject to risks and uncertainties that may cause actual results to differ materially from those expressed or implied in the
forward-looking statements. Such risks and uncertainties include, but are not limited to, challenges to intellectual property, competition from other products, difficulties
inherent in the research and development process, adverse litigation or government action, and changes to laws and regulations applicable to our industry. Additional
information about the economic, competitive, governmental, technological and other factors that may affect AbbVie's operations is set forth in Item 1A, "Risk Factors," of
AbbVie's 2023 Annual Report on Form 10-K, which has been filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission, as updated by its subsequent Quarterly Reports on Form


10-Q. AbbVie undertakes no obligation, and specifically declines, to release publicly any revisions to forward-looking statements as a result of subsequent events or
developments, except as required by law. 
SOURCE AbbVie
For further information: Media: Jillian Griffin, (224) 545-4122, jillian.griffin@abbvie.com, Investors: Liz Shea, +1 (847) 935-2211, liz.shea@abbvie.com
https://news.abbvie.com/2024-06-25-AbbVie-Provides-U-S-Regulatory-Update-on-ABBV-951-Foscarbidopa-Foslevodopa


AbbVie News Center
AbbVie Announces Positive Topline Results from Phase 3 TEMPO-1 Trial Evaluating Tavapadon as a Monotherapy for Parkinson's
Disease
Tavapadon met the primary endpoint in the pivotal Phase 3, TEMPO-1 fixed-dose monotherapy trial, demonstrating a statistically significant improvement from
baseline in the MDS-UPDRS Parts II and III combined score at week 26
Trial also met key secondary endpoint, demonstrating statistically significant improvement from baseline in the MDS-UPDRS Part II score
Results from the Phase 3 TEMPO-2 trial, studying tavapadon as a flexible-dose monotherapy, are expected by the end of 2024
NORTH CHICAGO, Ill., Sept. 26, 2024 /PRNewswire/ -- AbbVie (NYSE: ABBV) today announced positive topline results from its pivotal Phase 3 TEMPO-1 trial for
tavapadon as a monotherapy in early Parkinson's disease. Tavapadon is an investigational D1/D5 dopamine receptor partial agonist being studied as a once-daily treatment
for Parkinson's disease.
The TEMPO-1 trial evaluated the efficacy, safety and tolerability of two fixed doses (5 mg and 15 mg, once daily) of tavapadon as a monotherapy in adults with early
Parkinson's disease. The trial met its primary endpoint – patients treated with tavapadon in both dose groups experienced a statistically significant reduction (improvement)
from baseline compared to placebo (placebo: +1.8; 5 mg: -9.7; 15 mg: -10.2; p-value <0.0001 each dose versus placebo) in the Movement Disorder Society - Unified
Parkinson's Disease Rating Scale (MDS-UPDRS) Parts II and III combined score at week 26.
The TEMPO-1 trial also met the key secondary endpoint, demonstrating a statistically significant and clinically meaningful improvement in motor aspects of experiences of
daily living (MDS-UPDRS Part II) in both tavapadon dose groups compared to placebo at week 26.
"The TEMPO-1 data, coupled with the previously reported TEMPO-3 adjunctive trial findings, further support the potential of tavapadon for people living with Parkinson's
disease," said Primal Kaur, MD, MBA, senior vice president, immunology, neuroscience, eye care and specialty development, AbbVie. "This marks a significant step
forward in our commitment to enhancing our neuroscience portfolio following the strategic acquisition of Cerevel Therapeutics and further demonstrates our dedication to
supporting patients at all stages of this challenging neurological condition. We look forward to sharing additional data later this year from the TEMPO-2 monotherapy
trial."
The safety profile observed in the TEMPO-1 trial was consistent with prior clinical trials.1,2 The majority of adverse events reported were mild to moderate in severity.
Full results from the TEMPO-1 study will be submitted for presentation at future medical meetings and used to support regulatory submissions of tavapadon as a treatment
for Parkinson's disease. Topline results from TEMPO-2, the Phase 3 flexible-dose monotherapy trial for tavapadon, are expected by the end of 2024.
About Parkinson's Disease
Parkinson's disease is a chronic neurodegenerative disorder. It primarily results in progressive and debilitating motor symptoms, including decreased bodily movement,
slowness of movement, rigidity, tremors and postural instability, all of which result from the loss of dopamine-producing neurons in the brain.3
About Tavapadon 
Tavapadon is a selective D1/D5 receptor partial agonist in development for Parkinson's disease and is currently being studied as a once-daily medicine for use as both a
monotherapy and as an adjunctive therapy to levodopa. The safety and efficacy of investigational tavapadon has not been established.
TEMPO Clinical Development Program


The TEMPO clinical development program is evaluating the efficacy, safety and tolerability of tavapadon across a broad Parkinson's disease population, including two
monotherapy Phase 3 trials (TEMPO-1 and TEMPO-2) and one adjunctive Phase 3 trial (TEMPO-3). AbbVie is also conducting a fourth, open-label extension (OLE) trial
(TEMPO-4) to assess the long-term safety and tolerability of tavapadon.
TEMPO-1 was a Phase 3 double-blind, randomized, placebo-controlled, parallel-group, 27-week trial to evaluate the efficacy, safety and tolerability of two fixed doses of
tavapadon as a monotherapy in early Parkinson's disease. The primary endpoint was the change from baseline in the MDS-UPDRS Parts II and III combined score. Key
secondary endpoints included change from baseline in the MDS-UPDRS Parts II score and percentage of responders with "much improved" or "very much improved" on
the Patient Global Impression of Change (PGIC).
The MDS-UPDRS was developed to evaluate various aspects of Parkinson's disease including non-motor and motor experiences of daily living and motor complications. It
includes a motor evaluation and characterizes the extent and burden of disease across various populations.4 Part II contains 13 sub-scores for the motor experiences of daily
living and Part III contains 33 sub-scores based on 18 items, several with right, left or other body distribution scores for the motor examination. The sub-score for each is
summed to calculate the total scores. The scale range for Part II+III Total Score is 0-184 (Part II maximum total score of 52 + Part III maximum total score of 132). The
higher the score the greater the severity. A negative change from baseline represents an improvement in motor function.5
A total of 529 adults between the ages of 40-80 were enrolled in the trial. All had a confirmed diagnosis of Parkinson's disease and had disease duration (from time of
diagnosis) of less than three years. Patients were randomized to receive tavapadon titrated to 5 milligrams, tavapadon titrated to 15 milligrams or placebo, orally and once-
daily.
More information on the TEMPO trials can be found on www.clinicaltrials.gov:
TEMPO-1: NCT04201093
TEMPO-2: NCT04223193
TEMPO-3: NCT04542499
TEMPO-4: NCT04760769
About AbbVie in Neuroscience
At AbbVie, our commitment to preserving personhood of people around the world living with neurological and psychiatric disorders is unwavering. With more than three
decades of experience in neuroscience, we are providing meaningful treatment options today and advancing innovation for the future. AbbVie's Neuroscience portfolio
consists of approved treatments in neurological conditions, including migraine, movement disorders and psychiatric disorders, along with a robust pipeline of
transformative therapies. We have made a strong investment in research and are committed to building a deeper understanding of neurological and psychiatric disorders.
Every challenge makes us more determined and drives us to discover and deliver advancements for those impacted by these conditions, their care partners and clinicians.
For more information, visit www.abbvie.com.
About AbbVie
AbbVie's mission is to discover and deliver innovative medicines and solutions that solve serious health issues today and address the medical challenges of tomorrow. We
strive to have a remarkable impact on people's lives across several key therapeutic areas – immunology, oncology, neuroscience, and eye care – and products and services
in our Allergan Aesthetics portfolio. For more information about AbbVie, please visit us at www.abbvie.com. Follow @abbvie on LinkedIn, Facebook, Instagram, X
(formerly Twitter), and YouTube.
Forward-Looking Statements 


Some statements in this news release are, or may be considered, forward-looking statements for purposes of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995. The words
"believe," "expect," "anticipate," "project" and similar expressions and uses of future or conditional verbs, generally identify forward-looking statements. AbbVie cautions
that these forward-looking statements are subject to risks and uncertainties that may cause actual results to differ materially from those expressed or implied in the
forward-looking statements. Such risks and uncertainties include, but are not limited to, challenges to intellectual property, competition from other products, difficulties
inherent in the research and development process, adverse litigation or government action, and changes to laws and regulations applicable to our industry. Additional
information about the economic, competitive, governmental, technological and other factors that may affect AbbVie's operations is set forth in Item 1A, "Risk Factors," of
AbbVie's 2023 Annual Report on Form 10-K, which has been filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission, as updated by its subsequent Quarterly Reports on Form
10-Q. AbbVie undertakes no obligation, and specifically declines, to release publicly any revisions to forward-looking statements as a result of subsequent events or
developments, except as required by law. 
References
1. Sohur US, Gray DL, Duvvuri S, Zhang Y, Thayer K, Feng G. Phase 1 Parkinson's Disease Studies Show the Dopamine D1/D5 Agonist PF-06649751 is Safe and Well
Tolerated. Neurol Ther. 2018;7(2):307-319. doi: 10.1007/s40120-018-0114-z.
2. Riesenberg R., Werth J., Zhang Y., Duvvuri S., Gray D. PF-06649751 efficacy and safety in early Parkinson's disease: A randomized, placebo-controlled trial. Ther.
Adv. Neurol. Disord. 2020;13:1756286420911296. doi: 10.1177/1756286420911296.
3. DeMaagd G, Philip A. Parkinson's Disease and Its Management: Part 1: Disease Entity, Risk Factors, Pathophysiology, Clinical Presentation, and Diagnosis. P T.
2015 Aug;40(8):504-32. PMID: 26236139; PMCID: PMC4517533.
4. MDS-Unified Parkinson's Disease Rating Scale (MDS-UPDRS). International Parkinson and Movement Disorder Society. Accessed on September 20, 2024.
https://www.movementdisorders.org/MDS/MDS-Rating-Scales/MDS-Unified-Parkinsons-Disease-Rating-Scale-MDS-UPDRS.htm
5. Fixed-Dose Trial in Early Parkinson's Disease (PD) (TEMPO-1). National Library of Medicine. Accessed on September 20, 2024.
https://clinicaltrials.gov/study/NCT04201093
SOURCE AbbVie
For further information: Media: Victoria Wagner, victoria.wagner@abbvie.com; Investors: Liz Shea, liz.shea@abbvie.com
https://news.abbvie.com/2024-09-26-AbbVie-Announces-Positive-Topline-Results-from-Phase-3-TEMPO-1-Trial-Evaluating-Tavapadon-as-a-Monotherapy-for-
Parkinsons-Disease


AbbVie News Center
New Analysis Demonstrates the Efficacy of RINVOQ® (upadacitinib) in Atopic Dermatitis with Varying Degrees of Severity in Head
and Neck Involvement
New post-hoc analysis demonstrated efficacy of RINVOQ® (upadacitinib) in moderate-to-severe atopic dermatitis patients with varying degrees of severity in head
and neck involvement, with results in skin clearance, itch resolution and impact on quality of life at 16 weeks1
Atopic dermatitis in the head and neck regions can have a significant impact on the quality of life for patients and is highly prevalent based on real-world
observational studies2-4
New data showcasing depth and strength across AbbVie's dermatology portfolio will be presented at the 33rd European Academy of Dermatology and Venereology
(EADV) Congress in Amsterdam
NORTH CHICAGO, Ill., Sept. 25, 2024 /PRNewswire/ -- AbbVie (NYSE: ABBV) today announced positive results from a new post-hoc analysis from the Measure Up 1
and Measure Up 2 Phase 3 studies. The analysis evaluated the efficacy of upadacitinib (15 mg or 30 mg) in patients with moderate-to-severe atopic dermatitis (AD)
stratified by the severity of disease in the head and neck region at baseline compared to placebo across 16 weeks.1 
In this analysis, several optimal and stringent treatment targets – including the achievement of near complete skin clearance in the head and neck region (EASI Head &
Neck score <1), near complete skin clearance (EASI 90), no to little itch (WP-NRS 0/1) and minimal or no impact on quality of life (DLQI 0/1) – were assessed with the
treatment of upadacitinib across patient subgroups. Patients were stratified by no-to-mild, moderate, or severe head and neck involvement.1
Living with uncontrolled AD can have a substantial physical, emotional and social impact on patients' lives and is often associated with significant long-term disease
burden from debilitating symptoms.5 Research shows that AD in specific sites such as the head, neck, face and hands can have a significant impact on symptom frequency
and quality of life for patients.2,6 In the real-world observational setting, 70% of AD patients in the UP-TAINED study and at least 74.5% of AD patients in the AD-VISE
study had head and neck region involvement at baseline.3,4 The high prevalence reinforces the need for effective therapies in this high impact, challenging to treat area.
"These data stratify the severity of atopic dermatitis in the head and neck region, which is a part of the body that has significant impact on patients and is challenging to
treat," said Kilian Eyerich, MD, PhD, chair and professor at the Department of Dermatology and Venerology of the University of Freiburg, Germany. "At 16 weeks,
RINVOQ showed efficacy in patients with moderate-to-severe atopic dermatitis with various degrees of head and neck involvement, achieving optimal treatment targets
with combined measures of EASI 90 and WP-NRS 0/1, along with improvement on the patients' quality of life measured by DLQI 0/1 in a substantial number of patients."
New post-hoc analysis of the Measure Up 1 and Measure Up 2 studies showed that a higher proportion of patients with moderate-to-severe AD with varying degrees of
head and neck involvement treated with upadacitinib (15 mg or 30 mg) achieved the following optimal treatment targets compared to placebo at week 16: near complete
skin clearance in the head and neck region (EASI Head & Neck Score <1), minimal or no impact on quality of life (DLQI 0/1), and minimal disease activity, which is the
simultaneous achievement of near complete skin clearance (EASI 90) and no to little itch (WP-NRS 0/1)1:
% (N)
Placebo
Upadacitinib 15 mg Upadacitinib 30 mg
EASI Head & Neck Score < 1
1 to <4 (moderate)
27.4 (307)
67.8 (320)
75.9 (323)
4 to 7.2 (severe)
10.5 (152)
47.2 (142)
63.2 (136)


Minimal Disease Activity
(MDA; EASI 90 + WP-NRS 0/1)
0 to <1 (no-to-mild)
3.1 (97)
37.2 (94)
48.1 (108)
1 to <4 (moderate)
2.0 (304)
22.3 (319)
37.5 (320)
4 to 7.2 (severe)
0.7 (150)
24.8 (141)
37.8 (135)
DLQI 0 or 1
0 to <1 (no-to-mild)
5.7 (87)
38.4 (86)
45.5 (99)
1 to <4 (moderate)
4.6 (283)
25.3 (296)
38.0 (295)
4 to 7.2 (severe)
4.3 (139)
25.0 (128)
41.5 (123)
P0734 E-poster
Primary efficacy and safety results from these ongoing pivotal studies have been previously reported: https://rb.gy/oqscek.
"Despite taking steps to manage their condition, many patients with atopic dermatitis continue to live with debilitating symptoms, especially in highly visible areas such as
head and neck that can intensify one's physical and emotional burden," said Andrew Anisfeld, PhD, vice president, global medical affairs, immunology, AbbVie. "These
data contribute to our ongoing commitment to elevate the standard of care in atopic dermatitis so patients can strive for the best possible outcomes."
Additional abstracts to be presented at EADV 2024 supporting the efficacy and safety profile of RINVOQ (upadacitinib) for moderate-to-severe AD include:
Efficacy and safety of upadacitinib vs dupilumab in adults and adolescents with moderate-to-severe atopic dermatitis: results of an open-label, efficacy
assessor-blinded head-to-head phase 3b/4 study (LEVEL UP): This study evaluated the efficacy and safety of RINVOQ (15 mg once daily starting dose and dose-
adjusted based on clinical response) versus dupilumab (per its labeled dose) in adults and adolescents (≥12 years of age) with moderate-to-severe atopic dermatitis
(AD) who had an inadequate response to systemic therapy or when use of those therapies was inadvisable. The primary endpoint was achievement of both EASI 90
and WP-NRS 0/1 at Week 16.7 
FC08.04 Oral Presentation on Friday, 27 September 2024, 16:30-16:40
Effectiveness of upadacitinib in adults and adolescents with atopic dermatitis: 6-month interim analysis of the real-world multicountry AD-VISE study: An
interim analysis of the AD-VISE study evaluating the effectiveness and durability of response to upadacitinib for skin clearance (EASI) and itch resolution (WP-
NRS) in real-world settings. Results include 578 adult and adolescent patients with moderate-to-severe AD treated with upadacitinib (15 mg or 30 mg).3
P0683 E-Poster
Baseline criteria from a real world non-interventional study with Upadacitinib for the treatment of systemic atopic dermatitis: an analysis based on
guideline criteria (UP-TAINED): An interim analysis of the UP-TAINED study including baseline visit data from 351 patients with moderate-to-severe AD treated
with upadacitinib in real-world settings in Germany.  Results show that patients treated with upadacitinib met German checklist criteria for systemic therapy.4
P0535 E-Poster


About Atopic Dermatitis
Atopic dermatitis is a chronic, relapsing inflammatory condition characterized by a cycle of intense itching and scratching leading to cracked, scaly, oozing skin.8,9 It
affects up to an estimated 10% of adults and 24.6% of adolescents.9-11 Between 20% and 46% of adults with atopic dermatitis have moderate-to-severe disease.12 The
range of symptoms poses significant physical, psychological and economic burden on individuals impacted by the disease.9,13
About Measure Up 1 and Measure Up 2
Measure Up 1 and Measure Up 2 are Phase 3, multicenter, randomized, double-blind, parallel-group, placebo-controlled studies designed to evaluate the safety and efficacy
of RINVOQ in adult and adolescent (12 years or older) patients with moderate to severe atopic dermatitis who are candidates for systemic treatment. Patients were
randomized to RINVOQ 15 mg, RINVOQ 30 mg or placebo. The co-primary endpoints were the percentage of patients achieving EASI 75 and a validated Investigator's
Global Assessment for Atopic Dermatitis (vIGA-AD) score of 0/1 after 16 weeks of treatment. Patients receiving placebo were switched to either RINVOQ 15 mg or
RINVOQ 30 mg at week 16.14,15
About RINVOQ® (upadacitinib)
Discovered and developed by AbbVie scientists, RINVOQ is a selective and reversible JAK inhibitor that is being studied in several immune-mediated inflammatory
diseases. In human cellular assays, RINVOQ preferentially inhibits signaling by JAK1 or JAK1/3 with functional selectivity over cytokine receptors that signal via pairs of
JAK2.16
Upadacitinib (RINVOQ) is being studied in Phase 3 clinical trials for alopecia areata, giant cell arteritis, hidradenitis suppurativa, Takayasu arteritis, systemic lupus
erythematosus, and vitiligo.17-22
EU Indications and Important Safety Information about RINVOQ® (upadacitinib)23
Indications
Rheumatoid arthritis
RINVOQ is indicated for the treatment of moderate to severe active rheumatoid arthritis (RA) in adult patients who have responded inadequately to, or who are intolerant
to one or more disease-modifying anti-rheumatic drugs (DMARDs). RINVOQ may be used as monotherapy or in combination with methotrexate.
Psoriatic arthritis
RINVOQ is indicated for the treatment of active psoriatic arthritis (PsA) in adult patients who have responded inadequately to, or who are intolerant to one or more
DMARDs. RINVOQ may be used as monotherapy or in combination with methotrexate.
Axial spondyloarthritis
Non-radiographic axial spondyloarthritis (nr-axSpA)
RINVOQ is indicated for the treatment of active non-radiographic axial spondyloarthritis in adult patients with objective signs of inflammation as indicated by elevated C-
reactive protein (CRP) and/or magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), who have responded inadequately to nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs).
Ankylosing spondylitis (AS, radiographic axial spondyloarthritis)


RINVOQ is indicated for the treatment of active ankylosing spondylitis in adult patients who have responded inadequately to conventional therapy.
Atopic dermatitis
RINVOQ is indicated for the treatment of moderate to severe atopic dermatitis (AD) in adults and adolescents 12 years and older who are candidates for systemic therapy.
Ulcerative colitis
RINVOQ is indicated for the treatment of adult patients with moderately to severely active ulcerative colitis (UC) who have had an inadequate response, lost response or
were intolerant to either conventional therapy or a biologic agent.
Crohn's disease
RINVOQ is indicated for the treatment of adult patients with moderately to severely active Crohn's disease who have had an inadequate response, lost response or were
intolerant to either conventional therapy or a biologic agent.
Important Safety Information
Contraindications
RINVOQ is contraindicated in patients hypersensitive to the active substance or to any of the excipients, in patients with active tuberculosis (TB) or active serious
infections, in patients with severe hepatic impairment, and during pregnancy.
Special warnings and precautions for use
RINVOQ should only be used if no suitable treatment alternatives are available in patients:
65 years of age and older;
patients with history of atherosclerotic cardiovascular (CV) disease or other CV risk factors (such as current or past long-time smokers);
patients with malignancy risk factors (e.g. current malignancy or history of malignancy)
Use in patients 65 years of age and older
Considering the increased risk of MACE, malignancies, serious infections, and all-cause mortality in patients ≥65 years of age, as observed in a large randomised study of
tofacitinib (another JAK inhibitor), RINVOQ should only be used in these patients if no suitable treatment alternatives are available. In patients ≥65 years of age, there is
an increased risk of adverse reactions with RINVOQ 30 mg once daily. Consequently, the recommended dose for long-term use in this patient population is 15 mg once
daily.
Immunosuppressive medicinal products
Use in combination with other potent immunosuppressants is not recommended.
Serious infections
Serious and sometimes fatal infections have been reported in patients receiving RINVOQ. The most frequent serious infections reported included pneumonia and cellulitis.
Cases of bacterial meningitis and sepsis have been reported with RINVOQ. Among opportunistic infections, TB, multidermatomal herpes zoster, oral/esophageal
candidiasis, and cryptococcosis have been reported. RINVOQ should not be initiated in patients with an active, serious infection, including localized infections. RINVOQ
should be interrupted if a patient develops a serious or opportunistic infection until the infection is controlled. A higher rate of serious infections was observed with
RINVOQ 30 mg compared to 15 mg. As there is a higher incidence of infections in the elderly and patients with diabetes in general, caution should be used when treating
these populations. In patients ≥65 years of age, RINVOQ should only be used if no suitable treatment alternatives are available.


Tuberculosis
Patients should be screened for TB before starting RINVOQ. RINVOQ should not be given to patients with active TB. Anti-TB therapy may be appropriate for select
patients in consultation with a physician with expertise in the treatment of TB. Patients should be monitored for the development of signs and symptoms of TB.
Viral reactivation
Viral reactivation, including cases of herpes zoster, was reported in clinical studies. The risk of herpes zoster appears to be higher in Japanese patients treated with
RINVOQ. Consider interruption of RINVOQ if the patient develops herpes zoster until the episode resolves. Screening for viral hepatitis and monitoring for reactivation
should occur before and during therapy. If hepatitis B virus DNA is detected, a liver specialist should be consulted.
Vaccination
The use of live, attenuated vaccines during or immediately prior to therapy is not recommended. It is recommended that patients be brought up to date with all
immunizations, including prophylactic zoster vaccinations, prior to initiating RINVOQ, in agreement with current immunization guidelines.
Malignancy
Lymphoma and other malignancies have been reported in patients receiving JAK inhibitors, including RINVOQ. In a large randomised active‑controlled study of tofacitinib
(another JAK inhibitor) in RA patients ≥50 years of age with ≥1 additional CV risk factor, a higher rate of malignancies, particularly lung cancer, lymphoma, and non-
melanoma skin cancer (NMSC), was observed with tofacitinib compared to tumour necrosis factor (TNF) inhibitors. A higher rate of malignancies, including NMSC, was
observed with RINVOQ 30 mg compared to 15 mg. Periodic skin examination is recommended for all patients, particularly those with risk factors for skin cancer. In
patients ≥65 years of age, patients who are current or past long-time smokers, or patients with other malignancy risk factors (e.g., current malignancy or history of
malignancy), RINVOQ should only be used if no suitable treatment alternatives are available.
Hematological abnormalities
Treatment should not be initiated, or should be temporarily interrupted, in patients with hematological abnormalities observed during routine patient management.
Gastrointestinal Perforations
Events of diverticulitis and gastrointestinal perforations have been reported in clinical trials and from post-marketing sources. RINVOQ should be used with caution in
patients who may be at risk for gastrointestinal perforation (e.g., patients with diverticular disease, a history of diverticulitis, or who are taking nonsteroidal
antiinflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), corticosteroids, or opioids. Patients with active Crohn's disease are at increased risk for developing intestinal perforation. Patients
presenting with new onset abdominal signs and symptoms should be evaluated promptly for early identification of diverticulitis or gastrointestinal perforation.
Major adverse cardiovascular events
MACE were observed in clinical studies of RINVOQ. In a large randomised active-controlled study of tofacitinib (another JAK inhibitor) in RA patients ≥50 years of age
with ≥1 additional CV risk factor, a higher rate of MACE, defined as CV death, non-fatal myocardial infarction and non-fatal stroke, was observed with tofacitinib
compared to TNF inhibitors. Therefore, in patients ≥65 years of age, patients who are current or past long-time smokers, and patients with history of atherosclerotic CV
disease or other CV risk factors, RINVOQ should only be used if no suitable treatment alternatives are available.
Lipids
RINVOQ treatment was associated with dose-dependent increases in lipid parameters, including total cholesterol, low-density lipoprotein cholesterol, and high-density
lipoprotein cholesterol.
Hepatic transaminase elevations
Treatment with RINVOQ was associated with an increased incidence of liver enzyme elevation. Hepatic transaminases must be evaluated at baseline and thereafter
according to routine patient management. If alanine transaminase (ALT) or aspartate transaminase (AST) increases are observed and drug-induced liver injury is suspected,
RINVOQ should be interrupted until this diagnosis is excluded.


Venous thromboembolism
Events of deep venous thrombosis (DVT) and pulmonary embolism (PE) were observed in clinical trials for RINVOQ. In a large randomised active-controlled study of
tofacitinib (another JAK inhibitor) in RA patients ≥50 years of age with ≥1 additional CV risk factor, a dose‑dependent higher rate of VTE including DVT and PE was
observed with tofacitinib compared to TNF inhibitors. In patients with CV or malignancy risk factors, RINVOQ should only be used if no suitable treatment alternatives are
available. In patients with known VTE risk factors other than CV or malignancy risk factors (e.g. previous VTE, patients undergoing major surgery, immobilisation, use of
combined hormonal contraceptives or hormone replacement therapy, and inherited coagulation disorder), RINVOQ should be used with caution. Patients should be re-
evaluated periodically to assess for changes in VTE risk. Promptly evaluate patients with signs and symptoms of VTE and discontinue RINVOQ in patients with suspected
VTE.
Hypersensitivity reactions
Serious hypersensitivity reactions such as anaphylaxis and angioedema have been reported in patients receiving RINVOQ. If a clinically significant hypersensitivity
reaction occurs, discontinue RINVOQ and institute appropriate therapy.
Hypoglycemia in patients treated for diabetes
There have been reports of hypoglycemia following initiation of JAK inhibitors, including RINVOQ, in patients receiving medication for diabetes. Dose adjustment of anti-
diabetic medication may be necessary in the event that hypoglycemia occurs.
Adverse reactions
The most commonly reported adverse reactions in RA, PsA, and axSpA clinical trials (≥2% of patients in at least one of the indications) with RINVOQ 15 mg were upper
respiratory tract infections, blood creatine phosphokinase (CPK) increased, ALT increased, bronchitis, nausea, neutropenia, cough, AST increased, and
hypercholesterolemia. Overall, the safety profile observed in patients with psoriatic arthritis or active axial spondyloarthritis treated with RINVOQ 15 mg was consistent
with the safety profile observed in patients with RA.
The most commonly reported adverse reactions in AD trials (≥2% of patients) with RINVOQ 15 mg or 30 mg were upper respiratory tract infection, acne, herpes simplex,
headache, blood CPK increased, cough, folliculitis, abdominal pain, nausea, neutropenia, pyrexia, and influenza. Dose dependent increased risks of infection and herpes
zoster were observed with RINVOQ. The safety profile for RINVOQ 15 mg in adolescents was similar to that in adults. The safety and efficacy of the 30 mg dose in
adolescents are still being investigated.
The most commonly reported adverse reactions in the UC and CD trials (≥3% of patients) with RINVOQ 45 mg, 30 mg or 15 mg were upper respiratory tract infection,
pyrexia, blood CPK increased, anemia, headache, acne, herpes zoster, neutropenia, rash, pneumonia, hypercholesterolemia, bronchitis, AST increased, fatigue, folliculitis,
ALT increased, herpes simplex, and influenza. The overall safety profile observed in patients with UC was generally consistent with that observed in patients with RA.
Overall, the safety profile observed in patients with CD treated with RINVOQ was consistent with the known safety profile for RINVOQ.
The most common serious adverse reactions were serious infections.
The safety profile of RINVOQ with long-term treatment was generally similar to the safety profile during the placebo-controlled period across indications.
This is not a complete summary of all safety information.
See RINVOQ full Summary of Product Characteristics (SmPC) at www.ema.europa.eu
Globally, prescribing information varies; refer to the individual country product label for complete information.
About AbbVie
AbbVie's mission is to discover and deliver innovative medicines and solutions that solve serious health issues today and address the medical challenges of tomorrow. We


strive to have a remarkable impact on people's lives across several key therapeutic areas – immunology, oncology, neuroscience, and eye care – and products and services
in our Allergan Aesthetics portfolio. For more information about AbbVie, please visit us at www.abbvie.com. Follow @abbvie on LinkedIn, Facebook, Instagram, X
(formerly Twitter), and YouTube. 
Forward-Looking Statements
Some statements in this news release are, or may be considered, forward-looking statements for purposes of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995. The words
"believe," "expect," "anticipate," "project" and similar expressions and uses of future or conditional verbs, generally identify forward-looking statements. AbbVie cautions
that these forward-looking statements are subject to risks and uncertainties that may cause actual results to differ materially from those expressed or implied in the
forward-looking statements. Such risks and uncertainties include, but are not limited to, challenges to intellectual property, competition from other products, difficulties
inherent in the research and development process, adverse litigation or government action, and changes to laws and regulations applicable to our industry. Additional
information about the economic, competitive, governmental, technological and other factors that may affect AbbVie's operations is set forth in Item 1A, "Risk Factors," of
AbbVie's 2023 Annual Report on Form 10-K, which has been filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission, as updated by its subsequent Quarterly Reports on Form
10-Q. AbbVie undertakes no obligation, and specifically declines, to release publicly any revisions to forward-looking statements as a result of subsequent events or
developments, except as required by law.
References:
1. Eyerich K, Mendes-Bastos P, Holzer G, et al. Efficacy of upadacitinib in treating atopic dermatitis in the head and neck regions. Poster presented at: European
Academy of Dermatology and Venereology Congress; September 25-28, 2024; Amsterdam, the Netherlands. ePoster P0734.
2. Silverberg JI, et al. Patient burden and quality of life in atopic dermatitis in US adults: a population-based cross-sectional study. Ann Allergy Asthma Immunol.
2018;121(3):340-C347. doi:10.1016/j.anai.2018.07.006
3. Gooderham MJ, Pereyra-Rodriguez JJ, Sinclair R, et al. Effectiveness of upadacitinib in adults and adolescents with atopic dermatitis: 6-month interim analysis of
the real-world multicountry AD-VISE study. Poster presented at: European Academy of Dermatology and Venereology Congress; September 25-28, 2024;
Amsterdam, the Netherlands. ePoster P0683.
4. Weidinger S, Pinter A, Weyergraf T, et al. Baseline criteria from a real world non-interventional study with upadacitinib for the treatment of systemic atopic
dermatitis: an analysis based on guideline criteria. Poster presented at: European Academy of Dermatology and Venereology Congress; September 25-28, 2024;
Amsterdam, the Netherlands. ePoster P0535.
5. Wollenberg A, Gooderham M, Katoh N, et al. Patient-reported burden in adults with atopic dermatitis: an international qualitative study. Arch Dermatol Res.
2024;316(7):380. doi:10.1007/s00403-024-03130-w
6. Hang L, Aroman MS, Taieb C, et al. The impact of eczema involving visible areas of the skin on patients' quality of life. JEADV Clin Pract. 2022;1:105-110.
doi:10.1002/jvc2.20
7. Silverberg JI, Bunick C, Hong HC, et al. Efficacy and safety of upadacitinib vs dupilumab in adults and adolescents with moderate-to-severe atopic dermatitis: results
of an open-label, efficacy assessor-blinded head-to-head phase 3b/4 study (Level Up). Paper presented at: European Academy of Dermatology and Venereology
Congress; September 25-28, 2024; Amsterdam, the Netherlands. FC08.04.
8. Nutten S. Atopic dermatitis: global epidemiology and risk factors. Ann Nutr Metab. 2015;66(suppl 1):8-16. doi:10.1159/000370220
9. Weidinger S, Beck LA, Bieber T, Kabashima K, Irvine A. Atopic dermatitis. Nat Rev Dis Primers. 2018;4(1):1. doi:10.1038/s41572-018-0001-z
10. Simpson EL, Paller AS, Siegfried EC, et al. Efficacy and safety of dupilumab in adolescents with uncontrolled moderate to severe atopic dermatitis: a phase 3
randomized clinical trial. JAMA Dermatol. 2020;156(1):44-56. doi:10.1001/jamadermatol.2019.3336
11. Blauvelt A, Guttman-Yassky E, Paller AS, et al. Long-term efficacy and safety of dupilumab in adolescents with moderate-to-severe atopic dermatitis: results through
week 52 from a phase III open-label extension trial (LIBERTY AD PED-OLE). Am J Clin Dermatol. 2022;23(3):365-383. doi:10.1007/s40257-022-00683-2
12. Shrestha S, Miao R, Wang L, Chao J, Yuce H, Wei W. Burden of atopic dermatitis in the United States: analysis of healthcare claims data in the commercial,
Medicare, and Medi-Cal databases. Adv Ther. 2017;34(8):1989-2006. doi:10.1007/s12325-017-0582-z
13. European Federation of Allergy and Airways Diseases Patients' Associations. Atopic eczema: itching for life report—quality of life and costs for people with severe
atopic eczema in Europe. Published July 2018. Accessed August 28, 2023. https://www.efanet.org/images/2018/EN_-


_Itching_for_life_Quality_of_Life_and_costs_for_people_with_severe_atopic_eczema_in_Europe_.pdf
14. Evaluation of upadacitinib in adolescent and adult patients with moderate to severe atopic dermatitis (eczema) (Measure Up 1). ClinicalTrials.gov identifier:
NCT03569293. Updated March 5, 2024. Accessed April 9, 2024. https://clinicaltrials.gov/study/NCT03569293
15. A study to evaluate upadacitinib in adolescents and adults with moderate to severe atopic dermatitis (Measure Up 2). ClinicalTrials.gov identifier: NCT03607422.
Updated March 5, 2024. Accessed April 9, 2024. https://clinicaltrials.gov/study/NCT03607422
16. RINVOQ. Summary of product characteristics. AbbVie. Accessed September 19, 2024.
17. A study to evaluate the safety and effectiveness of upadacitinib tablets in adult and adolescent participants with severe alopecia areata (Up-AA). ClinicalTrials.gov
identifier: NCT06012240. Updated September 19, 2024. Accessed September 19, 2024. https://clinicaltrials.gov/study/NCT06012240
18. A study to evaluate the safety and efficacy of upadacitinib in participants with giant cell arteritis (SELECT-GCA). ClinicalTrials.gov identifier: NCT03725202.
Updated February 23, 2024. Accessed September 19, 2024. https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT03725202
19. A study to assess change in disease activity and adverse events of oral upadacitinib in adult and adolescent participants with moderate to severe hidradenitis
suppurativa who have failed anti-TNF therapy (Step-Up HS). ClinicalTrials.gov identifier: NCT05889182. Updated August 29, 2024. Accessed April 9, 2024.
https://clinicaltrials.gov/study/NCT05889182
20. A study to evaluate the efficacy and safety of upadacitinib in participants with Takayasu arteritis (TAK) (SELECT-TAK). ClinicalTrials.gov identifier:
NCT04161898. Updated March 22, 2024. Accessed April 9, 2024. https://clinicaltrials.gov/study/NCT04161898
21. Program to assess adverse events and change in disease activity of oral upadacitinib in adult participants with moderate to severe systemic lupus erythematosus
(SELECT-SLE). ClinicalTrials.gov identifier: NCT05843643. Updated September 19, 2024. Accessed April 9, 2024. https://clinicaltrials.gov/study/NCT05843643
22. A study to assess adverse events and effectiveness of upadacitinib oral tablets in adult and adolescent participants with vitiligo (Viti-Up). ClinicalTrials.gov identifier:
NCT06118411. Updated March 28, 2024. Accessed April 9, 2024. https://clinicaltrials.gov/study/NCT06118411
23. RINVOQ [Package Insert]. North Chicago, IL: AbbVie Inc.; 2024.
 
SOURCE AbbVie
For further information: Global Media: Mary Byun, +1 (862) 261-8567, Mary.byun@abbvie.com, Investors: Liz Shea, +1 (862) 261-8130, liz.shea@abbvie.com, U.S.
Media: Stephanie Tennessen, +1 (224) 214-8638, stephanie.tennessen@abbvie.com
https://news.abbvie.com/2024-09-25-New-Analysis-Demonstrates-the-Efficacy-of-RINVOQ-R-upadacitinib-in-Atopic-Dermatitis-with-Varying-Degrees-of-Severity-in-
Head-and-Neck-Involvement


AbbVie News Center
AbbVie Receives Positive CHMP Opinion for Risankizumab (SKYRIZI®) for the Treatment of Adults with Moderately to Severely
Active Ulcerative Colitis
The positive opinion is based on results from two pivotal Phase 3 trials, INSPIRE and COMMAND, that evaluated the efficacy and safety of risankizumab in adults
with moderately to severely active ulcerative colitis (UC)1,2
In both trials, the primary endpoint of clinical remission (per Adapted Mayo Score*) and key secondary endpoints, including endoscopic improvement** and
histologic-endoscopic mucosal improvement,† were met1,2
UC is a chronic, idiopathic, immune-mediated inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) affecting the large intestine. It can lead to a substantial burden and often results in
disability3-6
NORTH CHICAGO, Ill., May 31, 2024 /PRNewswire/ -- AbbVie (NYSE: ABBV) today announced that the European Medicines Agency's (EMA's) Committee for
Medicinal Products for Human Use (CHMP) adopted a positive opinion recommending the approval of risankizumab (SKYRIZI®) for the treatment of adults with
moderately to severely active UC who have had an inadequate response, lost response, or were intolerant to either conventional or biologic therapy. The recommended
induction dose is 1200 mg intravenous (IV), followed by a maintenance dose of 180 mg or 360 mg subcutaneous (SC), based on individual patient presentation. The final
European Commission decision is expected in the third quarter of 2024.
"Results from the INSPIRE and COMMAND Phase 3 trials show that patients with moderately to severely active UC can strive for long-term management goals that go
beyond symptom control, including histologic-endoscopic mucosal healing," said Edouard Louis, M.D., Ph.D., professor and head of gastroenterology, Liège University
Hospital; dean of faculty, Liège University; and INSPIRE trial investigator. "This finding is significant since treatment goals for patients are evolving beyond symptom
management to include endoscopic remission.7-9 Studies have shown that endoscopic improvement may be associated with favorable longer-term outcomes, including
lower risk of hospitalizations and improved quality of life."10-12
The CHMP positive opinion is supported by data from two Phase 3 clinical trials: the INSPIRE induction trial1 and the COMMAND maintenance trial.2 The INSPIRE trial
evaluated 1200 mg of IV risankizumab administered as an induction dose at 0, 4 and 8 weeks in patients with moderately to severely active UC. In the COMMAND trial,
patients who responded to induction treatment in INSPIRE were rerandomized to receive 180 mg or 360 mg of SC risankizumab as maintenance doses for an additional 52
weeks. The safety profile of risankizumab in both trials was consistent with the safety profile observed in previous trials across other indications, with no new safety risks
observed.1,2
"At AbbVie, patients are at the heart of everything we do," said Kori Wallace, M.D., Ph.D., vice president, immunology clinical development, AbbVie. "We are motivated
to bring new treatment options to patients in need through our commitment to ongoing research and development in gastroenterology. We eagerly await the EMA's final
decision for risankizumab on its use in UC which has the potential to help patients meet their long-term treatment goals."
Use of risankizumab in UC is not approved in the European Union, and its safety and efficacy remain under evaluation.
Risankizumab (SKYRIZI) is part of a collaboration between Boehringer Ingelheim and AbbVie, with AbbVie leading development and commercialization globally.
*Adapted Mayo Score is based on stool frequency subscore (SFS), rectal bleeding subscore (RBS) and endoscopic subscore (ES).
**Endoscopic improvement is defined as ES ≤1 without evidence of friability.
†Histologic-endoscopic mucosal improvement (HEMI) is defined as an ES of ≤1 without evidence of friability and Geboes score ≤3.1.


About Ulcerative Colitis (UC)
UC is a chronic, idiopathic, immune-mediated IBD of the large intestine that causes continuous mucosal inflammation extending, to a variable extent, from the rectum to
the more proximal colon.3,4 The hallmark signs and symptoms of UC include rectal bleeding, abdominal pain, bloody diarrhea, tenesmus (a sense of pressure), urgency and
fecal incontinence.4,5 The disease course of UC varies between patients and can range from quiescent disease to chronic refractory disease, which in some cases can lead to
surgery or life-threatening complications.4,5 The severity of symptoms and unpredictability of disease course can lead to substantial burden and often disability among
those living with the disease.6
About the INSPIRE Induction Trial1
INSPIRE is a Phase 3, multicenter, randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial evaluating the efficacy and safety of IV risankizumab 1200 mg administered at 0, 4
and 8 weeks as induction therapy in patients with moderately to severely active UC. The primary endpoint of the trial is clinical remission (per Adapted Mayo Score,
defined as SFS ≤1 and not greater than baseline, RBS of 0 and ES ≤1 without friability) at week 12. Key secondary endpoints include clinical response (decrease from
baseline in the Adapted Mayo Score ≥2 points and ≥30% from baseline, plus a decrease in RBS ≥1 or an absolute RBS ≤1), endoscopic improvement (ES ≤1 without
friability) and HEMI (ES of 0 or 1 without friability and Geboes score ≤3.1) at week 12.
Top-line results of the study were shared in March 2023. More information can be found on www.clinicaltrials.gov (NCT03398148).
About the COMMAND Maintenance Trial2
COMMAND is a Phase 3, multicenter, randomized, double-blind, controlled, 52-week maintenance trial designed to evaluate the efficacy and safety of SC risankizumab
180 mg or 360 mg in adults with moderately to severely active UC. This study had a rerandomized withdrawal design in which all patients received risankizumab IV
induction, and those who responded to risankizumab IV were rerandomized to receive SC risankizumab 180 mg or 360 mg or withdrawal from risankizumab treatment
(induction-only control group). For those patients randomized to withdraw from risankizumab treatment (induction-only control group), the rest of the study duration was a
risankizumab washout. The objective of the Phase 3 trial is to evaluate the efficacy and safety of risankizumab 180 mg or 360 mg as maintenance therapy versus
withdrawal from risankizumab treatment (control) in patients with moderately to severely active UC who responded to risankizumab IV induction in the INSPIRE trial.
The primary endpoint of the trial is clinical remission (per Adapted Mayo Score, defined as SFS ≤1 and not greater than baseline, RBS of 0 and ES ≤1 without evidence of
friability) at week 52. Key secondary endpoints include endoscopic improvement (ES ≤1 without evidence of friability), HEMI (ES of ≤1 without evidence of friability and
Geboes score ≤3.1), and steroid-free clinical remission at week 52 (defined as clinical remission per Adapted Mayo Score at week 52 and corticosteroid free for ≥90 days
prior to week 52).
Top-line results from this study were shared in June 2023. More information can be found on www.clinicaltrials.gov (NCT03398135).
About Risankizumab (SKYRIZI)
SKYRIZI is an interleukin (IL)-23 inhibitor that selectively blocks IL-23 by binding to its p19 subunit.13 IL-23, a cytokine involved in inflammatory processes, is thought
to be linked to a number of chronic immune-mediated diseases.14,15 SKYRIZI is approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration and the EMA for the treatment of
plaque psoriasis, psoriatic arthritis, and Crohn's disease.13,16
EU Indications and Important Safety Information About Risankizumab (SKYRIZI)13
SKYRIZI is indicated for the treatment of moderate to severe plaque psoriasis in adults who are candidates for systemic therapy. SKYRIZI, alone or in combination with
methotrexate, is indicated for the treatment of active psoriatic arthritis in adults who have had an inadequate response or who have been intolerant to one or more disease-
modifying antirheumatic drugs. SKYRIZI is indicated for the treatment of adult patients with moderately to severely active Crohn's disease who have had an inadequate
response to, lost response to, or were intolerant to conventional or biologic therapy.


SKYRIZI is contraindicated in patients hypersensitive to the active substance or to any of its excipients and in patients with clinically important active infections (e.g.,
active tuberculosis [TB]). SKYRIZI may increase the risk of infection. In patients with a chronic infection, a history of recurrent infection, or known risk factors for
infection, SKYRIZI should be used with caution. Treatment with SKYRIZI should not be initiated in patients with any clinically important active infection until the
infection resolves or is adequately treated.
Patients treated with SKYRIZI should be instructed to seek medical advice if signs or symptoms of clinically important chronic or acute infection occur. If a patient
develops such an infection or is not responding to standard therapy for the infection, the patient should be closely monitored, and SKYRIZI should not be administered
until the infection resolves.
Prior to initiating treatment with SKYRIZI, patients should be evaluated for TB infection. Patients receiving SKYRIZI should be monitored for signs and symptoms of
active TB. Anti-TB therapy should be considered prior to initiating SKYRIZI in patients with a past history of latent or active TB in whom an adequate course of treatment
cannot be confirmed.
Prior to initiating therapy with SKYRIZI, completion of all appropriate immunizations should be considered according to current immunization guidelines. If a patient has
received live vaccination (viral or bacterial), it is recommended to wait at least 4 weeks prior to starting treatment with SKYRIZI. Patients treated with SKYRIZI should
not receive live vaccines during treatment and for at least 21 weeks after treatment.
If a serious hypersensitivity reaction occurs, administration of SKYRIZI should be discontinued immediately, and appropriate therapy initiated.
The most frequently reported adverse reactions were upper respiratory infections (from 13% in psoriasis to 15.6% in Crohn's disease). Commonly (≥1/100 to <1/10)
reported adverse reactions included tinea infections, headache, pruritus, fatigue, and injection site reactions.
This is not a complete summary of all safety information.
See the full Summary of Product Characteristics (SmPC) for SKYRIZI at www.ema.europa.eu.
Globally, prescribing information varies; refer to the individual country product label for complete information.
About AbbVie in Gastroenterology
With a robust clinical trial program, AbbVie is committed to cutting-edge research to drive exciting developments in IBD, like ulcerative colitis and Crohn's disease. By
innovating, learning, and adapting, AbbVie aspires to eliminate the burden of IBD and make a positive long-term impact on the lives of people with IBD. For more
information on AbbVie in gastroenterology, visit https://www.abbvie.com/our-science/therapeutic-focus-areas/immunology/immunology-focus-areas/gastroenterology.html.
About AbbVie
AbbVie's mission is to discover and deliver innovative medicines and solutions that solve serious health issues today and address the medical challenges of tomorrow. We
strive to have a remarkable impact on people's lives across several key therapeutic areas — immunology, oncology, neuroscience, and eye care — and products and services
in our Allergan Aesthetics portfolio. For more information about AbbVie, please visit us at www.abbvie.com. Follow @abbvie on LinkedIn, Facebook, Instagram, X
(formerly Twitter), and YouTube.
Forward-Looking Statements
Some statements in this news release are, or may be considered, forward-looking statements for the purposes of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995. The
words "believe," "expect," "anticipate," "project" and similar expressions and uses of future or conditional verbs generally identify forward-looking statements. AbbVie
cautions that these forward-looking statements are subject to risks and uncertainties that may cause actual results to differ materially from those expressed or implied in
the forward-looking statements. Such risks and uncertainties include, but are not limited to, challenges to intellectual property, competition from other products, difficulties
inherent in the research and development process, adverse litigation or government action, and changes to laws and regulations applicable to our industry. Additional


information about the economic, competitive, governmental, technological and other factors that may affect AbbVie's operations is set forth in Item 1A, "Risk Factors," of
AbbVie's 2023 Annual Report on Form 10-K, which has been filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission, as updated by its subsequent Quarterly Reports on Form
10-Q. AbbVie undertakes no obligation, and specifically declines, to release publicly any revisions to forward-looking statements as a result of subsequent events or
developments, except as required by law. 
References
1. Louis, E. et al. (2023) "OP021 Risankizumab Induction Therapy in Patients With Moderately to Severely Active Ulcerative Colitis: Efficacy and Safety in the
Randomized Phase 3 INSPIRE Study." UEG Journal. 11(8):26.
2. Louis, E. et al. (2024) "OP06 Risankizumab Maintenance Therapy in Patients With Moderately to Severely Active Ulcerative Colitis: Efficacy and Safety in the
Randomised Phase 3 COMMAND Study." J Crohn's Colitis. 18(1):10-12. doi: https://doi.org/10.1093/ecco-jcc/jjad212.0006.
3. Gajendran, M. et al. (2019) "A Comprehensive Review and Update on Ulcerative Colitis." Dis Mon. 65(12):100851. doi:10.1016/j.disamonth.2019.02.004.
4. Crohn's & Colitis Foundation of America. "The Facts About Inflammatory Bowel Diseases." https://www.crohnscolitisfoundation.org/sites/default/files/2019-
02/Updated%20IBD%20Factbook.pdf. Published November 2014. Accessed May, 2024.
5. National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases. "Ulcerative colitis." https://www.niddk.nih.gov/health-information/digestive-diseases/ulcerative-
colitis/all-content. Updated September 2020. Accessed May, 2024.
6. Mehta, F. (2016) "Report: economic implications of inflammatory bowel disease and its management." Am J Manag Care. 22(3 Suppl):51-60.
7. Van Assche, G. et al. (2016) "Burden of Disease and Patient-Reported Outcomes in Patients With Moderate to Severe Ulcerative Colitis in the Last 12 Months -
Multicenter European Cohort Study." Dig Liver Dis. 48(6):592-600. doi:10.1016/j.dld.2016.01.011.
8. Dave, M. Loftus, EV Jr. (2012) "Mucosal Healing in Inflammatory Bowel Disease-A True Paradigm of Success?" Gastroenterol Hepatol (N Y). 8(1):29-38.
9. Turner, D. et al. (2021) "STRIDE-II: An Update on the Selecting Therapeutic Targets in Inflammatory Bowel Disease (STRIDE) Initiative of the International
Organization for the Study of IBD (IOIBD): Determining Therapeutic Goals for Treat-to-Target Strategies in IBD." Gastroenterology. 160(5):1570-1583.
doi:10.1053/j.gastro.2020.12.031.
10. Colombel, J.F. et al. (2020) "Outcomes and Strategies to Support a Treat-to-Target Approach in Inflammatory Bowel Disease: A Systematic Review." J Crohns
Colitis. 14(2):254-266. doi:10.1093/ecco-jcc/jjz131.
11. Picco ,M.F., Farraye, F.A. (2019) "Targeting Mucosal Healing in Crohn's Disease." Gastroenterol Hepatol (N Y). 15(10):529-538.
12. Armuzzi, A. et al. (2020) "The Association Between Disease Activity and Patient-Reported Outcomes in Patients With Moderate-to-Severe Ulcerative Colitis in the
United States and Europe." BMC Gastroenterol. 20(1):18. doi:10.1186/s12876-020-1164-0.
13. Skyrizi. Summary of Product Characteristics.
14. Duvallet, E. et al. (2011) "Interleukin-23: A Key Cytokine in Inflammatory Diseases." Ann Med. 43(7):503-511. doi:10.3109/07853890.2011.577093.
15. Moschen, A.R. et al. (2019) "IL-12, IL-23 and IL-17 in IBD: Immunobiology and Therapeutic Targeting." Nat Rev Gastroenterol Hepatol.16(3):185-196.
doi:10.1038/s41575-018-0084-8.
16. Skyrizi. Highlights of Prescribing Information. https://www.accessdata.fda.gov/drugsatfda_docs/label/2022/761262s000lbl.pdf. Updated June 2022. Accessed May,
2024.