30 Aug 2024
A vehicle of the World Food Programme shot at while approaching an Israeli checkpoint after escorting aid trucks in Gaza.
Photo by WFP
The Humanitarian Situation Update is issued by OCHA Occupied Palestinian Territory three times per week. The Gaza Strip is covered
on Mondays and Fridays, and the West Bank is covered on Wednesdays. The next update will be issued on 2 September.
Key Highlights
Attacks hitting humanitarian personnel and missions are further limiting the delivery of life-saving aid.
In August, the number of humanitarian missions and movements within Gaza that have been denied access by Israeli authorities
has almost doubled.
For the first time since the beginning of hostilities, the Israeli military announced that residents, displaced people and
humanitarian organizations could return to certain evacuated areas.
Humanitarian Situation Update #211 |
Gaza Strip


Humanitarian Developments
Israeli bombardment from the air and land continues to be reported across much of the Gaza Strip, resulting in further civilian
casualties, displacement, and destruction of houses and other civilian infrastructure. Ground incursions, particularly in Beit
Hanoun, southwest Gaza city, eastern Khan Younis and Deir al Balah and east as well as south Rafah, with heavy fighting, also
continue to be reported. Rocket fire was reportedly fired from within Gaza.
Between the afternoons of 26 and 29 August, according to the Ministry of Health (MoH) in Gaza, 167 Palestinians were killed and
321 were injured. Between 7 October 2023 and 29 August 2024, at least 40,602 Palestinians were killed and 93,855 were injured,
according to MoH in Gaza.
The following are some of the deadly incidents reported between 25 and 29 August:
On 25 August, five Palestinians, including three children and one woman, were reportedly killed and 15 others injured when a
house was hit near Patient’s Friends Society Medical Centre, west of Gaza city.
On 26 August, five Palestinians including a girl and a woman, were reportedly killed and others injured when an apartment,
hosting internally displaced people (IDPs), was hit in Al Yarmouk Street, central Gaza city.
On 26 August, five Palestinians, including four children, were reportedly killed when an apartment was hit in At Tuffah
neighbourhood, east Gaza city.
On 26 August, seven Palestinians were reportedly killed on the beach of Gaza city.
On 26 August, seven Palestinians, including a woman, two boys and a girl, were reportedly killed and others injured when an
apartment was hit in central Al Maghazi, in Deir al Balah.
On 26 August, five Palestinians, including a journalist, were reportedly killed and others injured when a car was hit in in Al
Mawasi, Khan Younis.
On 27 August, six Palestinians, including two girls and a boy, were reportedly killed and seven others, including children, were
injured in Batan as Sameen area in western Khan Younis.
On 28 August, nine Palestinians, including two children and a person with disability, were reportedly killed and others injured
when they were hit at the entrance of Al Manfalouti governmental school, designated as an IDP shelter, on Salah ad Deen
Road in eastern Deir al Balah.
On 29 August, eight Palestinians, including two children and three women, were reportedly killed and others injured when a
residential building was hit near Al Amal Hotel, west Gaza city.
Between the afternoons of 26 and 30 August, at least one Israeli soldier was reportedly killed in Gaza, according to the Israeli
military. Between 7 October 2023 and 30 August 2024, according to the Israeli military and official Israeli sources cited in the
media, more than 1,539 Israelis and foreign nationals were killed, the majority on 7 October and its immediate aftermath. The
figure includes 339 soldiers killed in Gaza or along the border in Israel since the beginning of the ground operation. In addition,
2,263 Israeli soldiers were reported injured since the beginning of the ground operation. As of 30 August, it is estimated that 107
Israelis and foreign nationals remain captive in Gaza, including hostages who have been declared dead and whose remains are
withheld in Gaza. On 27 August, one Israeli hostage and the body of an Israeli soldier presumed to have been killed on 7 October
were returned to Israel.
Following the partial resumption of operations at the European Gaza Hospital in Khan Younis on 25 August, 17 out of Gaza’s 36
hospitals are now functional – all of them partially; three in North Gaza, seven in Gaza, four in Khan Younis and three in Deir al
Balah. While the Al Aqsa Hospital in Deir al Balah remains open, almost all patients and the hundreds of IDPs seeking sanctuary
there fled, after an evacuation order was issued on 25 August, to areas nearby and hostilities intensified. In response, Médecins
Sans Frontières (MSF) and the MoH expedited the previously planned opening of a field hospital elsewhere in Deir al Balah. MSF
states that it was “left with no choice” but to prematurely open the facility, delayed thus far due to difficulties bringing supplies into
Gaza, and that the facility is only partially functional and now operating under pressure amid dire shortages of supplies and
resources. Nine out of 14 field hospitals are operational in Gaza, five of them only partially, while only 44 per cent of primary
health-care centres (58 out of 132) and medical points (126 out of 285) continue to provide minimal services. On 27 August, the
NGO Emergency announced that “after several months of waiting to obtain humanitarian permits,” it had managed to enter Gaza
and was endeavoring to open a clinic that would provide basic medical and surgical care, outpatient reproductive health services
and post-operative follow-up care, among other services.
For the first time since the beginning of hostilities, the Israeli military announced on 29 and 30 August that residents and IDPs
could return to certain in southern of Deir al Balah and west of Khan Younis, which had previously been subject to evacuation
orders. These areas had seen many residents displaced following evacuation orders issued on 16, 21 and 25 August. UN and
humanitarian partners are preparing to return and continue their missions, as these areas included service facilities, water wells
and more. Since October, more than 86 per cent of the Gaza Strip's space remains affected by evacuation orders, including over 40
orders issued since 1 January 2024.* Hundreds of thousands of displaced families continue to be forced to move into an area of
around 47 square kilometres (approximately 13 per cent of Gaza’s total land area, as of 30 August), designated by the Israeli
military in Al Mawasi, which has become overcrowded and lacks essential infrastructure and services.


Briefing the UN Security Council on 29 August, the Acting Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency Relief
Coordinator, Joyce Msuya, stated: “The situation in Gaza is beyond desperate… Civilians are hungry. They are thirsty. They are sick.
They are homeless. They have been pushed beyond the limits of endurance – beyond what any human being should bear,” Msuya
highlighted the struggle that people are facing to find shelter and other essentials while being forced into a small area of the Strip.
Severe overcrowding, coupled with the lack of clean water, sanitation facilities and basic hygiene items like soap, are taking a
heavy toll on children, with skin infections continuing to increase among them. As of 30 June, WHO had already recorded 103,385
cases of scabies and lice, 65,368 cases of skin rashes and 11,214 cases of chickenpox in the Strip. With MSF support, the
Palestinian Agricultural Development Association (PARC) has been providing emergency latrines, solar water pumps and basic
health care to some of the displaced people arriving in the Al Mawasi area of Khan Younis. “Every day, we see between 300 to 400
people at the medical clinic, of which 200 cases are related to skin conditions,” explained PARC pediatrician Dr. Youssef Salaf Al-
Farra, underscoring that children are the most affected by highly contagious skin conditions. MSF claims that, for three months, it
has been trying to import 4,000 hygiene kits, comprising items such as soap, toothbrushes, shampoo and laundry power, to
improve living conditions in Khan Younis, but the importation has not been allowed by Israeli authorities.
The number of unaccompanied and separated children in Gaza has likely increased to 3-5 per cent of the overall displaced
population according to a recent assessment by International Rescue Committee (IRC). Doctors reported to the IRC that children
without surviving family members are being found in hospitals, essentially living there alone due to the lack of alternative care
arrangements. IRC indicated that, since October, 41 per cent of families in Gaza were caring for children who were not their own,
and a UN survey in April 2024 estimates that this rate is more than eight times higher than in other emergency situations, where
the figures range between three and five per cent. Despite the care provided by community members, the grave conditions and the
lack of resources are heightening fears of child neglect, particularly amid recent displacements, as families may be forced to
prioritize their own children over others, due to limited space and resources. IRC concluded that “children who are abandoned or
separated from their families, as well as orphans, face particularly high risks of child labour, exploitation, neglect and mental
health issues. Their access to critical resources for survival is also severely reduced.” To tackle family separation, UNICEF is
distributing 450,000 identity bracelets to children, including the child’s name, date of birth, and the phone number of a family
member.
Attacks on humanitarian personnel and missions are increasing the risk of limiting access and delivering life-saving aid. The World
Food Programme (WFP) announced that, while operations across Gaza continue, it has had to temporarily suspended staff
movements following an attack on one of its convoys on 28 August. The UN Under-Secretary-General for Safety and Security Gilles
Michaud highlighted that humanitarians, including UN personnel, are operating under extreme risk, with the ongoing crisis being
the deadliest on record for the UN. This attack underscores the rapidly shrinking humanitarian space in Gaza, said WFP Executive
Director Cindy McCain, stating that “this is totally unacceptable and the latest in a series of unnecessary security incidents that
have endangered the lives of WFP’s team in Gaza... The current deconfliction system is failing and this cannot go on any longer...”
In August, the number of humanitarian missions and movements within Gaza that have been denied access by Israeli authorities
has doubled in the north (68 vs. 30) and almost doubled in the south (99 vs 53), compared with July. Between 1 and 29 August,
out of the 199 planned humanitarian missions coordinated with the Israeli authorities for northern Gaza, 74 (37 per cent) were
facilitated, 68 (34 per cent) were denied access, 42 (21 per cent) were impeded (including missions that succeeded), and 15 (8 per
cent) were cancelled due to logistical, operational, or security issues. In southern Gaza, out of 372 coordinated humanitarian
movements, 173 (46 per cent) were facilitated, 99 (27 per cent) were denied access, 52 (14 per cent) were impeded, and 48 (13
per cent) were cancelled.
The forced evacuation of WFP’s main operating hub in Deir al Balah, has drastically reduced its capacity to provide critical food
assistance as the Programme also lost access to its last operational warehouse in the governorate and had to evacuate five
community kitchens, which were crucial for feeding displaced families. Recent mass evacuation orders issued by the Israeli
military have significantly intensified these threats, causing severe disruptions in the delivery of life-saving aid and drastically
reducing the availability of safe spaces for aid workers. The UN Under-Secretary-General for Safety and Security Gilles Michaud
noted that over 200 UN personnel were forced to evacuate from Deir al Balah, a key humanitarian hub, further straining the already
overstretched operations. The dire security situation has caused significant setbacks, particularly in health and food security with
the planned polio vaccination campaign, which requires a large number of staff to enter Gaza, continues to face severe delays due
to the heightened security risks as highlighted by Michaud. Staff may be able to return and continue their work in areas previously
evacuated but announced safe to return by Israeli authorities. Michaud and McCain have both called on all parties to respect
international humanitarian law and ensure the safety of humanitarian workers.
Food delivery is severely hampered by ongoing fighting and damaged roads, and limited crossing points. The WFP reports that
Palestinians are confined to small areas with inadequate sanitation and health care, frequently displaced by evacuation orders
that disrupt vital aid services, including WFP-supported food distributions and community kitchens. In the past two months, WFP
has managed to bring in only half of the 24,000 metric tonnes of food aid required to hit its targets. Due to dwindling supplies and
decreased aid inflows, it has been forced to reduce the contents of food parcels distributed. WFP also emphasizes the urgent
need for road repairs, warning that war-damaged roads, already difficult to navigate, are expected to become impassable with
forthcoming rain and flooding. In a positive development, WFP reports that the community kitchens it supports in northern Gaza
have begun providing hot meals with fresh vegetables, marking the first delivery of such produce which aims at supplementing
emergency food rations and preventing malnutrition.
Funding
As of 29 August, Member States have disbursed about US$1.63 billion out of $3.42 billion (48 per cent) requested to meet the
most critical needs of 2.3 million* people in Gaza and 800,000 people in the West Bank, including East Jerusalem, between
January and December 2024. For funding analysis, please see the Flash Appeal Financial Tracking dashboard. (*2.3 million


reflects the projected population of the Gaza Strip upon issuance of the Flash Appeal in April 2024. As of July 2024, the UN
estimates that about 2.1 million people remain in the Gaza Strip, and this updated number is now used for programmatic
purposes.)
During July 2024, the occupied Palestinian territory Humanitarian Fund (oPt HF) managed a total of 98 ongoing projects, totalling
$81.4 million. These projects aimed to address urgent needs in the Gaza Strip (89 per cent) and the West Bank (11 per cent). The
projects were strategically focused on education, food security, health, protection, emergency shelter and non-food items, water,
sanitation, and hygiene, coordination and support services, multi-purpose cash assistance and nutrition. Of these projects, 55
projects are being implemented by international non-governmental organizations (INGOs), 31 by national NGOs and 12 by UN
agencies. Notably, 32 out of the 67 projects implemented by INGOs or the UN are being implemented in collaboration with national
NGOs. Since 7 October, the oPt HF has mobilized over $112 million from Member States and private donors to support urgent
humanitarian and life-saving programmes across the Occupied Palestinian Territory. Of the total funding, 89 per cent has been
allocated to projects in Gaza. A summary of the oPt HF activities and challenges in July 2024 is available through this link and the
2023 Annual Report of the oPt HF can be accessed here. Private donations are collected directly through the oPt HF. For an overall
picture of the OCHA-managed pooled funds response since October 2023, please see link.
* Asterisks indicate that a figure, sentence, or section has been rectified, added, or retracted after the initial publication of this update.


A Palestinian child riding his bicycle in Gaza city on 17 September 2024. Photo by OHCHR/Olga Cherevko
23 Sep 2024
The Humanitarian Situation Update is issued by OCHA Occupied Palestinian Territory three times per week. The Gaza Strip is covered
on Mondays and Fridays, and the West Bank is covered on Wednesdays. The next update will be issued on 25 September.
Key Highlights
The health crisis in Gaza deepens as only 17 out of 36 hospitals remain functional – all partially – and just 57 out of 132 primary
health-care facilities are functional, all amid crippling shortages of fuel, medicine, and essential supplies.
In August, 46 per cent of coordinated humanitarian movements in Gaza were denied or impeded; making it the most challenging
month for humanitarian access since January 2024.
Humanitarian efforts to establish 215 temporary learning Sites for more than 30,000 children are underway as schools continue to
be attacked.
Humanitarian Developments
Israeli bombardment from the air and land continues to be reported across the Gaza Strip, resulting in further civilian casualties,
displacement, and destruction of houses and other civilian infrastructure. Ground operations, particularly in Beit Hanoun,
southwest Gaza city, eastern Khan Younis and Deir al Balah, and east and south Rafah, with heavy fighting, also continue to be
reported.
Between the afternoons of 18 and 22 September, according to the Ministry of Health (MoH) in Gaza, 158 Palestinians were killed
and 267 were injured. Between 7 October 2023 and 22 September 2024, at least 41,431 Palestinians were killed and 95,818 were
injured, according to MoH in Gaza.
The following are some of the deadly incidents reported between 19 and 20 September:
On 19 September, seven Palestinians, including two women, were reportedly killed and others injured when a residential
building was hit in the vicinity of At Tawba Mosque in Ad Daraj area, Gaza city.
On 20 September, six Palestinians, including four women, were reportedly killed and others injured when a residential
building was hit in the vicinity of Municipality of Gaza Park in Gaza city.
On 20 September, eight Palestinians, including two boys, one girl, and two women, were reportedly killed and others injured
when a chalet was hit in western An Nuseirat, in Deir al Balah.
On 20 September, six Palestinians, including at least one woman, were reportedly killed and others injured when an
apartment was hit in Batn Al Samin area, south of Khan Younis.
On 20 September, 13 Palestinians, including three women and three children, were reportedly killed and others injured when
a house was hit in north Rafah.
Between the afternoons of 20 and 23 September, no Israeli soldiers were reportedly killed in Gaza, according to the Israeli military.
Between 7 October 2023 and 23 September 2024, according to the Israeli military and official Israeli sources cited in the media,
Humanitarian Situation Update #221 |
Gaza Strip


more than 1,546 Israelis and foreign nationals were killed, the majority on 7 October and its immediate aftermath. The figure
includes 346 soldiers killed in Gaza or along the border in Israel since the beginning of the ground operation. In addition, 2,287
Israeli soldiers were reported injured since the beginning of the ground operation.
The World Health Organization (WHO) reports that only 17 out of 36 hospitals remain functional across Gaza – all of them
partially –, with a cumulative capacity of 1,501 in-patient, maternity and Intensive Care Unit (ICU) beds. Ten field hospitals are also
presently operational in the Deir al Balah, Khan Younis and Rafah governorates, six fully and four only partially, providing an
additional in-patient capacity of over 600 beds. On 18 September, Médecins Sans Frontières (MSF) announced the opening of a
new field hospital in Deir al Balah but added that at present the facility is only providing outpatient consultations as the “expansion
of other services depends on Israeli authorities, who have delayed supplies entering Gaza”. Meanwhile, out of 132 primary health-
care facilities, only 57 are currently functional in the Strip, including 10 out of 27 UNRWA health-care centres. Alongside a critical
shortage of medicines and essential supplies, the Health Cluster warns of a severe scarcity of blood units across Gaza, which is
endangering the life of patients, including people suffering from Thalassemia and other conditions requiring regular blood
transfusions. Meanwhile, MoH continues to warn about the lack of fuel, spare parts, and filters to repair and maintain electricity
generators in hospitals, which is threatening the functionality of ICUs, nurseries, and other essential health services.
Out of six WHO missions planned to northern and southern Gaza between 13 and 18 September, only one was facilitated by Israeli
authorities, while three were significantly delayed and two were denied. WHO and its partners managed to reach health facilities in
northern Gaza twice on 14 and 18 September, delivering 48,000 litres of fuel to the Kamal Adwan and Indonesian hospitals. They
also provided critically needed medical supplies to the newly rehabilitated Emergency Department at the Al Shifa Hospital and
non-communicable disease kits to assist the Palestine Red Crescent Society's (PRCS) facilities in the north. WHO also facilitated
the rotation of emergency medical team (EMT) personnel between northern and southern Gaza and the deployment of a new
paediatrics EMT to the Kamal Adwan Hospital. Although the Indonesian Hospital is in an active evacuation zone, and the Al Awda
and Kamal Adwan hospitals are just 200 and 485 metres respectively from the affected area; they continue providing services to
the affected population. Meanwhile, while dental care is almost absent in Gaza due to the lack of equipment and facilities, on 19
September, UNRWA reopened a dental clinic in one of its health centres in Khan Younis. The PRCS also reported the completion of
the first fully equipped mobile operating room in southern Gaza that can be deployed whenever needed.
Internally displaced persons (IDP) continue to be endangered. At least 32 people were killed when three schools were hit between
21 and 23 September. On 21 September, UNRWA’s Az-Zaytun School sheltering thousands of IDPs southeast Gaza city was hit,
killing 22 Palestinians and injuring over 30 others, according to Gaza MoH. The Palestinian Civil Defense reported that 14 children
and five women were among the fatalities, and that of those who required amputations nine were children. On 22 September,
seven Palestinians were reportedly killed when the Kafar Qasam school, sheltering IDPs in Ash Shata’ Refugee Camp, west of
Gaza city, was hit. Three people from the same family were reportedly killed when the Khalid Bin Al-Waleed school in Nusseirat
Refugee Camp in Deir al Balah was hit, including a child and her parents.
UNRWA has stated that schools “have turned into rubble or overcrowded places of refuge for displaced families living in fear.”
Within this grim context, efforts are underway to establish temporary learning spaces (TLS) for children. As of 15 September,
Education Cluster partners established 215 TLS across the Gaza Strip benefiting 33,616 children. While this is an important
accomplishment, the number of children attending these spaces is only 5 per cent of school age children in Gaza. According to
the Education Cluster, ongoing hostilities severely restrict access to in-person learning spaces, and the persistent blockade on
educational supplies hampers scaling-up the response. Additionally, the use of UNRWA and other schools as shelters for
displaced populations further limits the availability of facilities for educational purposes.
In August, the UN and its humanitarian partners conducted 598 coordinated humanitarian movements across the Gaza Strip: 395
in the south and 203 in the north. Of these, only 250 were facilitated, 99 impeded (which include movements that managed to
ultimately proceed) and 176 were denied. In total, 46 per cent of humanitarian movements were either denied or impeded in
August, making it the most challenging month for humanitarian access since January 2024. The impact was particularly severe in
the north, where only 45 per cent of the 203 requested movements were facilitated, including just one out of nine planned health
movements to deliver over 200,000 litres of fuel to hospitals.
Access challenges are compounded by unpredictable and restrictive time windows for humanitarian movements through the two
Israeli-controlled checkpoints between the south and north of the Gaza strip. In addition to the limited operating hours, technical
failures at the checkpoints have further delayed movements and compromised the safety of aid workers. For instance, on 24
August, a reportedly broken gate at a checkpoint delayed one movement by four hours, resulting in the failure to deliver 10,000
vaccines, 58 pallets of medicine, and 24,000 litres of fuel. In this challenging context, OCHA and other humanitarian partners
attempted to conduct two movements in August to assist families with children trapped under the rubble. Humanitarian convoys
are frequently required by Israeli forces to wait at holding points before approaching checkpoints, often for hours, leaving them
exposed in high-risk environments. On 5 August, a convoy of two trucks delivering essential commodities to the north was
attacked by crowds just 15 minutes after arriving at the holding point, resulting in the loss of all the goods intended to support
vulnerable people in the north.
Funding
As of 23 September, Member States have disbursed about US$1.63 billion out of the $3.42 billion (48 per cent) requested to meet
the most critical needs of 2.3 million* people in Gaza and 800,000 people in the West Bank, including East Jerusalem, between
January and December 2024. For funding analysis, please see the Flash Appeal Financial Tracking dashboard. (*2.3 million
reflects the projected population of the Gaza Strip upon issuance of the Flash Appeal in April 2024. As of July 2024, the UN
estimates that about 2.1 million people remain in the Gaza Strip, and this updated number is now used for programmatic
purposes.)


During August 2024, the occupied Palestinian territory Humanitarian Fund (oPt HF) managed 93 ongoing projects, totalling $79.7
million. These projects aimed to address urgent needs in the Gaza Strip (89 per cent) and the West Bank (11 per cent). They were
strategically focused on education, food security, health, protection, emergency shelter and non-food items, water, sanitation, and
hygiene, coordination and support services, multi-purpose cash assistance and nutrition. Of these projects, 52 projects are being
implemented by international non-governmental organizations, 29 by national NGOs and 12 by UN agencies. Notably, 32 out of the
64 projects implemented by INGOs or the UN are being implemented in collaboration with national NGOs. Monthly updates, annual
reports, and a list of all funded projects per year, are available on the oPt Humanitarian Fund webpage, under the financing section.


A young girl collects water in the Gaza Strip. Photo by UNRWA
29 Jul 2024
The Humanitarian Situation Update is issued by OCHA Occupied Palestinian Territory three times per week. The Gaza Strip is covered
on Mondays and Fridays, and the West Bank is covered on Wednesdays. The next update will be issued on 31 July.
Key Highlights
Evacuation orders and intensified hostilities continue to push thousands more people into recurrent displacement.
Regional health ministers call for a “safe and enabling environment” to stop a polio outbreak in Gaza, as WHO dispatches over one
million vaccines to the Strip. 
People in Gaza city are facing a near total lack of fresh fruits and vegetables, according to a UNICEF rapid market assessment. 
Nearly 85 per cent of school buildings in Gaza have been directly hit or damaged, a new assessment by the Education Cluster
finds. 
Humanitarian Developments
Israeli bombardment from the air, land, and sea continues to be reported across much of the Gaza Strip, resulting in further civilian
casualties, displacement, and destruction of houses and other civilian infrastructure. Ground incursions and heavy fighting also
continue to be reported. 
In a 26 July briefing to the Security Council on the humanitarian situation in Gaza, UN Deputy  Special Coordinator for the Middle
East Peace Process, Resident Coordinator and Humanitarian Coordinator (DSC/RC/HC) for the Occupied Palestinian Territory
(OPT), Mr. Muhannad Hadi, emphasized that “current procedures in place for getting aid and fuel consignments from crossings to
people in need are cumbersome, dangerous and costly.” He noted that the risks facing humanitarian staff in Gaza are
“unacceptable” and reiterated the UN’s call for inter alia the protection of civilians, the concurrent opening of all crossings
(including Rafah crossing) and all checkpoints within Gaza and permitting aid trucks to drive directly from Egypt and Jordan to
destinations inside Gaza. 
Between the afternoons of 25 and 29 July, according to the Ministry of Health (MoH) in Gaza, 188 Palestinians were killed and 520
were injured. Between 7 October 2023 and 29 July 2024, at least 39,363 Palestinians were killed and 90,923 were injured,
according to MoH in Gaza.  
On 27 July, the Israeli military reportedly struck Khadija Girls’ School in Deir al Balah, which was sheltering over 4,000 internally
displaced people (IDPs) according to Palestinian Civil Defence (PCD) as cited in the media, and housed a field medical unit
belonging to the nearby Al Aqsa Hospital. According to MoH in Gaza, the attack resulted in the death of at least 30 Palestinians
and the injury of over 100 others. In a subsequent statement reported by the media, the Government Media Office further indicated
that at least 15 children and eight women were among those killed. Most of the wounded were transferred to Al Aqsa Hospital,
which had to cope with a new mass casualty influx as a result. Between 7 October 2023 and 22 July 2024, WHO recorded at least
492 health attacks throughout the Strip, affecting 109 health facilities, including 32 hospitals, and 114 ambulances. 
The following are among other deadly incidents reported between 25 and 27 July: 
Humanitarian Situation Update #197 |
Gaza Strip


On 25 July, at about 13:15, three Palestinians were reportedly killed when a location was hit in the vicinity of Gaza European
Hospital in southeastern Khan Younis.  
On 25 July, at about 13:35, four Palestinians were reportedly killed and several others injured when a location was hit in At
Tahlya area in Maan in eastern Khan Younis. 
On 27 July, at about 16:55, four Palestinians were reportedly killed when a group of Palestinians was hit on Al Barka Street in
Deir al Balah. 
Between the afternoons of 26 and 29 July, one Israeli soldier was reported killed in Gaza, according to the Israeli military. Between
7 October 2023 and 29 July 2024, according to the Israeli military and official Israeli sources cited in the media, over 1,529 Israelis
and foreign nationals were killed, the majority on 7 October and its immediate aftermath and including 329 soldiers killed in Gaza
or along the border in Israel since the beginning of the ground operation. In addition, 2,165 soldiers were reported injured since the
beginning of the ground operation. As of 29 July, it is estimated that 115 Israelis and foreign nationals remain captive in Gaza,
including hostages who have been declared dead.
Humanitarian partners tracking population movements in Gaza estimate that new directives issued by the Israeli authorities on 27
and 28 July affected parts of Rafah, Khan Younis and Deir al Balah governorates, where an estimated 56,000 people had been
sheltering. According to the Site Management Working Group (SMWG), the areas are estimated to include dozens of sites for IDPs,
including collective centres (UNRWA and non-UNRWA), makeshift sites and scattered sites, in addition to educational and water
and sanitation (WASH) facilities as well as medical points.
Tens of thousands of people continue to experience new waves of internal displacement across Gaza due to the issuance of
evacuation orders by the Israeli military and intensified hostilities. Between 22 and 27 July, the SMWG estimated that more than
200,000 people were displaced, including 9,000 people who arrived in Al Mawasi on 27 July. Following the evacuation order issued
on 27 July, the Gaza MoH stated that they are no longer able to restore the functionality of the Gaza European Hospital in Khan
Younis, adding that four Primary Health-care Centres and several field medical points have been rendered out of service.
Describing the dreadful conditions facing people across Gaza, UNRWA noted that, “people in Gaza are exhausted. Almost every
day they are forced to flee their makeshift shelters, with nowhere safe to go,” and “often with very little time to do so.”
Amid only scant access to water and sanitation, communicable diseases and skin infections continue to rage across Gaza,
highlighted WHO, UNICEF and UNRWA this week. Similarly, PCD warned that overcrowding of displaced people in areas that lack
water, hygiene and a sewage system has already led to the spread of diseases, including skin diseases among children. While
accurate and timely disease surveillance is impossible under current conditions, as of 7 July, WHO had already recorded nearly
one million cases of acute respiratory infections, 577,000 cases of acute watery diarrhea, 107,000 of acute jaundice syndrome,
12,000 of bloody diarrhea, as well as hundreds of cases of suspected mumps and meningitis. Moreover, 103,385 cases of scabies
and lice, 65,368 of skin rashes and over 11,000 of chicken pox had already been registered as of 30 June. 
Efforts continue to avert the spread of polio after six circulating variant poliovirus type 2 (cVDPV2) strains were detected in
environmental samples from Deir al Balah and Khan Younis in late June. The WHO Director-General, Tedros Adhanom
Ghebreyesus, has announced that the organization will be sending to Gaza more than one million polio vaccines. Gaza had a
vaccination coverage of 99 per cent prior to the war, a rate that has now dropped to 86 per cent due to the “decimation of the
health system, lack of security, destruction of infrastructure, mass displacement and shortage of medical supplies,” explained the
WHO Director-General. “While no cases of polio have been recorded yet, without immediate action, it is just a matter of time before
it reaches the thousands of children who have been left unprotected,” he added, stressing that children under the age of five are at
risk, “especially infants under two because many have not been vaccinated over the nine months of conflict.”  
On 25 July, the WHO Regional Director for the Eastern Mediterranean, Dr. Hanan Balkhy, convened the 11th meeting of the
Regional Subcommittee on Polio Eradication and Outbreaks, which brought together health ministers from across the Eastern
Mediterranean region, Global Polio Eradication Initiative (GPEI) partners and UNICEF to collectively discuss decisive actions to
contain the outbreak in Gaza. Participants unanimously called for a “safe and enabling environment, by way of a ceasefire or days
of tranquillity, to allow for steps to be taken to stop polio from paralyzing children in Gaza, and surrounding areas and countries.”
Such steps include intensified surveillance, multiple mass polio immunization campaigns “that may be integrated with other
crucial health service delivery when feasible”, as well as enhanced community engagement.  
According to a new assessment by the Education Cluster, which relies on satellite imagery collected on 6 July, nearly 85 per cent
of school buildings in the Gaza Strip (477 out of 564) have been directly hit or damaged and are currently estimated to require
either full reconstruction or major rehabilitation work to be functional again. Fifty-five per cent of these schools (264) are
government schools, a third (156) are UNRWA schools, and 12 per cent (57) are private schools. The increase is mainly attributed
to an increase in the number of directly hit schools, particularly in Rafah governorate where 21 out of 35 schools newly classified
as “directly hit” over the past two months are located. Moreover, according to the assessment, the majority of directly hit schools
are in areas that were subject to evacuation orders by the Israeli military. Prior to the war, “direct hit” or “damaged” schools served
about 525,000 students and had more than 19,000 teachers and represent, respectively, about 84 and 85 per cent of the total
student population and teaching staff in Gaza. In addition, 47 schools are now assessed as “likely damaged,” where at least one
damaged site has been identified within 30 to 70 metres of school buildings, indicating the possibility that school structures have
sustained moderate damage; including this category indicates that up to 93 per cent of school buildings have sustained some
level of damage. Two months ago, 76 per cent of school buildings were estimated to require full reconstruction or rehabilitation,
which demonstrates how ongoing hostilities have a grave impact on school facilities and the possibility that they can be used
again for educational purposes to safeguard the right of children to learn. 


Between 19 and 25 July, UNICEF conducted a rapid market assessment in Gaza city and Deir al Balah to examine food stock
prices and diversity of products in supermarkets, wholesaler food suppliers and street market stalls. Flour prices in Gaza city have
been found to be stable recently but had regularly fluctuated depending on the supply from about 1,000 shekels (US$268) per 25
kilogrammes to around 10 shekels ($2.68). According to the assessment, Gaza city markets, however, have no vegetables and
fruits due to the lack of private commercial trucks entering the area and traders face the triple challenges of high transportation
costs, insecurity and spoilage of fresh foods due to prolonged transit periods of trucks at crossings. In Deir Al Balah’s main
markets, fruit and vegetable wholesalers possess more diverse stocks of fresh fruits, but with only two types of vegetables. One
supermarket was found to be very busy, as it had three payment methods available: cash, bank cards and e-wallets. The Gaza
Multi-Purpose Cash Assistance (MPCA) working group reports that between 8 and 21 July, more than 11,127 households in Gaza
received emergency MPCA, either first payments or top-ups in the case of vulnerable groups, including persons with disabilities
(PwD) and nursing mothers. Overall, between 7 October 2023 and 21 July 2024, 197,407 households (1,362,156 people) received
at least one MPCA payment. The current MPCA transfer value is ILS 1,000 (around US$275).  The use of “e-wallets” for digital
transactions and purchases continues to expand among humanitarian Cash actors and the first Post-Distribution Monitoring
(PDM) survey of e-wallet payments indicates a redemption rate of up to 80 per cent. 
Funding 
As of 29 July, Member States have disbursed about $1.54 billion out of $3.42 billion (45 per cent) requested to meet the most
critical needs of 2.3 million* people in Gaza and 800,000 people in the West Bank, including East Jerusalem, between January and
December 2024. On 10 July, DSC/RC/HC Hadi stated that “more funding is urgently needed – as is a safe, enabling environment
inside Gaza. Increased funding now will enable the humanitarian community to scale up operations as soon as conditions permit.
For funding analysis, please see the Flash Appeal Financial Tracking dashboard. (*2.3 million reflects the projected population of
the Gaza Strip upon issuance of the Flash Appeal in April 2024. As of July 2024, the UN estimates that about 2.1 million people
remain in the Gaza Strip, and this updated number is now used for programmatic purposes.) 
The occupied Palestinian territory Humanitarian Fund (oPt HF) has 111 ongoing projects, for a total of $88 million, addressing
urgent needs in the Gaza Strip (89 per cent) and the West Bank (11 per cent). Of the total, 63 projects are being implemented by
international non-governmental organizations (INGOs), 34 by national NGOs and 14 by UN agencies. Since 7 October, the oPt HF
has mobilized over $112 million from Member States and private donors to support urgent humanitarian and life-saving
programmes across the OPT. Of total funding, 89 per cent has been allocated to projects in Gaza. A summary of the oPt HF
activities and challenges in June 2024 is available through this link and the 2023 Annual Report of the oPt HF can be accessed
here. Private donations are collected directly through the oPt HF. 


Piles of waste alongside the tents of displaced people in Rafah, southern Gaza Strip. Photo: UNICEF, Iyad El Baba
28 Jun 2024
The Humanitarian Situation Update is issued by OCHA Occupied Palestinian Territory three times per week. The Gaza Strip is covered
on Mondays and Fridays, and the West Bank is covered on Wednesdays. The next update will be issued on 1 July.
Key Highlights
A high risk of famine persists in the Gaza Strip, a new IPC analysis finds.
At least 60,000 people were displaced from Gaza City and 5,000 from Al Mawasi area of Rafah overnight, according to initial
estimates by the Site Management Working Group.
Twenty-one children suffering from cancer leave Gaza in first medical evacuation since early May; according to the Ministry of
Health in Gaza, about 10,000 cancer patients, including nearly 1,000 children, require medical evacuation.
Critical water sanitation and hygiene (WASH) services are hanging by a thread due to severe fuel shortages, warns the WASH
Cluster.
Humanitarian Developments
Israeli bombardment from the air, land, and sea continues to be reported across much of the Gaza Strip, resulting in further civilian
casualties, displacement, and destruction of houses and other civilian infrastructure, particularly in Ash Shuja’iyeh area of Gaza
City and Al Mawasi area of Rafah. The Site Management Working estimates that, overnight on 27 June, about 60,000 to 80,000
people were displaced from areas east and northeast of Gaza City and moved westwards and, according to initial indications,
about 5,000 people were displaced from Al Mawasi area of Rafah to Al Mawasi area of Khan Younis. Ground incursions and heavy
fighting also continue to be reported.
Between the afternoons of 24 and 27 June, according to the Ministry of Health (MoH) in Gaza, 139 Palestinians were killed and
331 were injured. Between 7 October 2023 and 27 June 2024, at least 37,765 Palestinians were killed and 86,429 were injured in
Gaza, according to MoH in Gaza. Casualty figures covering the period until the afternoon of 28 June are not available as of the
time of reporting.
The following are among the deadliest incidents reported between 24 and 27 June:
On 24 June, at about 16:40, ten Palestinians, including nine men and a boy, were reportedly killed when a group of
Palestinians was hit at Bani Suhaila Square on Salah ad Din Road, in eastern Khan Younis.
On 25 June, at about 20:00, at least nine Palestinians, including women, were reportedly killed when a house was hit in Ash
Shati' Refugee Camp, west of Gaza City. Other people were reportedly trapped under rubble.
On 25 June, at about 2:30, eight Palestinians, including women and children, were reportedly killed when Abed Al Fatah
Hamoud School, designated as a shelter for internally displaced persons was hit in At Tuffah neighbourhood, in central Gaza
City.
On 26 June, at about 13:55, four Palestinians were reportedly killed when a group of Palestinians attempting to get internet
connection was hit in Al Jurn area of Jabalya, in North Gaza.
Humanitarian Situation Update #184 |
Gaza Strip


On 26 June, at about 20:30, eight Palestinians, including children, were reportedly killed and others injured when a group of
Palestinians was hit in Al Alami area in Jabalya Refugee Camp, in North Gaza.
On 27 June, at about 6:50, five Palestinians were reportedly killed, and others injured when a residential building was hit in
Ash Ash Shuja’iyeh, east of Gaza City.
On 27 June, the General Directorate of the Palestinian Civil Defense (PCD) announced that three of their workers were killed
in the line of duty and several other people were injured in an Israeli airstrike in Al Bureij.
Between the afternoons of 24 and 28 June, there were no Israeli soldiers were killed in Gaza, according to the Israeli military.
Between 7 October and 28 June, according to the Israeli military and official Israeli sources cited in the media, over 1,514 Israelis
were killed, the majority on 7 October. These include 314 soldiers killed in Gaza or along the border in Israel since the beginning of
the ground operation*. In addition, 2,005 soldiers were reported injured since the beginning of the ground operation. As of 28 June,
it is estimated that 120 Israelis and foreign nationals remain captive in Gaza, including fatalities whose bodies are withheld.
Attacks on humanitarian aid workers and health facilities continue to be reported. On 25 June, Médecins Sans Frontières (MSF)
reported the death of its sixth staff member in Gaza. According to MSF, the staff member was a physiotherapist who was killed,
along with five other people including three children, by Israeli forces while cycling to an MSF clinic in Gaza City. In a 26 June press
release, Al Awda Health and Community Association announced the complete destruction of its health centre in Rafah based on
aerial and satellite imagery. The Association explained that this was its fifth facility to be destroyed since October 2023, with the
other four hospitals and health centers also being directly targeted. Decrying the reported killing of 500 health workers “against
the backdrop of systematic attacks on hospitals and other medical facilities,” the UN Human Rights Office (OHCHR) stressed this
week that “hospitals, medical personnel and ambulances must be respected and protected at all times.” OHCHR also cited
“credible information” that Israeli military “raids on hospitals have often led to mass detention and enforced disappearances,
including of medical staff.” OHCHR appealed to Israel, as the occupying power in Gaza, to “immediately cease the killing of
protected people, including healthcare workers,” as well as urged impartial investigations into the killings and the release of all
arbitrarily detained health workers.
On 27 June, the Israeli military ordered residents of 28 residential blocs (~7.3 square kilometres) in Ash Shuja’iyeh, Al Turkuman,
Judaidah, and At Tuffah, all east of Gaza City, to immediately evacuate via Salah Ad Din Road to what the Israeli military defines as
a "humanitarian zone" in southern Gaza. According to the Site Management Working Group, it is estimated that about 60,000 to
80,000 people were displaced on 27 June from areas east and northeast of Gaza City and moved westwards. In total,
approximately 285 square kilometres, or about 78 per cent of the Gaza Strip, have been placed under evacuation orders by the
Israeli military. This includes all areas north of Wadi Gaza, where residents were first instructed to evacuate in late October, as well
as specific areas south of Wadi Gaza designated for evacuation since 1 December.
On 24 June, Save the Children (SCI) reported that over 20,000 children in Gaza are estimated to be “lost, disappeared, detained,
buried under rubble or in mass graves.” Children who have been separated from their parents and are with strangers are
particularly vulnerable to violence, abuse, exploitation and neglect, added the NGO. Coupled with repeated displacement and
incessant hostilities, children in Gaza have become susceptible to a wide spectrum of mental health issues that doctors are
observing in Gaza; MSF Mental Health Activity Manager in Gaza, Davide Musardo, described images of children “maimed, with
burns or without parents. Children having panic attacks, because physical pain triggers psychological wounds…Calmer children
draw[ing] drones and military jets.” Little children do not have the tools to cope with the scale of loss, suffering and trauma
surrounding them, Musardo explained, and are increasingly showing symptoms of depression, anxiety and acute stress, with many
expressing a “desire to die instead of living this horror.”
A high risk of famine persists in the Gaza Strip as long as hostilities continue and humanitarian access remains restricted,
according to the third update on food insecurity in the Gaza Strip published on 25 June by the Integrated Food Security Phase
Classification (IPC) partnership. The IPC analysis finds that about 96 per cent of the population of the Gaza strip are likely to face
crisis or worse levels of acute food insecurity (IPC Phase 3 or above) between 16 June and 30 September, including 33 per cent
(745,000 people) projected to face emergency levels of acute food insecurity (IPC Phase 4) and 22 per cent (495,000 people)
projected to face catastrophic levels of acute food insecurity (IPC Phase 5). Moreover, in contrast to the February projections that
famine would likely occur in northern Gaza by the end of May, available evidence does not suggest that famine is currently
occurring in the northern governorates, where food deliveries and nutrition services increased in March and April. In the southern
governorates, the situation has deteriorated following intensified hostilities in Rafah and increased access restrictions since early
May; over a million people have been displaced from Rafah to areas with “significantly reduced” essential infrastructure and basic
services and “people’s ability to cope and access humanitarian assistance” has been eroded.  Across the Gaza Strip, the latest
data show that, on a regular basis, more than half of the population does not have any food to eat in the house, and over 20 per
cent go entire days and nights without eating. To buy food, more than half of the households were forced to exchange their
clothes for money and one third resorted to picking up trash to sell.
Nutrition Cluster partners have observed trends similar to those in the IPC analysis through the Nutrition Vulnerability Analysis
(NVA) published on 25 June, based on data collected in southern and northern Gaza between 1 April and 24 May 2024. The
analysis finds that improved humanitarian access in April contributed to limited improvements in food security indicators and the
diets of children (aged 6–23 months). Yet, the analysis points to a deterioration in dietary diversity among children aged 6 to 23
months and pregnant and breastfeeding women in May compared with April, based on a post-distribution monitoring (PDM)
assessment carried out by UNICEF between 20 and 24 May across the Gaza Strip. In southern Gaza, PDM results showed a
deterioration in dietary diversity among children aged 6 to 23 months, with 99 per cent eating from four or fewer food groups in
May, compared with 96 per cent in April. Although with a limited sample, data covering northern Gaza revealed similar trends.
Across the Gaza Strip, 93 per cent of children aged 6 to 23 months had eaten two or fewer food groups in the 24 hours preceding


the survey, while among pregnant and breastfeeding women, 96 per cent had eaten two or fewer food groups. Furthermore, the
PMD found that 85 per cent of parents reported that their children had gone without eating for a whole day due to lack of money or
other resources, while almost 100 per cent of households reported having to skip meals or eat less food to secure their child’s
diet. The absence of minimum dietary diversity – which entails the consumption of at least five out of eight defined food groups
for children aged 6–23 months and at least five out of 10 defined food groups for women—can seriously jeopardize both women’s
health and child development. Access constraints and volatile security conditions have led to the closure of nutrition delivery
points in May and June and to delays in establishing new nutrition services, according to the Nutrition Cluster, thereby hampering
the scale up of operational presence to ensure the early detection of children and women requiring nutrition support.
On 27 June, MoH in Gaza announced that 21 children suffering from cancer, mostly leukaemia, exited Gaza through the Israeli-
controlled Kerem Shalom crossing to Egypt. Calling for the re-opening of Rafah Crossing, MoH emphasized the urgent need to
evacuate 10,200 people suffering from cancer in Gaza, including 980 paediatric cases of whom 250 are in critical condition.
Moreover, while more than 1,200 people require hemodialysis treatment, nearly half (593 patients) are relying on only 24 dialysis
machines at Al Aqsa Hospital in Deir al Balah, and there are only 17 dialysis machines available in the North Gaza and Gaza
governorates, according to MoH. Due to shortages of equipment and medications, dialysis patients are now receiving treatment
only twice a week, with each session lasting less than one hour and a half, which is far below the frequency and length of
treatment required, underscored the Ministry. According to MoH in Gaza, over 70 per cent of essential medicines are missing at
Gaza’s hospitals and primary healthcare centers and about 70 per cent of health infrastructure has been destroyed,
disproportionately affecting cancer and kidney patients.
The scale of health needs in Gaza continues to severely outstretch the scant resources available. On 23 June, WHO and its
partners delivered fuel and medical supplies to Al Ahli and As Sahaba hospitals in northern Gaza. Five children - four suffering
from cancer and one having second-degree burns - were also transferred from Al Ahli Hospital in Gaza governorate to Nasser
Medical Complex in Khan Younis governorate. On 26 June, the Palestine Red Crescent Society (PRCS) received six trucks of
medicines and supplies through Kerem Shalom Crossing. However, the inability to bring in sufficient medical supplies and fuel has
forced aid organizations to scale back their services. UNRWA reported that the severe deficit of medicines and fuel is hampering
life-saving operations by its teams who continue to provide services at only 29 per cent of the Agency’s health centres that remain
operational. PRCS noted that severe fuel shortages have rendered 36 per cent of its ambulance fleet (18 ambulances) non-
functional. Similarly, MSF highlighted that its inability to bring in supplies into Gaza since the end of April had forced it to
temporarily suspend operations at one of its health centers in Khan Younis. Moreover, due to the shortage of sterile compress
gauzes at Nasser and Al Aqsa hospitals, MSF has reduced the frequency of dressing changes for patients with severe burns,
which increases the risk of infections. Painkillers are lacking and medicines to treat rising skin infections such as scabies are
“running dangerously low.” According to MSF, since 14 June, six MSF trucks, comprising 37 tons of medical supplies, have been
awaiting entry on the Egyptian side of Kerem Shalom Crossing.
The ongoing constraints on the entry of sufficient fuel supplies continue to severely reduce people’s access to WASH services
across the Gaza Strip and further disrupt water trucking, network repairs, sewage pumping, and solid waste collection. According
to the WASH Cluster, between 15 and 23 June, only 25,900 litres of fuel were received, an average of about 3,200 litres of fuel per
day, which is less than five per cent of the estimated daily requirement of 70,000 litres to operate critical WASH services that
remain accessible. The scarcity of fuel has forced water service providers to undertake significant rationing in operating municipal
groundwater wells and the two water desalination plants that remain functional, resulting in further reductions in water
production. For example, water production from groundwater wells, which historically accounted for 80 per cent of Gaza’s water
supply, has recently dropped from 35,000 to 15,000 cubic metres per day, or to about six per cent of pre-war groundwater
production capacity (~250,000 cubic metres per day). Limited fuel has also only allowed the two operational desalination plants to
pump sufficient water to maintain the filtration membranes, which rapidly deteriorate from lack of use, have been difficult to
replace, and without which the plants are rendered inoperable. This ‘membrane flushing” produces 2,000 – 2,500 cubic metres of
drinking water per day, which constitutes only a quarter of each desalination plant’s current production capacity. In the absence of
an immediate replenishment of adequate fuel supplies, the WASH Cluster warns that water production in Gaza would cease within
three days of the cessation of membrane flushing. Between 10 and 23 June, water production for safe drinking and domestic
purposes stood at about 112,000 cubic metres per day, which is less than 30 per cent of the per-war production level, the WASH
Cluster reports.
Between 1 and 27 June, out of 101 planned humanitarian assistance missions to northern Gaza coordinated with Israeli
authorities, 49 (49 per cent) were facilitated, 10 (10 per cent) were denied access, 30 (30 per cent) were impeded, and 12 (11 per
cent) were cancelled due to logistical, operational, or security reasons. In addition, out of 276 coordinated humanitarian
assistance missions to areas in southern Gaza, 197 (71 per cent) were facilitated by Israeli authorities, 14 (five per cent) were
denied access, 30 (11 per cent) were impeded, and 35 (13 per cent) were cancelled.
Funding
As of 28 June, Member States have disbursed about US$1.20 billion out of $3.42 billion (35 per cent) requested to meet the most
critical needs of 2.3 million people in Gaza and 800,000 people in the West Bank, including East Jerusalem, between January and
December 2024. For funding analysis, please see the Flash Appeal Financial Tracking dashboard.
The oPt HF has 109 ongoing projects, for a total of $78.9 million, addressing urgent needs in the Gaza Strip (86 per cent) and West
Bank (14 per cent). Of these projects, 69 projects are being implemented by international non-governmental organizations
(INGOs), 26 by national NGOs and 14 by UN agencies. A summary of the oPt HF activities and challenges in May 2024 is available
through this link and the 2023 Annual Report of the oPt HF can be accessed here. Private donations are collected directly through
the Humanitarian Fund.