Methods of Critical Discourse Analysis


INTRODUCING QUALITATIVE METHODS provides a series of volumes which introduce qualitative research to the
student and beginning researcher. The approach is interdisciplinary and international. A distinctive feature of these
volumes is the helpful student exercises.
One stream of the series provides texts on the key methodologies used in qualitative research. The other stream contains
books on qualitative research for different disciplines or occupations. Both streams cover the basic literature in a clear
and accessible style, but also cover the ‘cutting edge’ issues in the area.
SERIES EDITOR
David Silverman (Goldsmiths College)
EDITORIAL BOARD
Michael Bloor (Cardiff University and University of Glasgow)
Barbara Czarniawska (Göteburg University)
Norman Denzin (University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign)
Uwe Flick (Alice Salomon University of Applied Sciences, Berlin)
Barry Glassner (University of Southern California)
Jaber Gubrium (University of Missouri)
Anne Murcott (University of Nottingham)
Jonathan Potter (Loughborough University)
For a list of all titles in the series, visit www.sagepub.co.uk/iqm


Methods of Critical Discourse Analysis
Second Edition
Edited by
Ruth Wodak and Michael Meyer





Contents
Acknowledgements
Notes on contributors
1 Critical discourse analysis: history, agenda, theory and methodology
Ruth Wodak and Michael Meyer
2 Theoretical and methodological aspects of Foucauldian critical discourse analysis and
dispositive analysis
Siegfried Jäger and Florentine Maier
3 Critical discourse studies: a sociocognitive approach
Teun A. van Dijk
4 The discourse-historical approach (DHA)
Martin Reisigl and Ruth Wodak
5 Checks and balances: how corpus linguistics can contribute to CDA
Gerlinde Mautner
6 Discourse as the recontextualization of social practice: a guide
Theo van Leeuwen
7 A dialectical–relational approach to critical discourse analysis in social research
Norman Fairclough
References
Index


Acknowledgements
This book could not have been written without the help of many people. We wish to
express our gratitude to them all.
Our endeavour to provide readers with a comprehensive book introducing the different
approaches to Critical Discourse Analysis started in the form of a seminar on CDA at the
Department of Linguistics (University of Vienna) in 1999. We appreciate the discussion
and work with the student participants which provided an important stimulus for our plan
to publish the first edition.
We appreciate the collaboration with the authors of the contributions to this book:
Norman Fairclough, Siegfried Jäger, Florentine Maier, Gerlinde Mautner, Martin Reisigl,
Teun van Dijk and Theo van Leeuwen. Not only did they write instructive and interesting
chapters, they submitted them on schedule, and were very open to our criticism, comments
and suggestions.
Bryan Jenner has been indispensable in helping to recast some of our more
idiosyncratic pieces of non-native English into an acceptable form. Anahid
Aghamanoukjan, Ulla Ernst and Edith Fazekas contributed to fine-tuning the manuscript in
an essential way. Claire Lipscomb at Sage has been an extremely supportive editor who
has made a very positive contribution to the final results. Last but not least we thank the
six anonymous reviewers who helped us to avoid a number of shortcomings in the first
edition but who are not responsible for those in the second.


Notes on contributors
Norman Fairclough is Professor Emeritus of Language in social Life at Lancaster
University in the UK. He has written extensively in the field of Critical Discourse
Analysis. His main publications include: Language and Power (1989), Discourse and
Social Change (1992), Media Discourse (1995), Critical Discourse Analysis (1995),
Discourse in Late Modernity (1999) (with Lilie Chaouliaraki) and New Labour, New
Language? (2000). His main current interest is in language (discourse) as an element in
the contemporary social changes that are referred to as ‘globalization’, ‘neoliberalism’,
‘new capitalism’, the ‘knowledge economy’ and so forth. Over the past three years he has
been working specifically on aspects of ‘transition’ in Central and Eastern Europe,
especially 
Romania, 
from 
a 
discourse 
analytical 
perspective 
(see
www.ling.lancs.ac.uk/profiles/263). Email: n.fairclough@lancaster.ac.uk
Siegfried Jäger has been a Professor for German Language at the University of
Duisburg/Essen (Germany) since 1972, and since 1987 he has also been head of the
Dusiburg Institute of Linguistic and Social Research. His major research areas are
Discourse Theory and Critical Discourse Analysis based on Michel Foucault’s theory.
He has conducted several projects dealing with a broad range of topics, e.g. language
barriers, right-wing extremism, immigration and racism in mass media and everyday talk,
media coverage of crime, Jewish publications in the 19th century, Christian
fundamentalism and antiSemitism in the German and Polish mass media. For his
publications, see diss-duisburg.de. Email: s.jaeger@diss-duisburg.de
Florentine Maier is a research assistant at the Academic Unit for Nonprofit Management
at the Wirtschaftsuniversität Wien (WU, Vienna University of Economics and Business).
Her primary fields of research are the spread of managerialism into Nonprofit
Organizations, and the employment of older workers. Before entering the Academic Unit
for Nonprofit Management, she was a Research Assistant at the Institute of Human
Resource Management at the WU. She has also worked as a lecturer in Human Resource
Management at the University of Applied Science at the Vienna Chambers of Commerce,
and as a teacher of Chinese. She gained her doctoral degree in social and economic
sciences from the WU in 2008. Email: florentine-maier@wu-wien.ac.at
Gerlinde Mautner is Professor of English Business Communication at the
Wirtschaftsuniversität Wien (Vienna University of Economics and Business). A graduate
of the University of Vienna, she has spent a year at each of the linguistics departments of
the universities of Birmingham (UK), Lancaster, and, most recently, Cardiff. Combining
critical discourse analysis with corpus linguistic methodology, her research focuses on
corporate and marketing communications, as well as on the discourse of the public and


nonprofit sectors. Email: gerlinde.mautner@wu-wien.ac.at
Michael Meyer is Professor for Business Administration at the Unit for Nonprofit
Management at the Wirtschaftsuniversität Wien (WU, Vienna University of Economics
and Business). Since 1989, Michael Meyer has held a range of academic positions, such
as Assistant Professor for Marketing and Cultural Management, and Social Researcher in
various interdisciplinary projects. Currently, he is head of the Research Institute for
Nonprofit Organizations at the WU. He is an experienced lecturer and researcher in the
field of Organizational Behaviour. His areas of specialization and current research
include: Managerialism, Nonprofit Organizations, Civil Society and Civic Participation,
Social Systems Theory, Organizational Theory, and Careers (for his publications, see:
www.wu-wien.ac.at/npo/english/team/mm). Email: michael.meyer@wu-wien.ac.at
Martin Reisigl has a PhD in Applied Linguistics and currently teaches Applied
Linguistics at the University of Vienna. He is also working on his habilitation project
supported by research fellowships of the German Alexander von Humboldt Foundation
and the Austrian Academy of Sciences (APART). From May 2006 until January 2007, he
was a visiting professor at the university La Sapienza in Rome, Italy. From February until
June 2007, he was a visiting fellow at the Institute for Human Sciences/Institut für die
Wissenschaften von Menschen (IWM) in Vienna. His research interests include (critical)
discourse analysis and discourse theory, text linguistics, academic writing,
sociolinguistics, (political) rhetoric (language and discrimination, nationalism, racism as
well as populism), language and history, linguistics and literature, argumentation analysis
and semiotics. Email: martin.reisigl@univie.ac.at
Teun A. van Dijk was Professor of Discourse Studies at the University of Amsterdam
until 2004, and is at present Professor at the Universitat Pompeu Fabra, Barcelona. After
earlier work on generative poetics, text grammar and the psychology of text processing,
his work since 1980 has taken a more critical perspective and has dealt with discursive
racism, news in the press, ideology, knowledge and context. He is the author of several
books in most of these areas, and he has edited The Handbook of Discourse Analysis (4
vols, 1985), the introductory book Discourse Studies (2 vols, 1997) as well as the reader
The Study of Discourse (5 vols, 2007). He has founded six international journals:
Poetics, Text 
(now Text and Talk ) , Discourse and Society, Discourse Studies,
Discourse and Communication and the internet journal Discurso and Sociedad in
Spanish (www.dissoc.org), the last four of which he still edits. His most recent
monographs in English are Ideology (1998), Racism and Discourse in Spain and Latin
America (2005), Discourse and Context (2008), Society and Discourse (2008), and his
last edited books (with Ruth Wodak), Racism at the Top (2000), and Discourse and
Racism in Latin America (2008). Teun van Dijk, who holds two honorary doctorates, has
lectured widely in many countries, especially also in Latin America. For further


information, see his website: www.discourses.org. Email: teun@discourses.org
Theo van Leeuwen is Professor of Media and Communication and Dean of the Faculty
of Arts and Social Sciences at the University of Technology, Sydney. He has published
widely in the areas of critical discourse analysis, multimodality and visual semiotics. His
books include: Reading Images – The Grammar of Visual Design (with Gunther Kress);
Speech, Music, Sound: Multimodal Discourse – The Modes and Media of
Contemporary Communication (with Gunther Kress); and Introducing Social Semiotics
and Global Media Discourse (with David Machin). His latest book Discourse and
Practice was published in 2008. He is a founding editor of the journal Visual
Communication. Email: theo.vanleeuwen@uts.edu.au
Ruth Wodak is Distinguished Professor of Discourse Studies at Lancaster University. In
addition to various other prizes, she was awarded the Wittgenstein Prize for Elite
Researchers in 1996. Her research interests focus on discourse studies, gender studies,
language and/in politics, prejudice and discrimination, and on ethnographic methods of
linguistic field work. She has held visiting professorships in Uppsala, Stanford
University, University of Minnesota, University of East Anglia and Georgetown
University. In 2008, she was awarded the Kerstin Hesselgren Chair of the Swedish
Parliament (at the University of Örebro). Recent book publications include Ist Österreich
ein ‘deutsches’ Land? (with R. de Cillia, 2006); Qualitative Discourse Analysis in the
Social Sciences (with M. Krzy anowski, 2008); Migration, Identity and Belonging (with
G. Delanty and P. Jones, 2008), The Discursive Construction of History: Remembering
the Wehrmacht’s War of Annihilation  (with H. Heer, W. Manoschek and A. Pollak,
2008) and The Construction of Politics in Action: Politics as Usual? (2009). See
www.ling.lancs.ac.uk/profiles/265 for more information on her ongoing research projects
and recent publications. Email: r.wodak@lancaster.ac.uk


1
Critical Discourse Analysis: History, Agenda, Theory and Methodology1
Ruth Wodak and Michael Meyer
CDA – What is it all about?
A brief history of the ‘CDA Group’
The common ground: discourse, critique, power and ideology
Main research agenda and challenges
Differences and similarities – beyond the social dimension
Methodology
Summary and criticism
CDA – What is it all about?
In this chapter, we first provide a brief ‘story’ – how it all began; then we present an
overview of some important research agendas in CDA and discuss new challenges for
CDA research. Secondly, we discuss the various theoretical and methodological
approaches assembled in this volume from a sociological and epistemological
perspective.2 There, we focus mostly on three central and constitutive concepts: power,
ideology and critique. We also, of course, summarize some of the salient principles
which are constitutive of all approaches in CDA. In addition, we mention some important
criticism which CDA has been confronted with in the past years (see Billig, 2003, 2008;
Chilton, 2007; Chilton and Wodak, 2007; Wodak and de Cillia, 2006 for an extensive
discussion of these issues).
The terms Critical Linguistics (CL) and Critical Discourse Analysis (CDA) are often
used interchangeably. In fact, recently, the term CDA seems to have been preferred and is
being used to denote the theory formerly identified as CL. Therefore, we will continue to
use CDA exclusively here (see Anthonissen, 2001; Chilton and Wodak, 2007 for an
extensive discussion of these terms and their history). The manifold roots of CDA lie in
Rhetoric, Text linguistics, Anthropology, Philosophy, Socio-Psychology, Cognitive
Science, Literary Studies and Sociolinguistics, as well as in Applied Linguistics and
Pragmatics.
Nowadays, some scholars prefer the term Critical Discourse Studies (CDS). For
example, Teun van Dijk provides us with a broad overview of the field of (C)DS, where
one can identify the following developments: between the mid-1960s and the early 1970s,
new, closely related disciplines emerged in the humanities and the social sciences.


Despite their different disciplinary backgrounds and a great diversity of methods and
objects of investigation, some parts of the new fields/paradigms/linguistic sub-disciplines
of semiotics, pragmatics, psycho-and sociolinguistics, ethnography of speaking,
conversation analysis and discourse studies all deal with discourse and have at least
seven dimensions in common (see Van Dijk, 2007a; Wodak, 2008a):
an interest in the properties of ‘naturally occurring’ language use by real language
users (instead of a study of abstract language systems and invented examples)
a focus on larger units than isolated words and sentences and, hence, new basic
units of analysis: texts, discourses, conversations, speech acts, or communicative
events
the extension of linguistics beyond sentence grammar towards a study of action and
interaction
the extension to non-verbal (semiotic, multimodal, visual) aspects of interaction
and communication: gestures, images, film, the internet, and multimedia
a focus on dynamic (socio)-cognitive or interactional moves and strategies
the study of the functions of (social, cultural, situative and cognitive) contexts of
language use
an analysis of a vast number of phenomena of text grammar and language use:
coherence, anaphora, topics, macrostructures, speech acts, interactions, turn-taking,
signs, politeness, argumentation, rhetoric, mental models, and many other aspects of
text and discourse.
The significant difference between DS and CDS (or CDA) lies in the constitutive
problem-oriented, interdisciplinary approach  of the latter, apart from endorsing all of
the above points. CDA is therefore not interested in investigating a linguistic unit per
se but in studying social phenomena which are necessarily complex and thus require a
multidisciplinary and multimethodical approach. The objects under investigation do not
have to be related to negative or exceptionally ‘serious’ social or political experiences or
events – this is a frequent misunderstanding of the aims and goals of CDA and of the term
‘critical’ which, of course, does not mean ‘negative’ as in commonsense usage (see
below). Any social phenomenon lends itself to critical investigation, to be challenged and
not taken for granted. We will return to this important point and other common
misunderstandings of CDA below.
We would also like to emphasize right at the beginning of this volume that it is obvious
that the notions of text and discourse have been subject to a hugely proliferating number
of usages in the social sciences. Almost no paper or article is to be found which does not
revisit these notions, quoting Michel Foucault, Jürgen Habermas, Chantal Mouffe, Ernesto
Laclau, Niklas Luhmann, or many others. Thus, discourse means anything from a
historical monument, a lieu de mémoire, a policy, a political strategy, narratives in a


restricted or broad sense of the term, text, talk, a speech, topic-related conversations, to
language per se. We find notions such as racist discourse, gendered discourse, discourses
on un/employment, media discourse, populist discourse, discourses of the past, and many
more – thus stretching the meaning of discourse from a genre to a register or style, from a
building to a political programme. This causes and must cause confusion – which leads to
much criticism and more misunderstandings (Blommaert, 2005; Reisigl, 2007; Wodak,
2008a; Wodak and de Cillia, 2006). This is why each contributor to this volume was
asked to define their use of the term integrated in their specific approach.
A brief history of the ‘CDA Group’
CDA as a network of scholars emerged in the early 1990s, following a small symposium
in Amsterdam, in January 1991. Through the support of the University of Amsterdam,
Teun van Dijk, Norman Fairclough, Gunther Kress, Theo van Leeuwen and Ruth Wodak
spent two days together, and had the wonderful opportunity to discuss theories and
methods of Discourse Analysis, specifically CDA. The meeting made it possible to
confront with each other the very distinct and different approaches, which have, of
course, changed significantly since 1991 but remain relevant, in many respects. In this
process of group formation, differences and sameness were laid out: differences with
regard to other theories and methodologies in Discourse Analysis (see Renkema, 2004;
Titscher et al., 2000; Wetherell et al., 2001; Wodak, 2008a) and sameness in a
programmatic way, both of which frame the range of theoretical approaches. In the
meantime, for example, some of the scholars previously aligned with CDA have chosen
other theoretical frameworks and have distanced themselves from CDA (such as Gunther
Kress and Ron Scollon); on the other hand, new approaches have been created which
frequently find innovative ways of integrating the more traditional theories or of
elaborating them (see below).
In general, CDA as a school or paradigm is characterized by a number of principles:
for example, all approaches are problem-oriented, and thus necessarily interdisciplinary
and eclectic (see below). Moreover, CDA is characterized by the common interests in
demystifying ideologies and power through the systematic and retroductable
investigation of semiotic data (written, spoken or visual). CDA researchers also attempt
to make their own positions and interests explicit while retaining their respective
scientific methodologies and while remaining self-reflective of their own research
process.
The start of the CDA network was marked by the launch of V
an Dijk’s journal
Discourse and Society (1990), as well as by several books which were coincidentally
(or because of a Zeitgeist) published simultaneously and led by similar research goals.3
The Amsterdam meeting determined an institutional start, an attempt both to constitute an


exchange programme (ERASMUS for three years)4, as well as joint projects and
collaborations between scholars of different countries, and a special issue of Discourse
and Society (1993), which presented the above-mentioned approaches. Since then, new
journals have been created, multiple overviews have been written, and nowadays CDA is
an established paradigm in linguistics; currently, we encounter Critical Discourse
Studies, The Journal of Language and Politics, Discourse and Communication and
Visual Semiotics, among many other journals; we also find several e-journals which
publish critical research, such as CADAAD. Book series have been launched (such as
Discourse Approaches to Politics, Culture and Society), regular CDA meetings and
conferences take place, and handbooks are under way. In sum, CDA (CDS) has become
an established discipline, institutionalized across the globe in many departments and
curricula.
The common ground: discourse, critique, power and ideology
When deconstructing the label of this research programme – we view CDA basically as a
research programme, the reasons for which we will explain below – we necessarily have
to define what CDA means when it employs the terms ‘critical’ and ‘discourse’. Michael
Billig (2003) has clearly pointed to the fact that CDA has become an established
academic discipline with the same rituals and institutional practices as all other academic
disciplines. Ironically, he asks the question whether this might mean that CDA has
become or might become ‘uncritical’ – or if the use of acronyms such as CDA might serve
the same purposes as in other traditional, non-critical disciplines; namely to exclude
outsiders and to mystify the functions and intentions of the research. Most recently, Billig
has reiterated this question under a new frame: do scholars who employ CDA write in the
same way mainly by using nominalizations extensively, like the many texts which they
criticize (Billig, 2008)?
The problem with talking about the unconscious, repression, mental representations, mirror-stages, etc., is that it is
easy to assume that we have solved problems by discovering ‘things’. And the more we write about these
‘things’, the more we take their existence for granted. Analysts might have once understood these concepts semi-
metaphorically, but soon they write about them literally. In my view, the cognitive psychology of ‘mental
representations’, or the psychoanalysis of ‘the unconscious’ and ‘repression’, makes psychology too easy and too
non-materialistic – too prone to accept that non-material entities provide the solution to the puzzles that, in effect,
analysts are avoiding. And that is why I advocate that we should be examining nominalizing (not nominalization),
representing (not representations), repressing (not repression) and so on.
Billig (2008) ends his quite provocative argument by stating:
[t]here is no reason for supposing that for academics, writing their academic articles, the active forms are
psychologically primary. In my article and in this reply, I have struggled to resist the grammatical forms with
which my fingers are so familiar. I have redrafted, often with a struggle, many sentences which spontaneously


spilled out in the passive form. I have probably used the first person singular here more times than I have done in
all the rest of my publications put together. And so now, I do not want to end by promoting a new label. To adapt
a very famous phrase, the point is not to categorize language, but to change it.
We cannot follow Billig’s recommendations in detail or answer his questions in this
chapter extensively. However, we believe that he points to potentially very fruitful and
necessary debates for CDA. More specifically, Billig points to the danger which can
befall any discipline (or school or group) when it becomes established and
institutionalized after having been marginalized for a long time. Once established, he
argues, one might forget the basic desiderata and become corrupted by the system – in our
case, the Knowledge-based Economy (KBE) which influences all our lives in so many
ways (Billig, 2008).
At this point, it is important to stress that CDA has never been and has never attempted
to be or to provide one single or specific theory. Neither is one specific methodology
characteristic of research in CDA. Quite the contrary, studies in CDA are multifarious,
derived from quite different theoretical backgrounds, oriented towards different data and
methodologies. Researchers in CDA also rely on a variety of grammatical approaches.
The definitions of the terms ‘discourse’, ‘critical’, ‘ideology’, ‘power’ and so on are also
manifold. Thus, any criticism of CDA should always specify which research or
researcher they relate to. Hence, we suggest using the notion of a ‘school’ for CDA, or of
a programme, which many researchers find useful and to which they can relate. This
programme or set of principles has, of course, changed over the years (see (Fairclough
and Wodak, 1997; Wodak, 1996).
Such a heterogeneous school might be confusing for some; on the other hand, it allows
for continuous debates, for changes in the aims and goals, and for innovation. In contrast
to ‘total and closed’ theories, such as Chomsky’s Generative Transformational Grammar
or Michael Halliday’s Systemic Functional Linguistics, CDA has never had the image of
a ‘sect’ and does not want to have such an image. This heterogeneity of methodological
and theoretical approaches that can be found in this field would tend to confirm van
Dijk’s point that CDA and CL ‘are at most a shared perspective on doing linguistic,
semiotic or discourse analysis’ (V
an Dijk, 1993a: 131). Below, we summarize some of
these principles, which are adhered to by most researchers.
The notion of discourse
CDA sees ‘language as social practice’ (Fairclough and Wodak, 1997), and considers the
‘context of language use’ to be crucial. We quote one definition which has become ‘very
popular’ among CDA researchers:
CDA sees discourse – language use in speech and writing – as a form of ‘social practice’. Describing discourse
as social practice implies a dialectical relationship between a particular discursive event and the situation(s),
institution(s) and social structure(s), which frame it:


The discursive event is shaped by them, but it also shapes them. That is, discourse is socially constitutive as well
as socially conditioned – it constitutes situations, objects of knowledge, and the social identities of and relationships
between people and groups of people. It is constitutive both in the sense that it helps to sustain and reproduce the
social status quo, and in the sense that it contributes to transforming it. Since discourse is so socially consequential,
it gives rise to important issues of power. Discursive practices may have major ideological effects – that is, they
can help produce and reproduce unequal power relations between (for instance) social classes, women and men,
and ethnic/cultural majorities and minorities through the ways in which they represent things and position people.
(Fairclough and Wodak, 1997: 258)
Within this definition, the term ‘discourse’ is of course used very differently by different
researchers and also in different academic cultures (Wodak, 2006a, b). In the German and
Central European context, a distinction is made between ‘text’ and ‘discourse’, relating to
the tradition in text linguistics as well as to rhetoric (see Brünner and Graefen, 1994;
V
ass, 1992; Wodak and Koller, 2008 for summaries). In the English speaking world,
‘discourse’ is often used both for written and oral texts (see Gee, 2004; Schiffrin, 1994).
Other researchers distinguish between different levels of abstractness: Lemke (1995)
defines ‘text’ as the concrete realization of abstract forms of knowledge (‘discourse’),
thus adhering to a more Foucauldian approach (see also Jäger and Maier in this volume).
The discourse-historical approach relates to the sociocognitive theory of Teun van
Dijk (1998) and views ‘discourse’ as structured forms of knowledge, whereas ‘text’
refers to concrete oral utterances or written documents (see Reisigl and Wodak in this
volume).
The critical impetus
The shared perspective and programme of CDA emphasize the term ‘critical’, which in
the work of some ‘critical linguists’ can be traced to the influence of the Frankfurt School
and Jürgen Habermas (Anthonissen, 2001; Fay, 1987: 203; Thompson, 1988: 71ff):
‘Critical Theory’ in the sense of the Frankfurt School, mainly based on the famous essay
of Max Horkheimer in 1937, indicates that social theory should be oriented towards
critiquing and changing society, in contrast to traditional theory oriented solely to
understanding or explaining it. The core concepts of such an understanding of critical
theory are:
Critical theory should be directed at the totality of society in its historical
specificity.
Critical theory should improve the understanding of society by integrating all the
major social sciences, including economics, sociology, history, political science,
anthropology and psychology.
What is rarely reflected in this understanding of critique is the analyst’s position itself.
The social embeddedness of research and science, the fact that the research system itself


and thus CDA are also dependent on social structures, and that criticism can by no means
draw on an outside position but is itself well integrated within social fields, has been
emphasized by Pierre Bourdieu (1984). Researchers, scientists and philosophers are not
outside the societal hierarchy of power and status but are subject to this structure. They
have also frequently occupied and still occupy rather superior positions in society.
In language studies, the term ‘critical’ was first used to characterize an approach that
was called Critical Linguistics (Fowler et al., 1979; Kress and Hodge, 1979). Among
other ideas, those scholars held that the use of language could lead to a mystification of
social events which systematic analysis could elucidate. ‘For example, a missing by-
phrase in English passive constructions might be seen as an ideological means for
concealing or “mystifying” reference to an agent’ (Chilton, 2008).
Nowadays, this concept of critique is conventionally used in a broader sense, denoting,
as Krings argues, the practical linking of ‘social and political engagement’ with ‘a
sociologically informed construction of society’ (Krings et al., 1973; Titscher et al.,
2000: 88). Hence, ‘critique’ is essentially making visible the interconnectedness of things
(Fairclough, 1995a: 747; see also Connerton, 1976: 11–39). The reference to the
contribution of critical theory to the understanding of CDA and the notions of ‘critical’
and ‘ideology’ are of particular importance (see Anthonissen, 2001, for an extensive
discussion of this issue).
Critical theories, thus also CDA, want to produce and convey critical knowledge that
enables human beings to emancipate themselves from forms of domination through self-
reflection. Thus, they are aimed at producing ‘enlightenment and emancipation’. Such
theories seek not only to describe and explain, but also to root out a particular kind of
delusion. Even with differing concepts of ideology, critical theory seeks to create
awareness in agents of their own needs and interests. This was, of course, also taken up
by Pierre Bourdieu’s concepts of ‘violènce symbolique’ and ‘méconnaissance’
(Bourdieu, 1989).
In agreement with its critical theory predecessors, CDA emphasizes the need for
interdisciplinary work in order to gain a proper understanding of how language functions
in constituting and transmitting knowledge, in organizing social institutions or in
exercising power (see Graham, 2002; Lemke, 2002; Martin and Wodak, 2003). In any
case, CDA researchers have to be aware that their own work is driven by social,
economic and political motives like any other academic work and that they are not in any
privileged position. Naming oneself ‘critical’ only implies specific ethical standards: an
intention to make their position, research interests and values explicit and their criteria as
transparent as possible, without feeling the need to apologize for the critical stance of
their work (Van Leeuwen, 2006: 293).
Ideology and power – a kaleidoscopic view


The critical impetus of CDA and other ‘critical’ research programmes is certainly the
legacy of enlightenment (Horkheimer and Adorno, 1969/1991). Critique regularly aims at
revealing structures of power and unmasking ideologies. Ideology is then not understood
in a positivistic way, i.e. ideologies cannot be subjected to a process of falsification. Nor
is it the Marxian type of ideology according to the economic base/superstructure
dichotomy that is of interest for CDA.
Political scientists name four central characteristics of ideologies:
1. Power is more important than cognitions.
2. They are capable of guiding individuals’ evaluations.
3. They provide guidance through action.
4. They must be logically coherent. (Mullins, 1972)
Although the core definition of ideology as a coherent and relatively stable set of beliefs
or values has remained the same in political science over time, the connotations
associated with this concept have undergone many transformations. During the era of
fascism, communism and the Cold War, totalitarian ideology was confronted with
democracy, the evil with the good. If we speak of the ‘ideology of the new capitalism’
(see V
an Dijk and Fairclough in this volume), ideology once again has a ‘bad’
connotation. Obviously, it is not easy to capture ideology as a belief system and
simultaneously to free the concept from negative connotations (Knight, 2006: 625).
It is, however, not that type of ideology on the surface of culture that interests CDA, it
is rather the more hidden and latent type of everyday beliefs, which often appear
disguised as conceptual metaphors and analogies, thus attracting linguists’ attention: ‘life
is a journey, social organizations are plants, love is war’, and so on (Lakoff, 1987; Lakoff
and Johnson, 1980, 1999). In daily discussion, certain ideas arise more commonly than
others. Frequently, people with diverse backgrounds and interests may find themselves
thinking alike in startling ways. Dominant ideologies appear as ‘neutral’, holding on to
assumptions that stay largely unchallenged. Organizations that strive for power will try to
influence the ideology of a society to become closer to what they want it to be. When
most people in a society think alike about certain matters, or even forget that there are
alternatives to the status quo, we arrive at the Gramscian concept of hegemony. With
regard to this key concept of ideology, V
an Dijk (1998) sees ideologies as the
‘worldviews’ that constitute ‘social cognition’: ‘schematically organized complexes of
representations and attitudes with regard to certain aspects of the social world, e.g. the
schema […] whites have about blacks’ (Van Dijk, 1993b: 258).
Furthermore, it is the functioning of ideologies in everyday life that intrigues CDA
researchers. Fairclough has a more Marxist view of ideologies and conceives them as
constructions of practices from particular perspectives:
Ideologies are representations of aspects of the world which contribute to establishing and maintaining relations of


power, domination and exploitation. They may be enacted in ways of interaction (and therefore in genres) and
inculcated in ways of being identities (and therefore styles). Analysis of texts … is an important aspect of
ideological analysis and critique … (Fairclough, 2003: 218)
Power is another concept which is central for CDA, as it often analyses the language use
of those in power, who are responsible for the existence of inequalities. Typically, CDA
researchers are interested in the way discourse (re)produces social domination, that is,
the power abuse of one group over others, and how dominated groups may discursively
resist such abuse (e.g. V
an Dijk in this volume). This raises the question of how CDA
researchers understand power and what moral standards allow them to differentiate
between power use and abuse – a question which has so far had to remain unanswered
(Billig, 2008).
There are as many concepts of power as there are social theories. There is almost no
sociological or socio-psychological theory which does not provide a distinctive notion of
power, with a Weberian definition as the lowest common denominator: power as the
chance that an individual in a social relationship can achieve his or her own will even
against the resistance of others (Weber, 1980: 28).
At least three different approaches to power can be distinguished:
power as a result of specific resources of individual actors (e.g. French and Raven,
1959)
power as a specific attribute of social exchange in each interaction (e.g. Blau, 1964;
Emerson, 1962, 1975)
power as a systemic and constitutive element/characteristic of society (e.g. from
very different angles, Foucault, 1975 and Giddens, 1984).
Michel Foucault focuses on ‘technologies of power’: discipline is a complex bundle of
power technologies developed during the 18th and 19th centuries. Power is thus
exercised with intention – but it is not individual intention. Foucault focuses on what is
accepted knowledge about how to exercise power. One way of doing this is by
threatening with violence. However, suggesting how ‘happy’ people will become if they
buy specific consumer products is also an exercise of power; marketing provides us with
a large body of knowledge of powerful techniques. Though Foucault also combines the
notions of power and domination in a Weberian tradition, he focuses primarily on
structure. Foucault recommends an analysis of power with a rather functionalist strategy:
in his historical analysis in Surveiller et Punir (Foucault, 1975), he always asks and
answers questions concerning the social functions and effects of different technologies of
surveillance and punishment. How do things work at the level of ongoing subjugation, at
the level of those continuous and uninterrupted processes which subject our bodies,
govern our gestures and dictate our behaviours?
Within CDA, power is mostly perceived in the third way, not only because Foucault is


one of the theoretical ‘godfathers’ of CDA, but also because the text in CDA is often
regarded as a manifestation of social action which again is widely determined by social
structure. Besides, CDA researchers rarely work with interactional texts such as
dialogues (Chilton, 2004; Lalouschek et al., 1990; Wodak, 2009 as exceptions).
Consequently, it is not the individual resources and not the specifics of single-exchange
situations that are crucial for CDA analyses, but the overall structural features in social
fields or in overall society. Power is central for understanding the dynamics and specifics
of control (of action) in modern societies, but power remains mostly invisible. Linguistic
manifestations are under investigation in CDA. This relation between social power and
language is a permanent topic not only in CDA (Fairclough, 1989/1991; Wodak, 1989)
but also in sociology (Bourdieu, 1991) and sociolinguistics (e.g. Ng and Bradac, 1993;
Talbot, 2003; Young and Fitzgerald, 2006).
An important perspective in CDA related to the notion of ‘power’ is that it is very rare
that a text is the work of only one person. In texts, discursive differences are negotiated;
they are governed by differences in power that is in part encoded in and determined by
discourse and by genre. Therefore, texts are often sites of struggle in that they show traces
of differing discourses and ideologies contending and struggling for dominance.
Thus, the defining features of CDA are its concern with power as a central condition in
social life, and its efforts to develop a theory of language that incorporates this as a major
premise. Closely attended to are not only the notion of struggles for power and control,
but also the intertextuality and recontextualization of competing discourses in various
public spaces and genres (Iedema, 1997; Iedema and Wodak, 1999; Muntigl et al., 2000).
Power is about relations of difference, and particularly about the effects of differences in
social structures. The constant unity of language and other social matters ensures that
language is entwined in social power in a number of ways: language indexes and
expresses power, and is involved where there is contention over and a challenge to
power. Power does not necessarily derive from language, but language can be used to
challenge power, to subvert it, to alter distributions of power in the short and the long
term. Language provides a finely articulated vehicle for establishing differences in power
in hierarchical social structures.
In sum: CDA can be defined as being fundamentally interested in analysing opaque as
well as transparent structural relationships of dominance, discrimination, power and
control as manifested in language. In other words, CDA aims to investigate critically
social inequality as it is expressed, constituted, legitimized, and so on, by language use
(or in discourse). Most critical discourse analysts would thus endorse Habermas’s claim
that ‘language is also a medium of domination and social force. It serves to legitimize
relations of organized power. Insofar as the legitimizations of power relations … are not
articulated … language is also ideological’ (Habermas, 1967: 259).


Main research agenda and challenges
In this section, we summarize some important research agendas which are currently of
interest in CDA. We then also list examples of research linked to these agendas and
challenges. Although we, of course, encounter a vast amount of research and also many
methodological and theoretical approaches, we have decided to restrict ourselves to six
major areas and related challenges:
1. Analysing, understanding and explaining the impact of the Knowledge-based
Economy on various domains of our societies; related to this, the recontextualization
of KBE into other parts of the world and other societies (‘transition’).
2. Integrating approaches from cognitive sciences into CDA; this requires complex
epistemological considerations and the development of new tools. Moreover, we
question in which ways such approaches depend on Western cultural contexts and
how, related to these issues, Eurocentric perspectives could be transcended.
3. Analysing, understanding and explaining new phenomena in Western political
systems, which are due to the impact of (new) media and to transnational, global and
local developments and related institutions. More specifically, phenomena such as
‘depoliticization’ and ‘participation’ need to be investigated in detail.
4. Analysing, understanding and explaining the impact of new media and related genres
which entails developing new multimodal theoretical and methodological
approaches. Our concepts of space and time have changed, and these changes
interact in dialectical ways with new modes and genres of communication.
5. Analysing, understanding and explaining the relationship between complex historical
processes, hegemonic narratives and CDA approaches. Identity politics on all levels
always entails the integration of past experiences, present events and future visions.
The concepts of intertextuality and recontextualization are inherently tied to
interdisciplinary approaches.
6. Avoiding ‘cherry picking’ (choosing the examples which best fit the assumptions) by
integrating quantitative and qualitative methods and by providing retroductable, self-
reflective presentations of past or current research processes.
Of course, the many issues of Discourse and Society, Journal of Language and Politics,
Visual Semiotics, and Critical Discourse Studies, to name but a few, have published a
huge variety of CDA-oriented research over the past decade which we cannot review in
detail. We therefore necessarily have to refer readers to the many handbooks and journals
in the field.5
Language of the New Capitalism and the Knowledge-based Economy (KBE)


In Jessop et al. (2008), many aspects and dimensions of the impact of KBE on higher
education are explored from sociological, educational and CDA perspectives. KBE has
penetrated most domains of our Western societies and is also colonizing other parts of the
world. Indeed, globalization and competitiveness rhetoric (Muntigl et al., 2000) seem to
be ubiquitous, and the quantification and economization of knowledge serve to rank social
institutions and individuals. Through detailed case studies, the recontextualization of
more global policy strategies can be illustrated on the micro level (Falkner et al., 2005).
This, of course, requires interdisciplinary research as well as new theories on transition
and social change (see Krzy anowski and Wodak, 2008).
Chouliaraki and Fairclough (1999) explain and elaborate how CDA is useful in
disclosing the discursive nature of much contemporary social and cultural change.
Particularly the language of the mass media is scrutinized as a site of power, of struggle
and also as a site where language is often apparently transparent. Media institutions often
purport to be neutral, in that they provide space for public discourse, reflect states of
affairs disinterestedly, and give the perceptions and arguments of the newsmakers.
Fairclough reveals the fallacy of such assumptions, and illustrates the mediating and
constructing role of the media with a variety of examples. He has also been concerned
with the ‘Language of New Labour’ (Fairclough, 2000a) which, of course, is part and
parcel of KBE ideology.
In this vein, Jane Mulderrig (2006) develops a methodology and interdisciplinary
theoretical framework for historically analysing the exercise of governmental power in a
specific policy field, thus addressing at least three of the above-mentioned challenges. At
the theoretical level, this work employs an interdisciplinary approach to CDA by
grounding close textual analysis in both educational sociology and neo-Marxist state
theory. It thus contextualizes the linguistic findings in terms of historical developments in
the capitalist state over the last four decades. This research also develops novel ways of
using corpus tools in CDA, and in particular it demonstrates their heuristic value in
directing the analyst’s gaze in unexpected and often fruitful directions (see Mautner in this
volume; and Baker et al., 2008). More specifically, the themes explored in this research
include the rise of a more personalized form of governmental identity, and the prominent
role of the pronoun ‘we’ in legitimizing government action and deflecting its public
accountability. A further strand to this research makes a direct link between the verbs
used to perform government actions and the increasing social significance of ‘governing
at a distance’ or ‘networked governance’ as described by, among others, the social
theorist Nikolas Rose (1999).
Phil Graham also elaborates the problems of New Capitalism while integrating a
strong historical perspective (Graham, 2002). The historical investigation of hortatory
genres, for example, compares the emergence of, and struggles between, the Church,
‘divine right’ royalties and secular forces over legitimate uses of the sermon form in
Western Europe between the 10th and 14th centuries, with contemporary struggles over
genres that are used to motivate people on a mass scale. The main focus of Graham’s


research is to explore and explain the relationships between new media, new genres,
institutions and social change at a macro level. The perspective is primarily historical,
political–economic, relational and dynamic. Genres are produced, textured and
transformed within institutional contexts over long periods of time. In turn, institutions
invest years – in some cases, millennia – in developing, maintaining and adapting generic
forms to changing social conditions in order to maintain or gain power. Graham believes
that at certain times in history, certain genres become very effective in motivating or
manipulating large sections of society. Because genres are developed within institutions,
and thus within the realms of vested interests, they display inherent axiological biases.
The nature of knowledge and its status as a commodity form immediately become
problematic. In the tradition of dialectical argumentation, Graham accepts the claims that
knowledge can become a dominant commodity; that a global economy can be built on
such forms; and that our new media must, in some fundamental way, underpin the
emergence of this new form of political economy. The research problem is therefore
formulated as an historical investigation into the relationship between language, new
media and social perceptions of value.
Focusing cognition
The seminal book by Teun van Dijk and Walter Kintsch, Strategies of Discourse
Comprehension (1983), triggered research in discourse and cognition from
interdisciplinary and critical perspectives. In this book, they considered the relevance of
discourse to the study of language processing. Currently, interest in cognition has grown,
and many scholars attempt a combination of new cognitive theories (on conceptual
metaphors, for example) with CDA (Charteris-Black, 2006; Musolff, 2004). Some of this
research draws on earlier attempts which integrated cognition, sociolinguistics and
discourse analysis (such as Lutz and Wodak, 1987; Wodak, 1986a, 1996; Wodak and
Schulz, 1986) by proposing new approaches (see below).
Much of the focus in this area has been placed on researching social inclusion and
exclusion. Teun V
an Dijk, for example, has recently paid special attention to the
discursive reproduction of racism in Spain and Latin America (V
an Dijk, 2005). The
study by John Richardson on the ‘(mis)representation of Islam’, and research on the
representation of migrants, asylum-seekers and refugees in the British Press, have
elaborated research on racism, antisemitism and xenophobia in intricate ways, by
combining quantitative and qualitative methods, and by focusing on argumentation as well
(see Baker et al., 2008; Delanty et al., 2008; Richardson, 2004; Wodak, 2008b, 2008c).
Moreover, the focus on theorizing context and knowledge is apparent. V
an Dijk argues
that whereas (critical and other) discourse studies have paid extensive attention in the last
few decades to the structures of text and talk, they only paid lip-service to the necessity of
developing the relations between text and context (but see Panagl and Wodak, 2004).


Most approaches, also in CDA, define the influence of the social context on language
variation and discourse in terms of objective social variables such as gender, class, race,
ethnicity or age. V
an Dijk argues that no such direct influence exists, because social
structures and discourse structures cannot be related directly, and need the mediation of
an interface. He shows that this interface must be cognitive, in the sense that it is not
‘objective’ social situations, but the subjective definitions of the relevant properties of
communicative situations that influence text and talk. These definitions are then made
explicit in terms of a special kind of mental model (see V
an Dijk, this volume). In sum,
V
an Dijk emphasizes that CDA should also not limit itself to a study of the relationship
between discourse and social structure, such as racism and other forms of power abuse,
but that language use always presupposes the intervening mental models, goals and
general social representations (knowledge, attitudes, ideologies, norms, values). In other
words, the study of discourse triangulates between society/culture/situation, cognition,
and discourse/language.
Paul Chilton, who is a cognitive linguist, has never explicitly applied the term CDA to
his own work and has always worked within a cognitive framework, principally on the
discourse of politics and the international relations framework (cf. Chilton, 1994a,
1994b, 1996a, 1996b, 2004, 2005a, 2005b; Chilton and Lakoff, 1995). His most recent
(2004, 2005a) and ongoing work departs from CDA’s tendency to allegedly reify social
structures and processes and raises major research questions relating to the relationship
between language and social cognition in the evolution of the human species. More
particularly, he has drawn on cognitive evolutionary psychology to ask whether there
might exist an innate ‘critical instinct’. If this was the case, he argues, then what is the
role of critical discourse analysis? Chilton’s argument is that the most fundamental issue
is whether societies provide the freedom to enable the ‘critical instinct’ to operate. This
position is, of course, extremely vulnerable and has been challenged by other CDA
researchers (Fairclough in this volume; V
an Dijk, 2007a; Wodak, 2007). Linked to this
approach is a concern with universal aspects of language and the human mind, a concern
that is also reflected in his current collaborative work on comparative discourse analysis
that crosses linguistic, cultural and political boundaries (Chilton, 2007; Chilton et al.,
forthcoming). Comparative discourse analysis, he argues, is the most serious challenge
facing practitioners of CDA, if CDA is to overcome its Eurocentric drift and respond to a
globalized scholarly environment.
The emergent blend of CDA, cognitive linguistics and corpus linguistics has become a
huge priority that is also recognized by many other scholars (see, for example, Koller and
Davidson, 2008). However, what remains unsolved is the apparent contradiction that
CDA starts from a complex social problem or phenomenon; cognitive linguistics,
however, starts from the individual mind, and corpus linguistics from the largely (but not
fully!) decontextualized text. Thus, integration will have to address these epistemological
considerations. Both Chilton and Koller (and many other CDA researchers) state that the
analysis of powerful, even hegemonic discourse(s) which however do not necessarily


discriminate against a particular social group has to be enhanced, for example, by aspects
of corporate self-presentation, as well as the impact of new genres, and so on (Koller,
2008).
Multimodality and ‘new’ genres
Recognition of the contribution of all the aspects of the communicative context to text
meaning, as well as a growing awareness in media studies in general and in the
importance of non-verbal aspects of texts in particular, has turned attention to semiotic
devices in discourse other than the linguistic ones. In particular, the theory put forward
by Kress and van Leeuwen (1996) provides a useful framework for considering the
communicative potential of visual devices in the media. Currently, van Leeuwen is
focusing on the semiotics of handwriting and typography and the question of colour, as
well as on the constraints imposed by certain software, PowerPoint templates, and so on.
Thus, it is important for social semiotics to provide models of semiotic practice that are
appropriate to the practices they model, and as different semiotic practices are very
differently organized, it is not possible to apply a single model to all. V
an Leeuwen
claims that the role and status of semiotic practices in society are currently undergoing
change as a result of the fact that it is increasingly global corporations and semiotic
technologies, rather than national institutions, which regulate semiotic production and
consumption (see also van Leeuwen, this volume).
Jay Lemke’s recent work has emphasized multimedia semiotics, multiple timescales
and hypertexts or traversals. This work emphasizes the implicit value systems and their
connections to institutional and personal identity in new multimodal genres. The work on
multiple timescales, for example, is an extension of earlier work on ecological–social
systems as complex dynamical systems with semiotic cultures. It is very important in
considering all aspects of social dynamics to look across multiple timescales, i.e. how
processes and practices which take place at relatively faster rates are organized within
the framework of more slowly changing features of social institutions and cultures (see
the concept of ‘non-simultaneity’ or Ungleichzeitigkeit) (Lemke, 2001, 2002). Lemke’s
work has combined both these themes to develop the idea that although we tell our lives
as narratives, we experience them as hypertexts. Building on research on the semantic
resources of hypertext as a medium, he proposed that postmodern lifestyles are
increasingly liberated from particular institutional roles, and that we tend to move, on
multiple timescales, from involvement in one institution to another, creating new kinds of
meaning, less bound to fixed genres and registers, as we ‘surf’ across channels, websites
and lived experiences. This is seen as a new historical development, not supplanting
institutions, but building up new sociocultural possibilities on and over them.
Moreover, Lemke – while building on CDA and extending the tools from systemic
linguistics – has increasingly investigated combinations of language, visual media and


dynamic–interactive effects. The most advanced part of this work concerns computer
games. Here, one has to take into account not only the semiotic and semantic affordances
of an interactive environment, but also the phenomenological experience and particularly
the feelings and emotions of the user. This requires developing a number of new tools to
think about and analyse categories of feelings, and their combination with other sorts of
meanings. In this vein, the semantics of evaluations and judgements is a key link, as is re-
thinking feelings, at least in part, as social and distributed, rather than as totally
individual and internal. Of course, there are also cultural dimensions to feelings; this
point addresses similar issues to those mentioned by Chilton (see above), namely that
CDA has to move away from a Eurocentric focus.
Another branch of this work is the critical analysis of transmedia. This is the term now
used for sets of related media (e.g. a book and film, a website and a game, merchandise,
stories written by fans of the movie or games, etc.) that either form a commercial
franchise (e.g. Harry Potter, Star Wars) or some more loosely connected intertextual set
(see the remarks on KBE above). In either case, there are economic and material
relationships as well as textual and semantic ones (see also the research by Graham
above). Thus, these cases are particularly revealing for a study of the political economy
of signs. Commercial interests and their ideologies interact with consumer interests and
consumer beliefs and desires. Of special importance is the appearance of collectives of
consumers who also become producers of parallel or counter media: for instance, readers
write their own stories changing the values and practices of famous characters from
popular movies, fiction, games, and so on, and these are widely read and distributed on
the internet, for example in blogs. Something similar is also happening with art, games
and music. Fans edit commercial movies, add a musical soundtrack, and create new
montage effects with completely different ideological and narrative meanings from the
original works, which illustrate creative and subversive processes of the
recontextualization of multiple genres and modes in detail.
Therefore, Theo van Leeuwen (2006: 292) argues that:
[c]ritical discourse analysis has also moved beyond language, taking on board that discourses are often
multimodally realized, not only through text and talk, but also through other modes of communication such as
images … Overall, then, critical discourse analysis has moved towards more explicit dialogue between social
theory and practice, richer contextualization, greater interdisciplinarity and greater attention to the multimodality of
discourse.
Political discourse
The study of political discourse after the Second World War was triggered in part by the
investigation of National Socialist (NS) language (Klemperer, 1975/1947); it was
essential to understand and explain the roles and importance of language and
communication in totalitarian regimes and their propaganda. Utz Maas was the first
linguist to subject the everyday linguistic practice of National Socialism to an in-depth


analysis: he used NS texts to exemplify his approach of Lesweisenanalyse (Maas, 1984,
1989a, 1989b).
His historical ‘argumentation analysis’, based on the theories of Michel Foucault,
demonstrates how in complex ways discourse is determined by society, i.e. in what may
be termed ‘a social practice’. In his analysis of language practices during the National
Socialist regime between 1932 and 1938, he showed how the discursive practices of
society in Germany were impacted by the National Socialist (NS) discourse
characterized by social–revolutionist undertones. NS discourse had superseded almost all
forms of language (practices), a fact that made it difficult for an individual who did not
want to cherish the tradition of an unworldly Romanticism to use language in a critical–
reflective way. Discourse is basically understood as the result of collusion: the
conditions of the political, social and linguistic practice impose themselves practically
‘behind the back of the subjects’, while the actors do not understand ‘the game’ (see also
Bourdieu’s ‘violènce symbolique’). Discourse analysis identifies the rules which make a
text into a fascist text. In the same way as grammar characterizes the structure of
sentences, discourse rules characterize utterances/texts that are acceptable within a
certain practice. The focus is not on ‘National Socialist language’ per se, but the aim is
rather to record and analyse the spectrum of linguistic relations based on a number of
texts dealing with various spheres of life. These texts represent a complicated network of
similarities, which overlap and intersect. Therefore, it is also important to do justice to
the ‘polyphony’ of texts resulting from the fact that societal contradictions are inscribed
into texts (see also the concept of ‘entextualization’ as employed by Blommaert, 2005).
Texts from diverse social and political contexts (cooking recipes, local municipal
provisions on agriculture, texts by NS politicians, but also by critics of this ideology,
who are ultimately involved in the dominant discourse) are analysed in a representative
sample (see Wodak and de Cillia, 2006, for details and an extensive overview of the
field of language and politics).
The study of political institutions and everyday life and decision-making in
organizations has become a major new focus of CDA. Krzy anowski and Oberhuber
(2007), for example, have analysed the European Convention in much detail. The focus on
discursive dimensions of transnational political organizations also led to the elaboration
of discursively constructed visions/conceptions of social and political order in
Europe/the EU. Wodak (2009) focuses on the everyday lives of MEPs and other
politicians because – as she argues – depoliticization is linked to ‘the democracy deficit’
and the huge dissatisfaction about the strong ritualization of politics and the snapshots
provided by media which condense complex political processes into iconic images
(Triandafyllidou et al., 2009). Such studies allow insight into ‘politics as a profession’
and into the complexity of political decision-making. If the media, however, allow us to
venture backstage, this usually happens in the context of the sex and corruption scandals
of politicians. (Hence, in the above-mentioned ethnographic studies, ‘backstage’ access
opens the door to understanding ‘the doing of politics’.)


Much CDA research in the domain of politics centres on right wing populist rhetoric on
many occasions, as right wing populist rhetoric is becoming more and more hegemonic in
many European countries (see ‘Haiderization’ – Krzy anowski and Wodak, 2008; Pelinka
and Wodak, 2002; Richardson and Wodak, 2008; Rydgren, 2005; Wodak and Pelinka,
2002). This research is triggered by the rising dominance and hegemony of this kind of
rhetoric and its apt use of indirect strategies to address multiple audiences (see Reisigl
and Wodak, this volume). The latter research also develops new methodologies for CDA:
the use of ethnography, focus groups and narrative interviews, combined with more
traditional data sources such as newspapers and political speeches (Wodak and Krzy
anowski, 2008).
Research on politics from a historical perspective also co-triggered CDA from the
very beginning. The study for which the Discourse-Historical Approach (DHA) was
actually developed, for instance, first attempted to trace in detail the constitution of an
antisemitic stereotyped image, or Feindbild, as it emerged in public discourse in the 1986
Austrian presidential campaign of Kurt Waldheim (Gruber, 1991; Mitten, 1992; Wodak et
al., 1990). In order to be able to study the discourse about the ‘Waldheim Affair’,
‘context’ was unravelled into various dimensions.
The DHA has been further elaborated in a number of more recent studies, for example,
in a study on racist discrimination against immigrants from Romania and in a study on the
discourse about nation and national identity in Austria (Kovàcs and Wodak, 2003; Wodak
et al., 1999) and in the European Union (Muntigl et al., 2000; Wodak and V
an Dijk,
2000). The 1999 study was concerned with the analysis of the relationships between the
discursive construction of national sameness and the discursive construction of difference
leading to the political and social exclusion of specific outgroups. The findings suggest
that discourses about nations and national identities rely on at least four types of
discursive macro-strategies. These are:
constructive strategies (aiming at the construction of national identities)
justificatory strategies (aiming at the conservation and reproduction of national
identities or narratives of identity)
transformative strategies (aiming at the change of national identities)
destructive strategies (aiming at the dismantling of national identities).
More recently, much research has focused on commemorative events which manifest
hegemonic ways of dealing with traumatic pasts in various societies (Anthonissen and
Blommaert, 2007; Blommaert, 2005; de Cillia and Wodak, 2008; Ensink and Sauer, 2003;
Heer et al., 2008; Le, 2006; Martin and Wodak, 2003; Reisigl, 2007; Wodak and de
Cillia, 2007). In most of these studies, media, school books, speeches at national days
and the like are analysed to illustrate the myths which are constructed to provide new,
‘sanitized’ narratives which cover up ruptures, war crimes and conflicts which have


occurred in the past. For example, Heer et al. (2008) describe in detail the huge scandal
and crisis when the two exhibitions on war crimes committed by the German Wehrmacht
during the Second World War were opened to viewers, in 1995 and 2001. A carefully
constructed and protected myth was destroyed by these exhibitions – the myth that the
Wehrmacht soldiers had been innocent whereas the SS and other units had been the sole
perpetrators.
Differences and similarities – beyond the social dimension
The differences between CDA and other DA, pragmatic and sociolinguistic approaches
may be most clearly established with regard to the general principles of CDA. Firstly, the
nature of the problems with which CDA is concerned differs from all those approaches
which do not explicitly express their research interest. In general, CDA asks different
research questions, and some CDA scholars play an advocatory role for socially
discriminated groups. Looking at the CDA contributions collected in this reader, it also
becomes evident that the line drawn between social scientific research which ought to be
intelligible, and political argumentation sometimes gets blurred.
Specifically, we distinguish between approaches which proceed deductively and such
that choose a more inductive perspective. Linked to this distinction is the choice of
objects under investigation: more deductively oriented theories which also propose a
closed theoretical framework are more likely to illustrate their assumptions with a few
examples which seem to fit their claims (e.g. the dialectical–relational approach and
sociocognitive approach in this volume). More inductively oriented approaches usually
stay at the ‘meso level’ and select problems where they attempt to discover new insights
through in-depth case studies and ample data collection (for example, DHA, social actors
approach, corpus linguistics approach, dispositive analysis, in this volume). Of course,
all approaches moreover proceed abductively, i.e. oscillate between theory and data
analysis in retroductive ways. However, on a continuum, we are able to distinguish
obvious priorities in choosing entry points and themes (see Figure 1.1).
Related to the choice of more ‘macro-’ or ‘meso-topics’ (such as ‘globalization’ or
‘knowledge’ versus ‘un/employment’ or ‘right wing populism’), we encounter differences
in the evaluation of the chosen topics and objects under investigation. Macro-topics are
relatively non-controversial in the respective national or international academic contexts;
some meso-topics, however, can touch on the very core of the respective national
community to which the researcher belongs. For example, research on concrete
antisemitic, xenophobic and racist occurrences is much more controversial in certain
academic and national contexts and regarded as ‘unpatriotic’ or hostile than many macro-
themes – this explains grave problems which critical scholars have encountered when
venturing into such seemingly tabooed fields (see Heer et al., 2008).


FIGURE 1.1 Overall research strategies and theoretical background
In any case, related to the object of investigation, it remains a fact that CDA follows a
different and critical approach to problems, since it endeavours to reveal power relations
that are frequently obfuscated and hidden, and then to derive results which are also of
practical relevance.
Furthermore, one important characteristic arises from the assumption that all
discourses are historical and can therefore only be understood with reference to their
context. Therefore, these approaches refer to such extralinguistic factors as culture,
society and ideology in intricate ways, depending on their concepts of context and their
research methodologies and ways of data collection. Hence, the notion of context is
crucial for CDA, since this explicitly includes social–psychological, political and
ideological components and thereby postulates interdisciplinary procedures.
Interdisciplinarity is implemented in many different ways in the CDA approaches
assembled in this volume: in some cases, interdisciplinarity is characteristic of the
theoretical 
framework 
(dispositive 
approach, 
dialectical–relational 
approach,
sociocognitive approach); in other cases, interdisciplinarity also applies to the collection
and analysis of data (social actors approach, DHA). Moreover, CDA uses the concepts of
intertextuality and interdiscursivity; in sum, it may be concluded that CDA is open to a
broad range of factors exerting an influence on texts.


A further difference between CDA and other DA approaches emerges with regard to
the dialectic relationships between language and society. CDA does not take this
relationship to be simply deterministic but invokes the concept of mediation. The
dialectical–relational approach draws on Halliday’s multifunctional linguistic theory
(Halliday, 1985) and the concept of orders of discourse according to Foucault, while the
discourse-historical approach and the sociocognitive approach make use of theories of
social cognition (e.g. Moscovici, 2000). This reflection on issues of mediation between
language and social structure is absent from many other linguistic approaches, for
example from conversation analysis. This is somewhat related to the level of social
aggregation: though CDA concentrates on notions like ideology or power, scholars focus
on different units of analysis – the way in which individuals mentally perceive, or the
way social structures determine discourse (see Figure 1.2). In simplified terms, we can
distinguish between more cognitive–socio-psychological and more macro-sociological–
structural approaches – although, admittedly, this is a rough distinction.
A further characteristic of CDA is that most researchers integrate linguistic categories
into their analyses – but to a different extent and with a different focus and intensity. CDA
does not necessarily include a broad range of linguistic categories in each single analysis;
one might get the impression that only a few linguistic devices are central to CDA studies.
For instance, many CDA scholars consistently use social actor analysis by focusing upon
pronouns, attributes and the verbal mode, time and tense; Hallidayan transitivity analysis
and the analysis of argumentative topoi are also used frequently by other social scientists
because these concepts seem to be quite easy to apply without much linguistic background
knowledge. Exceptions always prove the generalization: Reisigl and Wodak (this
volume) and V
an Dijk (this volume) illustrate how a broad range of macro and micro
linguistic, pragmatic and argumentative features can be operationalized and integrated in
the analysis of specific texts (Figure 1.2).


FIGURE 1.2 Linguistic depth of field and level of aggregation
In principle, we may assume that linguistic categories such as deixis and pronouns can
be analysed in any linguistic methodology, but they are salient for CDA. Explicitly or
implicitly, CDA distinguishes between the linguistic surface and some kind of deep
structure; for instance, the dialectical–relational approach speaks of form and texture at
the textual level, the discourse-historical approach of forms of linguistic realization.
As for the methods and procedures used for interpretation, CDA generally views them
as hermeneutic, although this characteristic is not completely evident in the positioning of
every author. Hermeneutics can be understood as the method of grasping and interpreting
meanings. The hermeneutic circle – i.e. the meaning of one part can only be understood
in the context of the whole, but this in turn is only accessible from its components –
indicates the problem of the intelligibility of the hermeneutic interpretation. Therefore,
hermeneutic interpretation requires detailed documentation. However, the specifics of the
hermeneutic interpretation process are not made completely transparent by many CDA-
orientated studies.6 If a crude distinction has to be made between ‘text-extending’ and
‘text-reducing’ methods of analysis, then CDA, on account of its concentration of very
clear formal properties and the associated compression of texts during analysis, may be
characterized as ‘text-reducing’. These findings contradict the mainly hermeneutic
impetus of most CDA approaches.


Methodology
CDA in all its various forms understands itself to be strongly based in theory. To which
theories do the different approaches refer? Here we encounter a variety of theories,
ranging from theories on society and power in Michel Foucault’s tradition and theories of
social cognition and grammar, to individual concepts that draw on larger theoretical
traditions. As a first step, this section aims to systematize these different theoretical
influences (see Figure 1.1).
Moreover, this section is devoted to the problem of the operationalization of
theoretical concepts. The primary issue here is how the various approaches of CDA are
able to ‘translate’ their theoretical claims into instruments and methods of analysis. In
particular, the emphasis is on mediation between ‘grand theories’ as applied to larger
society, and concrete instances of social interaction which result in texts. In addition to
what can be described primarily as hermeneutics, one finds interpretative perspectives
with differing emphases, among them even quantitative procedures (see Mautner, this
volume).
Particularly worthy of discussion is the way in which sampling is conducted in CDA.
Most studies analyse ‘typical texts’. What is typical in which social situation, and for
which aspect of a social problem, however, frequently remains vague.
The links between theory and discourse in CDA can be described in terms of the model
for theoretical and methodological research procedures illustrated in Figure 1.3 (see
below).
Theoretical grounding and objectives
Among the different positions within CDA presented in this book, there is neither any
guiding theoretical viewpoint that is used coherently within CDA, nor do the CDA
protagonists proceed consistently from the area of theory to the field of discourse and
text, and back to theory (see Figure 1.1).
Within the CDA approaches presented here, all the theoretical levels of sociological
and socio-psychological theory can be discovered (the concept of different theoretical
levels is in the tradition of Merton, 1967: 39–72):


FIGURE 1.3 Empirical research as a circular process
Epistemology, i.e. theories which provide models of the conditions, contingencies
and limitations of human perception in general, and scientific perception in
particular.
General social theories, often called ‘grand theories’, try to conceptualize the
complex relations between social structure and social action and thus link micro-and
macro-sociological phenomena. Within this level, one can distinguish between the
more structuralist and the more individualist approaches. To put it very simply, the
former provide top-down explanations (structure>action), whereas the latter prefer
bottom-up explanations (action>structure). Many modern theories try to reconcile
these positions and imply some kind of circularity between social action and social
structure.
Middle-range theories focus either upon specific social phenomena (e.g. conflict,
cognition, social networks) or on specific subsystems of society (e.g. economy,
politics, religion).
Micro-sociological theories try to explain social interaction, for example the
resolution of the double contingency problem (Parsons and Shils, 1951: 3–29) or the
reconstruction of everyday procedures which members of a society use to create
their own social order (i.e. ethnomethodology).
Socio-psychogical theories concentrate upon the social conditions of emotion and
cognition and, compared to microsociology, prefer causal explanations to a
hermeneutic interpretation of meaning.
Discourse theories aim at the conceptualization of discourse as a social
phenomenon and try to explain its genesis and its structure.
Linguistic theories, e.g. theories of argumentation, of grammar, of rhetoric, describe
the patterns specific to language systems and verbal communication.
As all these theoretical levels can be found in CDA, in the following, we present a short


overview of the theoretical positions and methodological objectives of CDA approaches.
Among the approaches assembled in this reader, Dispositive Analysis (DA – Siegfried
Jäger and Florentine Maier in this volume) is closest to the origin of the notion of
discourse, i.e. to Michel Foucault’s structuralist explanations of discursive phenomena.
However, it detects a blind spot in Foucault’s theory, namely the mediation between
subject and object, between discursive and nondiscursive practices (activities) on the one
hand and manifestations (objects) on the other. Here, DA strategically inserts Aleksej
Leont’ev’s (e.g. 1982) activity theory. Thus, the social actor becomes the link between
discourse and reality. The epistemological position is based upon Ernesto Laclau’s social
constructivism, which denies any societal reality outside of the discursive. In that way,
Dispositive Analysis introduces a dualism of discourse and social reality.
As all CDA approaches accept that discourse, understood as language use, is but one
manifestation of social action (Chilton, 2005b: 20), DA is forced to argue against the
Foucauldian notion of discourse which also includes non-linguistic elements. DA
therefore applies Jürgen Link’s notion of discourse as ‘an institutionalized way of talking
that regulates and reinforces action and thereby exerts power’ (Link, 1983: 60).
Furthermore, Foucault’s concept of the ‘dispositive’ frames both discursive and
nondiscursive practices and materializations. DA thus explicitly aims at the analysis of
discourses and dispositives.
The Sociocognitive Approach (SCA – Teun van Dijk in this volume) is situated on the
socio-psychological dimension of the CDA field. The approach draws on social
representation theory (e.g. Moscovici, 2000). Discourse is seen as a communicative
event, including conversational interaction and written text, as well as associated
gestures, facework, typographical layout, images and any other ‘semiotic’ or multimedia
dimension of signification. V
an Dijk relies on sociocognitive theory and understands
linguistics in a broad ‘structural–functional’ sense. He argues that CDA should be based
on a sound theory of context. Within this claim, the theory of social representations plays
a major role.
Social actors involved in discourse do not only use their individual experiences and
strategies, they rely upon collective frames of perceptions, i.e. social representations.
These socially shared perceptions form the link between the social system and the
individual cognitive system, and perform the translation, homogenization and
coordination between external requirements and subjective experience. Thus, the
approach refers to the ‘link’ which Chilton (2005a) detects as missing. This assumption is
not new: already in the first half of the 20th century, Émile Durkheim (e.g. 1933) pointed
to the significance of collective ideas in constructing social order. Serge Moscovici
(1982) coined the notion of social representations as a bulk of concepts, opinions,
attitudes, evaluations, images and explanations which result from daily life and are
sustained by communication. Social representations are shared among members of a
social group, which was already stated by Émile Durkheim: ‘The ideas of man… are not
personal and are not restricted to me; I share them, to a large degree, with all the men


who belong to the same social group that I do. Because they are held in common, concepts
are the supreme instrument of all intellectual exchange’ (cited in Bellah, 1973: 52). Thus,
they form a core element of the individual’s social identity (Wagner, 1994: 132). Social
representations are always bound to specific social groups. They are dynamic constructs
and subject to permanent change. Together, they constitute a hierarchical order of mutual
dependency (Duveen and Lloyd, 1990). SCA introduces the concept of context models,
i.e. mental representations of the structures of the communicative situation that are salient
for a participant. These context models control the ‘pragmatic’ part of discourse, whereas
event models control the ‘semantic’ part. Three forms of social representations are
relevant in this context:
1. knowledge (personal, group, cultural)
2. attitudes (not in the social psychology understanding)
3. ideologies.
Discourses take place within society, and can only be understood in the interplay of
social situation, action, actor and societal structures.
The Discourse-Historical Approach (DHA) explicitly tries to establish a theory of
discourse by linking fields of action (Girnth, 1996), genres, discourses and texts.
Although DHA is aligned to critical theory, ‘grand theories’ play a minor role compared
with the discourse model and the emphasis on historical analysis: context is understood
as mainly historical. Thus far, the DHA consistently agrees with Mouzelis’s (1995)
pessimistic 
diagnosis 
of 
social 
research. 
DHA 
consequently 
follows 
his
recommendations: not to get lost in theoretical labyrinths, not to invest too much in the
operationalization of inoperationalizable ‘grand theories’ – but rather to develop
conceptual tools adequate for specific social problems. The DHA focuses on the field of
politics, where it develops conceptual frameworks for political discourse. Reisigl and
Wodak try to fit linguistic theories into their model of discourse. They make extensive use
of argumentation theory in the example presented in this volume. That does not
necessarily imply that the concepts resulting from argumentation theory are adequate for
other research questions.
As the Corpus Linguistics Approach (CLA – Gerlinde Mautner in this volume) is a
quantitative, linguistic extension of CDA, it provides additional linguistic devices for
thorough analysis – and can be applied against the backdrop of CDA approaches.
The Social Actors Approach (SAA – Theo van Leeuwen in this volume) refers to a
broad scope of sociological and linguistic theories, especially to those explaining the role
of action to establish social structure: representation is ultimately based on practice, on
that which people do – it is the primacy of practice which constitutes the theoretical core
of SAA. Therefore, SAA introduces sources from Malinowski to Parsons, and from
Bernstein to Bourdieu. This idea of individual actors permanently constituting and


reproducing social structure is linked with a Foucauldian notion of discourse, somewhat
similar to DA and DRA.
The Dialectical–Relational Approach (DRA – Norman Fairclough in this volume)
takes a rather grand-theory-oriented position: Fairclough focuses upon social conflict in
the Marxian tradition and tries to detect its linguistic manifestations in discourses, in
specific elements of dominance, difference and resistance. According to DRA, every
social practice has a semiotic element. Productive activity, the means of production,
social relations, social identities, cultural values, consciousness and semiosis are
dialectically related elements of social practice. He understands CDA as the analysis of
the dialectical relationships between semiosis (including language) and other elements of
social practices. These semiotic aspects of social practice are responsible for the
constitution of genres and styles. The semiotic aspect of social order is called the order
of discourse. His approach to CDA oscillates between a focus on structure and a focus on
action. CDA should pursue emancipatory objectives, and should be focused upon the
problems confronting what can loosely be referred to as the ‘losers’ within particular
forms of social life. DRA draws upon a specific linguistic theory – Systemic Functional
Linguistics (Halliday, 1985) – which analyses language as shaped (even in its grammar)
by the social functions it has come to serve.


Gathering data
We concluded above that CDA does not constitute a well-defined empirical methodology
but rather a bulk of approaches with theoretical similarities and research questions of a
specific kind. But there is no CDA way of gathering data, either. Some authors do not
even mention sampling, while other scholars strongly rely on traditions based outside the
sociolinguistic field.7 In any case, similar to Grounded Theory (Glaser and Strauss,
1967), data collection is not considered to be a specific phase that must be completed
before analysis begins: it is a matter of finding indicators for particular concepts,
expanding concepts into categories and, on the basis of these results, collecting further
data (theoretical sampling). In this procedure, data collection is never completely
excluded, and new questions always arise which can only be dealt with if more data are
collected or earlier data are re-examined (Strauss, 1987; Strauss and Corbin, 1990).
Most of the approaches to CDA do not explicitly recommend sampling procedures.
Obviously, CLA specifically refers to large corpora of text. DA, SCA, SAA and DRA
mainly rely on existing texts, such as mass media communication or documents. This is
also true for DHA, though it additionally postulates that studies should incorporate
fieldwork and ethnography if possible to explore the object under investigation as a
precondition for any further analysis and theorizing. The focus on already existing texts
implies specific strengths, in particular it provides non-reactive data (Webb et al., 1966),
and certain weaknesses concerning the research questions which have to be
operationalized.


Operationalization and analysis
CDA places its methodology in the hermeneutic rather than in the analytical–deductive
tradition. In any case, the linguistic character of CDA becomes evident, because in
contrast to other approaches of text and discourse analysis (e.g. Content Analysis,
Grounded Theory, Conversation Analysis; see Titscher et al., 2000), CDA strongly relies
on linguistic categories. This does not mean, of course, that topics and contents play no
role, but the core operationalizations depend on linguistic concepts such as actors, mode,
time, tense, argumentation and so on. Nevertheless, an exhaustive list of linguistic devices
cannot be given, for their selection depends mainly on the specific research questions.
DA distinguishes between a more content-oriented phase of (1) structure analysis and a
more linguistically oriented phase of (2) fine analysis. Within structure analysis, the
media and the general themes have to be characterized. Within the fine analysis, DA
focuses upon context, text surface and rhetorical means. Exemplary linguistic indicators
are figurativeness, vocabulary and argumentation types. DA takes into account both
qualitative and quantitative aspects of these features. DA analyses:
the kind and form of argumentation
certain argumentation strategies
the intrinsic logic and composition of texts
implicit implicateurs and insinuations
the collective symbolism or ‘figurativeness’, symbolism, metaphors and so on, both
in language and in design (statistics, photographs, pictures, caricatures, etc.)
idioms, sayings, clichés, vocabulary and style
actors (persons, pronominal structure)
references, for example, to (the) science(s)
the particulars of the sources of knowledge, etc.
SCA generally argues that a complete discourse analysis of a large corpus of text or talk
is totally impossible. If the focus of research is on the ways in which some speakers or
writers exercise power in or by their discourse, research focuses on those properties that
can vary as a function of social power. SCA therefore suggests the following linguistic
indicators:
stress and intonation
word order
lexical style
coherence
local semantic moves such as disclaimers
topic choice


speech acts
schematic organization
rhetorical figures
syntactic structures
propositional structures
turn-takings
repairs
hesitation.
SCA assumes that most of these are exemplary forms of interaction which are in principle
susceptible to speaker control, but are in practice mostly not consciously controlled.
Other categories, such as the form of words and many structures of sentences, are
grammatically obligatory and contextually invariant and hence are usually not subject to
speaker control and social power. SCA further suggests six steps of analysis:
1. The analysis of semantic macrostructures: topics and macropropositions.
2. The analysis of local meanings, where the many forms of implicit or indirect
meanings, such as implications, presuppositions, allusions, vagueness, omissions
and polarizations, are especially interesting.
3. The analysis of ‘subtle’ formal structures : here, most of the linguistic markers
mentioned are analysed.
4. The analysis of global and local discourse forms or formats.
5. The analysis of specific linguistic realizations, e.g. hyperbole, litotes.
6. The analysis of context.
DHA unfolds a four-step strategy of analysis: after (1) having established the specific
contents or topics of a specific discourse (e.g. with racist, antisemitic, nationalist or
ethnicist ingredients), (2) the discursive strategies (including argumentation strategies)
are investigated. Then (3), the linguistic means (as types) and the specific, context-
dependent linguistic realizations (as tokens) of the discriminatory stereotypes are
examined (4).
In these studies, DHA focuses on the following discursive strategies:
Referential strategy or strategy of nomination, where the salient linguistic devices
are membership categorization (Sacks, 1992), metaphors, metonymies and
synecdoches.
Strategies of predication which appear in evaluative attributions of positive or
negative traits and implicit or explicit predicates.
Strategies of argumentation which are reflected in certain topoi (i.e. used to justify
political inclusion or exclusion).


Strategies of perspectivization, framing or discourse representation use specific
means of reporting, description, narration or the quotation of events and utterances.
Strategies of intensification and mitigation intensify or mitigate the illocutionary
force of utterances (Ng and Bradac, 1993).
This methodology aims to be abductive, because the categories of analysis are first
developed in accordance with the research questions, and a constant movement back and
forth between theory and empirical data is suggested. The historical context is always
analysed and integrated into the interpretation, although there is no clear procedure for
this task.
CLA adds a quantitative methodology to CDA: large corpora are analysed by means of
concordance software, thus providing frequency lists and specific measures of statistical
significance. Therefore, CLA applies a rather deductive methodology in selecting
specific words which are relevant for analysis, but also offers concordance lines as a
basis for further (qualitative) interpretation.
In a very general sense, SAA describes and explains social practices by identifying
seven core elements. Firstly, it tries to identify (1) actions within given texts; then it
analyses (2) performance modes and denotes (3) actors which apply (4) specific
presentation styles of their actions. Social practices which are constituted by these
actions take place in (5) specific times and (6) spaces, and actors require (7) specific
resources. Some of these elements of social practice are eligible, while some are deleted,
i.e. are not represented in a specific discourse. Some are substituted; some reactions and
motives are added to the representation of social practices.
DRA suggests a stepwise procedure in preparation for analysis. Like DHA, it prefers a
pragmatic, problem-oriented approach, where the first step is to identify and describe the
social problem which should be analysed. DRA stages of analysis are as follows:
1. Focus upon a specific social problem which has a semiotic aspect, go outside the
text and describe the problem, and identify its semiotic dimension.
2. Identify the dominant styles, genres and discourses constituting this semiotic
dimension.
3. Consider the range of difference and diversity in styles, genres and discourses
within this dimension.
4. Identify the resistance against the colonialization processes executed by the dominant
styles, genres and discourses.
After these preparatory steps, which also help to select the material, DRA suggests (1) a
structural analysis of the context, and then (2) an interactional analysis, which focuses
on such well-known linguistic features as:


agents
time
tense
modality
syntax
and finally (3) an analysis of interdiscursivity, which tries to compare the dominant and
resistant strands of discourse.
Above, we have only been able to give a brief overview of the core procedures
applied in the different approaches to CDA. Finally, it should be pointed out that,
although there is no consistent CDA methodology, some features are common to most
CDA approaches: (1) they are problem-oriented and not focused on specific linguistic
items, yet linguistic expertise is obligatory for the selection of the items relevant to
specific research objectives; (2) theory as well as methodology is eclectic, both of which
are integrated to be able to understand the social problems under investigation.


Criteria for assessing quality
It seems to be beyond controversy that qualitative social research also needs concepts
and criteria to assess the quality of its findings. It is also indisputable that the classical
concepts of validity, reliability and objectivity used in quantitative research cannot be
applied in unmodified ways. ‘The real issue is how our research can be both
intellectually challenging and rigorous and critical’ (Silverman, 1993: 144); Silverman
also provides a detailed discussion of these concepts and a reformulation for qualitative
research. Within CDA, there is little specific discussion about quality criteria.
DA at least mentions the classical criteria of representativeness, reliability and
validity. Beyond it, DA suggests ‘completeness’ as a criterion suited for CDA: the results
of a study will be ‘complete’ if new data and the analysis of new linguistic devices
reveal no new findings. SCA suggests accessibility as a criterion which takes into
account the practical targets of CDA: findings should at least be accessible and readable
for the social groups under investigation.
DHA suggests triangulation procedures to ensure validity – ‘… which is appropriate
whatever one’s theoretical orientation or use of quantitative or qualitative data’
(Silverman, 1993: 156).8 DHA’s triangulatory approach is mainly theoretical and based
on the concept of context which takes into account four levels: (1) the immediate
language-or text-internal co-text; (2) the intertextual and interdiscursive relationship
between utterances, texts, genres and discourses; (3) the extralinguistic (social) level,
which is called the ‘context of situation’ and is explained by middle-range theories; and
(4) the broader sociopolitical and historical contexts. Permanent switching between these
levels and evaluating the findings from these different perspectives should minimize the
risk of being biased. Beyond it, DHA suggests methodical triangulation by using
multimethodical designs on the basis of a variety of empirical data as well as background
information.
Triangulation among different types of data, participants’ definition of relevance and
problem-based analysis to establish the significance of the sites of engagement and
mediated actions under investigation are suited to bring the analyses back to participants:
to uncover divergences and contradictions between one’s own analysis of the mediated
actions one is studying and those of participants.
Nevertheless, rigorous ‘objectivity’ cannot be reached by means of discourse analysis,
for each ‘technology’ of research must itself be examined as potentially embedding the
beliefs and ideologies of the analysts and therefore guiding the analysis towards the
analysts’ preconceptions.
Summary and criticism
The goal of this chapter was to provide a summary of CDA approaches, their similarities


and differences. One of CDA’s volitional characteristics is its diversity. Nevertheless, a
few salient cornerstones can be noticed within this diversity:
Concerning its theoretical background, CDA works eclectically in many aspects.
The whole range between grand theories and linguistic theories is evoked, although
each approach emphasizes different levels.
There is no accepted canon of data collection, but many CDA approaches work with
existing data, i.e. texts not specifically produced for the respective research
projects.
Operationalization and analysis are problem-oriented and imply linguistic expertise.
The most evident similarity is a shared interest in social processes of power, hierarchy-
building, exclusion and subordination. In the tradition of critical theory, CDA aims to
shed light on the discursive aspects of societal disparities and inequalities. CDA
frequently detects the linguistic means used by the privileged to stabilize or even to
intensify inequalities in society. This entails careful systematic analysis, self-reflection at
every point of one’s research and distance from the data which are being investigated.
Description and interpretation should be kept apart, thus enabling transparency and
retroduction of the respective analysis. Of course, not all of these recommendations are
consistently followed, and they cannot always be implemented in detail because of time
pressures and similar structural constraints. Therefore, some critics will continue to state
that CDA constantly sits on the fence between social research and political argumentation
(Wodak, 2006a), while others will accuse some CDA studies of being too linguistic or
not linguistic enough. In our view, such criticism keeps a field alive because it
necessarily stimulates more self-reflection and encourages new questions, new responses
and new thoughts.
Notes
1 This chapter is based on long and extensive discussions with friends, colleagues and co-researchers as well as
students. Ruth Wodak would like to thank Teun van Dijk, Paul Chilton, Theo van Leeuwen, John Richardson, Jay
Lemke and Michael Billig, as well as all her co-researchers and (former) students. Finally, we would like to thank
the many colleagues we have not been able to mention here.
2 See Anthonissen, 2001; Blommaert and Bulcaen, 2000; Fairclough and Wodak, 1997; Reisigl and Wodak, 2001;
Titscher et al., 2000; Weiss and Wodak, 2003; Wodak and Meyer, 2001; Wodak and Pelinka, 2002, etc.
3 See Language and Power by Norman Fairclough (1989/1991), Language, Power and Ideology by Ruth
Wodak (1989) and Prejudice in Discourse by Teun van Dijk (1984).
4 The Erasmus network 1995 consisted of a cooperation between Siegfried Jäger, Duisburg, Per Linell, Linköping,
Norman Fairclough, Lancaster, Teun van Dijk, Amsterdam, Gunther Kress, London, Theo van Leeuwen, London,
and Ruth Wodak, Vienna.
5 Unfortunately, we have to neglect much research here which could certainly also be categorized as critical, such
as feminist CDA (see Lazar, 2005), critical ethnographic approaches (see Blommaert, 2005), research situated


between sociolinguistics, literacy research and CDA (see Tricento, 2005), etc. We have to refer readers to the
many publications and overview essays in the field.
6 The question of whether it is possible to make hermeneutic processes transparent and intelligible at all remains
undecided, although some authors (Oevermann et al., 1979) have developed a hermeneutically orientated method
with well-defined procedures and rules.
7 A general survey on sampling and the selection of texts is given by Titscher et al. (2000).
8 An early proponent of the method of triangulation is Norman Denzin (1970). For further discussion of criteria for
assessing interpretive validity in qualitative research, see, for example, Altheide and Johnson (1994); Morse et al.
(2002).


2
Theoretical and Methodological Aspects of Foucauldian Critical Discourse
Analysis and Dispositive Analysis
Siegfried Jäger and Florentine Maier
Introduction
Foundations of discourse theory
From discourse to dispositive
Methods for analysing discourses and dispositives


Introduction
This article aims to give a concise introduction to the methodology of analysing
discourses and dispositives, building on the theoretical insights of Michel Foucault. The
article is mainly aimed towards novices to this approach.1
Critical discourse analysis (CDA) based on Michel Foucault’s discourse theory
centres on the following questions:
What is valid knowledge at a certain place and a certain time?
How does this knowledge arise and how is it passed on?
What functions does it have for constituting subjects?
What consequences does it have for the overall shaping and development of society?
‘Knowledge’ refers to all kinds of contents that make up a human consciousness, or in
other words, all kinds of meanings that people use to interpret and shape their
environment. People derive this knowledge from the discursive surroundings into which
they are born and in which they are enmeshed throughout their lives. Knowledge is
therefore conditional, i.e. its validity depends on people’s location in history, geography,
class relations and so on.
Discourse analysis and its extension, dispositive analysis, aim to identify the
knowledges contained in discourses and dispositives, and how these knowledges are
firmly connected to power relations in power/knowledge complexes. Discourse and
dispositive analysis subject these workings of power/knowledge to critique. All sorts of
knowledge can be subjected to analysis. This, for example, includes everyday knowledge
transmitted through everyday communication, scientific knowledge from the natural as
well as the cultural sciences, knowledge transmitted by the media, by schools and so on.
To provide an overview of the methodology for critically analysing discourses and
dispositives, we first need to establish the foundations of Foucauldian discourse theory
on which critical discourse and dispositive analysis build. A brief outline of this
theoretical background is given in the ensuing section on the foundations of discourse
theory. The third section (From discourse to dispositive) then introduces the concept of
the dispositive. Dispositives can be understood as the synthesis of discursive practices
(i.e. speaking and thinking on the basis of knowledge), nondiscursive practices (i.e. acting
on the basis of knowledge) and materializations (i.e. the material products of acting on the
basis of knowledge). In the final section, practical methodological guidelines for
analysing discourses and dispositives are provided.
Foundations of discourse theory


One of the most fruitful approaches to Foucauldian discourse analysis in the cultural
sciences has been developed by literary and cultural scientist Jürgen Link and his team at
the University of Dortmund. Their work, on which we build here, focuses on the analysis
of current discourses and their power effects, on uncovering the linguistic and
iconographic means – in particular, the collective symbolism – by which discourses
work, and on the function of discourse to legitimize and secure dominance in bourgeois-
capitalist modern society (see Link, 1982).
The concept of discourse
According to Link, a discourse can be defined as ‘an institutionalized way of talking that
regulates and reinforces action and thereby exerts power’ (Link, 1983: 60, author’s own
translation). This definition can be illustrated by the image of discourse as a flow of
knowledge throughout time. Different discourses are intimately entangled with each other
and together form the giant milling mass of overall societal discourse. This milling mass
of discourse is growing constantly and exuberantly.
Discourses are not only mere expressions of social practice, but also serve particular
ends, namely the exercise of power. The concept of power, in the Foucauldian sense,
refers to ‘a whole series of particular mechanisms, definable and defined, that seem
capable of inducing behaviours or discourses’ (Foucault, 1996: 394). Discourses
exercise power in a society because they institutionalize and regulate ways of talking,
thinking and acting.
Aims of critical discourse analysis
CDA aims to disentangle the giant milling mass of discourse, to chart what is said and can
be said in a given society at a given time with regard to its qualitative spectrum (What is
said? How is it said?), and to uncover the techniques through which discursive limits are
extended or narrowed down.
Last but not least, and to live up to its name, CDA aims to question and criticize
discourses. CDA does so in two ways.
Firstly, CDA reveals the contradictions within and between discourses, the limits of
what can be said and done, and the means by which discourse makes particular statements
seem rational and beyond all doubt, even though they are only valid at a certain time and
place.
Secondly, the critical discourse analyst needs to be clear about the fact that her critique
is not situated outside discourse – as this would contradict the fundamental assumptions
of discourse analysis. The analyst can – and has to – take a stand. She can invoke values,
norms, the constitution, universal human rights and so on. But when doing so, she must
never forget that these values, norms, laws and rights have been discursively constructed


too. This kind of critique is not ideological, because unlike ideology it does not make
claims to absolute truth. A critical discourse analyst needs to be clear about the fact that
her position is also the result of discursive processes. With this outlook, she can enter
discursive arguments, where she may defend and possibly modify her position.
Foucauldian CDA here clearly differs from orthodox Marxist positions, which stipulate
that social existence determines consciousness (as discussed under the terms of false
consciousness and the fetishism of commodities in Marx, 1992/1867). Foucault
understands this relationship rather the other way around and emphasizes the materiality
of discourse (cf. Jäger, 2008; Link, 1996).
The question of how the production of discourses and the temporarily and spatially
contingent knowledge they contain are connected to mechanisms and institutions of power
has been central for Foucault (as he states in the introduction to the German version of
The History of Sexuality – see Foucault, 1983: 8). To clarify the connections between
discourses and power, it is necessary to first examine how discourses and reality are
connected to each other. The following section examines this connection between
discourse and reality. We then examine how discourses relate to power.
Discourses and reality
Discourses do not merely reflect reality. Rather, discourses not only shape but even
enable (social) reality. Without discourses, there would be no (social) reality. Discourses
can thus be understood as material reality sui generis. They are not a second-class
material reality, not ‘less material’ than ‘real’ reality, not passive media into which
reality is imprinted. Discourses are fully valid material realities among others (Link,
1992). Therefore, discourse cannot be reduced to a notion of ‘false consciousness’ or a
‘distorted view of reality’, as is done by some orthodox Marxist approaches to ‘ideology
critique’. Discourse is a material reality of its own. It is neither ‘much ado about nothing’,
nor a distortion, nor a lie about reality. This characterization of discourse as material
reality implies that discourse theory is a materialist theory. Contrary to a common
misconception, probably based on the fact that discourse analysis deals with language,
discourse theory is not an idealist theory. Discourse theory deals with material realities,
not with ‘mere’ ideas. Discourses may be conceptualized as societal means of
production. Discourses are not ‘mere ideology’; they produce subjects and reality.
Discourses determine reality, though of course always via intervening active subjects
in their social contexts as co-producers and co-agents of discourses. The subjects are
able to do this because they are entangled into discourse and therefore have knowledge at
their disposal. Discourse analysis is therefore not only about the retrospective analysis of
allocations of meaning, but also about the analysis of the ongoing production of reality
through discourse, conveyed by active subjects.


Discourses and power
Based on the above outline of the connection between discourses and reality, we can now
examine the connections between discourses and power. On the one hand, there is the
power of discourse. On the other hand, there is also something like the power over
discourse.
The power of discourse lies in the fact that discourses delineate a range of ‘positive’
statements, which are sayable. This means that they simultaneously inhibit a range of other
statements, which are not sayable (cf. Link and Link-Heer, 1990). As flows of knowledge
through time, discourses determine the way in which a society interprets reality and
organizes further discursive and nondiscursive practices (i.e. further talking, thinking and
acting). To put it more precisely, we can distinguish two effects of discourse. Firstly,
discourses form individual and mass consciousness and thereby constitute individual and
collective subjects. Secondly, since consciousness determines action, discourses
determine action. This human action creates materializations. Discourses thus guide the
individual and collective creation of reality.
From a discourse-theoretical point of view, it is thus not the subject who makes the
discourses, but the discourses that make the subject (which may be irritating for those
attached to the idea of the uniqueness of the individual). The subject is of interest not as
an actor, but as a product of discourses. As Foucault argues:
One has to dispense with the constituent subject, to get rid of the subject itself, that’s to say, to arrive at an
analysis which can account for the constitution of the subject within a historical framework. And this is what I
would call genealogy, that is, a form of history which can account for the constitution of knowledges, discourses,
domains of objects etc. without having to make reference to a subject which is either transcendental in relation to
the field of events or runs in its empty sameness throughout the course of history. (Foucault, 1980a: 117)
Foucauldian discourse theory, though often wrongly accused of so doing, does not deny
the subject. It aims to analyse the constitution of the subject in its historical and social
context from a diachronic (i.e. longitudinal) and synchronic (i.e. cross-sectional)
perspective: who was conceived of as a subject at a particular point in time? How, and
how come? For example, unlike in the past, women and children in Western society
usually have subject status today. In modern management, in contrast to traditional
bureaucracy, employees are depicted as subjects. They are ‘empowered’, with all the
responsibilities that involves. The subject status of foetuses and apes is something that is
hotly debated. Asylum seekers and criminals are often denied a subject status, for
example when they are portrayed as maniacs, dogs or viruses (these are collective
symbols – see the section on collective symbols). In a nutshell, Foucauldian discourse
theory contests the existence of an autonomous subject, but that does not mean that it is
against the subject. The active individual is fully involved when it comes to realizing
power relations in practice. The individual thinks, plans, constructs, interacts and
fabricates. The individual also faces the problem of having to prevail, to assert himself,


to find his place in society.
When analysing the power effects of discourse, it is important to distinguish between
the effects of a text and the effects of a discourse. A single text has minimal effects, which
are hardly noticeable and almost impossible to prove. In contrast, a discourse, with its
recurring contents, symbols and strategies, leads to the emergence and solidification of
‘knowledge’ and therefore has sustained effects. What is important is not the single text,
the single film, the single photograph and so on, but the constant repetition of statements.
The philologist Victor Klemperer recognized this mechanism as early as the 1930s, when
he observed the language of the Nazis. In his analysis of the language of the Third Reich
(Klemperer, 2000/2006), he contends that fascist language works like the continuous
administration of small doses of arsenic, which unfold their poisonous effect only over
the long term.
With regard to power over discourse, different individuals and groups have different
chances of influence. However, none of them can simply defy dominant discourse, and
none of them alone has full control over discourse. Discourses are supra-individual.
Everybody is co-producing discourse, but no single individual or group controls
discourse or has precisely intended its final result. Discourses take on a life of their own
as they evolve. They transport more knowledge than the single subject is aware of. In
Foucault’s words, ‘[p]eople know what they do; they frequently know why they do what
they do; but what they don’t know is what what [sic] they do does’ (personal
communication, quoted in Dreyfus and Rabinow, 1982: 187). The power effects of
discourses should therefore not necessarily be interpreted as the conscious and
manipulative intent of some individual or group. There may be a difference between a
speaker’s reasons for using a particular discourse, and the social consequences of doing
so (Burr, 2003: 61).
It should be kept in mind, however, that in the long run, powerful politicians and other
groups can accomplish changes in discourse. For example, the Basic Constitutional Law
that governs the right of asylum in Germany was tightened after over ten years of intensive
political and media lobbying. In a similar way, the stance towards deployments abroad of
the German armed forces was changed in a long process. Examples like these show that
certain groups and individuals have more power over discourse than others, for example
because they have privileged access to the media or greater financial resources.
Exclusions inherent to the structure of discourse can thus be amplified by institutional
conditions.
This section can therefore be summarized as follows: discourses exert power because
they transport knowledge on which collective and individual consciousness feeds. This
knowledge is the basis for individual and collective, discursive and nondiscursive
action, which in turn shapes reality.


From discourse to dispositive
Since knowledge is the basis for acting, we can analyse not only discursive practices, but
also nondiscursive practices and materializations, as well as their relationships with each
other. Building on Foucault, we call the interplay between discursive practices,
nondiscursive practices and materializations a dispositive. In this section, this interplay is
examined.
As human beings, we assign meanings to reality. This is how we bring reality into
existence. Of course, this does not mean that human beings are the creators of the raw
matter of material reality. But people shape and use these raw materials. The assignment
of meanings includes very tangible physical acts, such as when a tree is sawn into boards,
or when boards are joined into a table. People moreover learn the conventions of
assigned meanings through language, which helps them to interpret reality in the way it
has previously been interpreted by others. For example, people learn that a certain object
is called a ‘table’, and by so doing, they simultaneously learn what a table is good for.
(Different cultures have different objects, which makes translations from one language
into another difficult.) Dispositive analysis examines how such assignments of meaning
create reality. (In contrast, some other disciplines such as the natural sciences and
medicine examine material reality as an objective, natural or biological given.)
Consciousness does not passively reflect reality, but actively takes hold of it. This
works through discourses, which provide the knowledge for shaping reality. If a
discourse withdraws from the reality that has been built on it, or to put it more precisely,
if people withdraw from that discourse, this part of reality becomes meaningless in the
truest sense of the word. It returns to a blank state. If the knowledge assigned to a
particular part of reality changes, this part of reality turns into a different thing. For
example, tramps may move into an abandoned bank and turn it into their flop. A steel mill
may be closed down and may be turned into an amusement park. In these examples,
original meanings are withdrawn and new meanings are assigned.
Foucault’s views on the relationship between discursive and nondiscursive realities
have been somewhat ambiguous. In the remainder of this section, we will first provide an
overview of Foucault’s conception of this relationship. Then we will propose a different
understanding, which builds on Foucault, but at the same time goes beyond his ideas.
Foucault writes in his Archaeology of Knowledge that discourses can be treated as
‘practices that systematically form the objects of which they speak’ (Foucault, 2002: 54).
But Foucault also sees that nondiscursive practices play a decisive role in forming
objects. He talks about ‘discursive relations’ in this regard. He states that discursive
relations are
in a sense, at the limit of discourse: they offer it objects of which it can speak, or rather […], they determine the
group of relations that discourse must establish in order to speak of this or that object, in order to deal with them,
name them, analyse them, classify them, explain them, etc. (Foucault, 2002: 50f.)


With this statement, Foucault circumnavigates the problem of the relationship between
discourse and reality without really solving it. It remains unclear what he actually means
by ‘objects’. Presumably, he does not mean materializations but themes, theories,
statements or other purely discursive ‘objects’.
This circumnavigating becomes most apparent in his attempt to define the dispositive.
In a conversation with several psychoanalysts in 1977, he defined the dispositive as
follows:
What I’m trying to pick out with this term is, firstly, a thoroughly heterogeneous ensemble consisting of discourses,
institutions, architectural forms, regulatory decisions, laws, administrative measures, scientific statements,
philosophical, moral and philanthropic propositions – in short, the said as much as the unsaid. Such are the
elements of the [dispositive]. The [dispositive] itself is the system of relations that can be established between
these elements. (Foucault, 1980b: 194)
He further differentiates:
[… B]etween these elements, whether discursive or nondiscursive, there is a sort of interplay of shifts of position
and modifications of function which can also vary very widely. (ibid.: 195)
He states that by the term ‘dispositive’, he understands:
[…] a sort of – shall we say – formation which has as its major function at a given historical moment that of
responding to an urgent need [urgence]. The [dispositive] thus has a dominant strategic function. (ibid.)
He mentions the example of the control of madness, of mental illness, and later of
neurosis which served the function of assimilating a floating population that would
otherwise be burdensome for an economy (ibid.: 195).
In the further course of the conversation, the psychoanalysts begin to nit-pick his
distinction between the discursive and the nondiscursive. It seems that Foucault is in a
tight spot here; the psychoanalysts drive him into a corner. It is noticeable that his
interview partners are getting on his nerves; he is becoming impatient, even annoyed. He
answers them:
Yes, if you like, but it doesn’t much matter for my notion of the [dispositive] to be able to say that this is discursive
and that isn’t. If you take Gabriel’s architectural plan for the Military School together with the actual construction
of the School, how is one to say what is discursive and what is institutional? That would only interest me if the
building didn’t conform with the plan. But I don’t think it’s very important to be able to make that distinction, given
that my problem isn’t a linguistic one. (ibid.: 198)
Foucault thereby liberates himself – and us – from a linguistics that is not based on
thought and consciousness. He subordinates language and also linguistics to thought and
knowledge. Thereby he basically turns linguistics into a sub-discipline of the cultural
sciences, which deal with the conditions and results of meaningful human activities.
Human activities are meaningful because they are based on thought and consciousness.
After his archaeological endeavours that aimed to reconstruct the development of


knowledge from a purely materialistic perspective, Foucault arrived at the conviction that
talk/text/discourse alone is not what makes the world tick. He invented the dispositive to
permit a better analysis of historic and current reality. With regard to the concept of the
dispositive, the question about the relationship between discourse and dispositive, as
well as between discourse and reality, is of fundamental importance.
As is evident from the above quotes, Foucault clearly assumes a coexistence of
discourse and objects. They are related elements of the dispositive. The dispositive as a
whole comprises the net that is spun between these elements and connects them.
However, Foucault is unable to tell us what concrete, or to put it very concisely, what
empirical relationship connects discourses and objects. The reason for this problem is
that while he is interested in the nature of the relationship between these heterogeneous
elements, he assumes a dualism of discourses and material reality. Foucault did not see
discourses and material reality as interrelated and unable to exist on their own.
According to him, the dispositive assembles various elements that are connected to each
other, and these connections are what constitute the dispositive (see also Balke, 1998;
Deleuze, 1988). Foucault apparently understands these connections as follows: an urgent
need emerges and an existing dispositive becomes precarious. The need for action arises,
and society or its hegemonic forces, confronted with the urgent need, gather all the
elements they can get hold of to deal with it. These may be speeches, people, knives,
cannons, organizations and so on. By these means, they mend the ‘leak’, the urgent need
that has arisen (see Balke, 1998; Deleuze, 1988). The elements of the dispositive are
connected by the common purpose they serve, namely the purpose of dealing with an
urgent need. No other ‘inner bond’ between these elements is apparent in Foucault’s
understanding of the dispositive.
In what follows, we propose a different understanding of the bond between the
elements of a dispositive. This bond exists in the form of nondiscursive practices (in
other words, human actions), which connect the subject and the object, symbolic reality
and material reality. In Foucault’s definition of the dispositive, nondiscursive practices
are not mentioned explicitly. The ensuing arguments draw on the activity theory
developed by Leontjev (Leont’ev [sic], 1978), which is based on LevV
ygotsky’s book
Thought and Language (V
ygotsky, 1986). Activity theory is essentially an approach to
the critique of ideology, which for the purpose in hand is here given a discourse-
theoretical turn.
As mentioned above, human beings are able to assign meaning to objects. What is
more, only by being assigned a meaning does the object turn into an object. For example, I
can assign the meaning ‘table’ to a piece of wood that I find in the woods. I can eat my
bread from it and put my mug on it. An object that is not assigned any meaning is not an
object. It is totally nondescript, invisible, even nonexistent. I don’t see it because I
overlook it. For example, I don’t see the bird that the forester sees (‘forester syndrome’).
I may see a red spot, and I may think ‘there is a red spot.’ It will have the meaning of a
red spot for me. It is beyond my knowledge whether it is a bird, a flower or the recently


dyed hair of Lothar Matthäus, who is going for a walk because he was injured playing in
the last football match and therefore cannot train today. Of course, a friend can tell me:
‘Look, that is Lothar Matthäus, and he used to be captain of the German national team.’
Then I may say: ‘Yes, okay, I know him’, or ‘no, that was definitely a bird or a flower.’
The point is that all meaningful reality exists for us because we make it meaningful for
us, or because our ancestors and neighbours assigned meaning to it, and this meaning is
still valid for us. It is like King Midas with his gold: everything he touched turned into
gold. Similarly, everything that human beings assign meaning to becomes a particular kind
of reality, according to the meaning it was assigned. Ernesto Laclau expressed this
connection elegantly:
By ‘discursive’ I do not mean that which refers to ‘text’ narrowly defined, but to the ensemble of the phenomena
in and through which social production of meaning takes place, an ensemble which constitutes a society as such.
The discursive is not, therefore, being conceived as a level nor even as a dimension of the social, but rather as
being co-extensive with the social as such. This means that the discursive does not constitute a superstructure
(since it is the very condition of all social practice) or, more precisely, that all social practice constitutes itself as
such insofar as it produces meaning. Because there is nothing specifically social which is constituted outside the
discursive, it is clear that the nondiscursive is not opposed to the discursive as if it were a matter of two separate
levels. History and society are an infinite text. (Laclau, 1980: 87)
The question is: why, when, how and under what conditions do I assign meaning to
objects? How is the ‘gap’ between discourse and reality closed? According to Leontjev’s
activity theory, meaning is assigned to an object if I derive a motive from a particular
need and therefore aim to achieve a particular aim, for which I use actions and raw
materials. In other words, meaning is assigned to an object through work. The products
thus created can be articles of daily use, but also new thoughts and plans, which again
may give rise to new activities and products. It seems strange that Foucault, who had a
background in psychology, did not know activity theory, which is based on the
materialistic psychology of the early 1930s. Maybe he rejected it because he found that it
centred too much on the subject. Yet the approach is fruitful because it deals with the
connection of subject and object, society and objective reality, through human activity.
Foucault also overlooks the fact that the materializations of work are part of reality.
People create these through their nondiscursive practices, as they build houses, benches,
banks and so on, which exist only as long as they are embedded into discourses. For
example, a bank, as an element of the dispositive of capital, stops functioning as a bank if
it is no longer supported by discourse. It becomes meaningless, reduced to nothing but
raw matter (which, if called this way, again takes on a certain meaning). Alternatively, it
may be ‘discursified anew’ into another object. Tramps may sleep in the former bank and
thereby assign another meaning to it, turning it into their flop. Foucault also sees this and
writes:
[I]t is not the objects that remain constant, nor the domain that they form; it is not even their point of emergence
or their mode of characterization; but the relation between the surfaces on which they appear, on which they can
be delimited, on which they can be analysed and specified. (Foucault, 2002: 52)


Or to put it more simply: if the discourse changes, the object does not only change its
meaning, it turns into a different object. It loses its previous identity. This may happen
abruptly or as the result of a long process that impalpably but thoroughly changes
everything.
Foucault does not want to define objects with ‘reference to the ground, the foundation
of things’ (ibid.: 53), but to define objects ‘by relating them to the body of rules that
enable them to form as objects of a discourse and thus constitute the conditions of their
historical appearance’ (ibid.). However, he gets stuck at this point because he does not
conceptualize subject and object, society and discourse, as connected by activity, i.e. by
nondiscursive practices. Discursive practices remain verbal for him, strictly separated
from nondiscursive practices. With this separation of intellectual activity and
(unintellectual?) physical activity, he shows himself as a product of his times and his
origins, where the bourgeoisie highly valued mental work and believed manual work to
be completely unintellectual. Foucault knows that the signs do more than designate things,
and he states that ‘[i]t is this more that renders them irreducible to the language (langue)
and to speech’ (ibid.: 54). He wants to ‘reveal and describe’ (ibid.) this ‘more’, but does
not succeed fully. He is not really able to grasp this ‘more’. In this chapter, we argue that
this ‘more’ is the knowledge that enables the transformation of verbally articulated
knowledge into material objects: knowledge about statics, materials, tools, routines and
the like that enters every kind of physical work. However, it is rarely verbalized, or even
cannot be verbalized (i.e. tacit knowledge). For example, a steelworker at a blast furnace
sees when the steel is ready or what ingredients are still missing. However, it may be
impossible to teach this knowledge to somebody else just through verbalization. One may
have to watch and try for oneself. In a way, the knowledge is in the practices.
We may therefore say that reality is meaningful, that reality exists in the way it does,
only insofar as it is assigned meaning by people, who are themselves entangled into and
constituted by discourses. If people no longer assign the same meaning to an object, the
object changes or loses its meaning. This meaning may then at most be reconstructed as a
former meaning that has mixed with other meanings or has ceased to be valid. Even if we
just watch the night sky and see constellations of stars there, we see them as a result of a
discourse. We see the constellations because we have learnt to see them. To assign
meaning is not a noncommittal, ‘merely symbolic’ act. To assign meaning is to animate
whatever one comes across, to re-shape and change. For example, from the collective
symbolism used with regard to immigrants, it is apparent that many people have learnt to
assign negative meanings to immigrants, and now actually perceive them as floods that
need to be held back, or even as lice or pigs that should be crushed or slaughtered.
Bernhard Waldenfels (1991) confirms this criticism of Foucault, which at the same
time is inspired by Foucault. He writes that it is:
unclear how [Foucault] draws the line between discursive and nondiscursive practices and how he bridges this
line. It even remains unclear if this line is drawn at all. I think that in a way, Foucault drove himself into a blind
alley when he first conceptualized the formations of the order of history as orders of knowledge (epistemes), and


then conceptualized them as orders of speech (discourses), instead of assuming an order that is shared by all
behavioural registers of people, i.e. by their speech and actions (!) but also their gazes, their bodily conventions,
their erotic relationships, their technical handlings, their economic and political decisions, their expression in art and
religion, etc. It is not clear why any of these areas should not have the functionality that Foucault developed based
on speech alone. (Waldenfels, 1991: 291, author’s own translation)
Waldenfels notes that Foucault himself crossed this border at several points. In the
Archaeology of Knowledge, Foucault (2002) mentions the discourse of the painter, who
‘speaks’ without words. Foucault also mentions political discourse, where for example
an unexpected revolution may take place, which cannot be traced back to a revolutionary
situation or a revolutionary conscience. From a superficial point of view, this unexpected
revolution is not based on knowledge, while on closer inspection, it is very much based
on knowledge. As often happened, Foucault preferred to do bricolage2 here (cf.
Waldenfels, 1991: 291).
In this text, we continue the bricolage, pick up Foucault’s toolbox of theoretical and
practical instruments, and develop his ideas further. So far, we have done so in two
regards. Firstly, Foucault’s notion of discourse, which is too bound to the verbal, is
shifted one step ‘backwards’, namely into human thinking and knowledge, or in other
words, into consciousness. This is where the contents of thought (including emotions and
perceptions) are located, which are the basis for shaping reality through work.
Secondly, and by the same token, activity theory is made available for discourse
theory. Activity theory explains how subjects and objects are connected to each other.
Foucault mainly saw discourse as somehow connected to reality. Drawing on Leontjev,
we identify the subject as the missing link that connects discourses to material reality.
Subjects do this in all their activities. The way in which those activities become effective
has not been intended in exactly this way by any individual or single group. Nevertheless,
it is human consciousness and physical strength that shape reality. Everything in human
consciousness 
is 
discursive, i.e. constituted by knowledge. Moreover, subjects
continuously draw on tacit knowledge. Tacit knowledge is passed on in nondiscursive
practices and materializations, and the researcher can aim to reconstruct tacit knowledge
from both of them.
To summarize the problems discussed in this section, many of the difficulties in
analysing dispositives stem from an insufficient conceptualization of discursive practices,
nondiscursive practices and materializations (see also Bublitz, 1999: 82–115). Many of
these problems can be solved by drawing on Leontjev’s and others’ understanding of
materializations and nondiscursive practices as realizations of discourse, i.e. knowledge
(for further discussion see, for example, Jäger, 2001a). The following section provides
some ideas on how discourses and dispositives can be analysed systematically.
Methods for analysing discourses and dispositives


To recapitulate briefly our initial definition, a discourse can be characterized as ‘an
institutionalized way of talking that regulates and reinforces action and thereby exerts
power’ (Link, 1983: 60, author’s own translation), as illustrated by the image of a flow of
knowledge throughout time (see Jäger, 2004). Together, all discourses form the giant
milling mass of overall societal discourse.
The theoretical considerations introduced in the early sections of this chapter are the
basis for the development of concepts and methods that facilitate analysis. A range of
these concepts and methods is outlined in this section. The scope of this chapter does not
allow for detailed methodological justifications of each of these concepts and methods,
but such explanations can be found in the book on methods of CDA by Jäger (2004).
Methods of CDA also include linguistic concepts (e.g. figurativeness, vocabulary,
pronominal structure, argumentation) which can be used to examine the more subtle
workings of texts. However, these linguistic instruments are not described in detail here,
as good explanations can be found in works on style and grammar. Linguistic concepts fill
only one slot in the ‘toolbox’ of discourse analysis. Depending on the research question
and subject matter, various other tools can be added to the toolbox. In any case, certain
methods are part of a standard repertoire. These are described in the remainder of this
section, putting special emphasis on discourse theory and activity theory as outlined
above.
The structure of discourse
The following suggestions on terminology aim to provide some help in making the
structure of discourses more transparent and amenable to analysis.


Special discourses and interdiscourse
A basic distinction can be drawn between special discourses and interdiscourse. Special
discourses are discourses in the sciences, while interdiscourse refers to all non-scientific
discourses. Elements of special discourses continuously feed into interdiscourse.


Discourse strands
In general societal discourse, a great variety of topics arise. Flows of discourse that
centre on a common topic are called discourse strands. Each discourse strand comprises
several subtopics, which again can be summarized into groups of subtopics.
The concept of ‘discourse strands’ is similar to the one of ‘discourses’. The difference
is that ‘discourse’ is the more abstract concept, located at the level of statements
(énoncés). ‘Discourse strands’, in contrast, are conceived of at the level of concrete
utterances (énonciations) or performances located on the surface of texts (cf. Foucault,
2002).
Every discourse strand has a diachronic and a synchronic dimension. A synchronic
analysis of a discourse strand examines the finite spectrum of what is said and sayable at
a particular point in time. A synchronic analysis can cut through a discourse strand at
various points in time, for example at particular discursive events. By comparing these
synchronic cuts, it provides insights into the changes and continuities of discourse strands
over time.
In a way, a synchronic cut through a discourse strand is always also a diachronic one.
This is because each topic has a genesis, a historical a priori. When analysing a topic, the
analyst has to keep an eye on its history. To identify the knowledge of a society on a
topic, the analyst has to reconstruct the genesis of this topic. Foucault has undertaken
several attempts to do so, not only with regard to the sciences, but also with regard to
everyday life and institutions (e.g. the hospital, the prison).
Discursive limits and techniques for extending them or narrowing them down
Each discourse delineates a range of statements that are sayable and thereby inhibits a
range of other statements, which are not sayable (cf. Link and Link-Heer, 1990). The
borders to what is not sayable are called discursive limits.
Through the use of certain rhetorical strategies, discursive limits can be extended or
narrowed down. Such strategies for example include direct prescriptions, relativizations,
defamations, allusions and implicatures. Discourse analysis examines these strategies in
their own right, and also uses them as analytic clues to identify discursive limits: if
‘tricks’ are used, this is an indicator that certain statements cannot be said directly
without risking negative sanctions.


Discourse fragments
Each discourse strand consists of a multitude of elements that are traditionally called
texts. We prefer the term ‘discourse fragment’, because one text may touch on various
topics and thus contain various discourse fragments. A discourse fragment therefore
refers to a text or part of a text that deals with a particular topic (for example, the topic of
immigration). Or to put it the other way around, various discourse fragments on the same
topic form a discourse strand.


Entanglements of discourse strands
A text usually refers to various topics and therefore to various discourse strands. In other
words, it usually contains fragments from various discourse strands. These discourse
strands are usually entangled with each other. An entanglement of discourse strands can
take the form of one text addressing various topics to equal degrees, or of one text
addressing mainly one topic and referring to other topics only in passing.
A statement where several discourses are entangled is called a discursive knot. For
example, in the statement ‘integrating immigrants into our society costs a lot of money’,
the discourse strand of immigration is entangled with the discourse strand of the economy.
In the statement ‘in [insert any Islamic country here], they still live in a patriarchal
society’, the discourse strand of immigration is entangled with the discourse strand of
women.
Two discourse strands can be entangled more or less intensively. For example, in
everyday discourse in Germany, the discourse strand of immigration is intensively
entangled with the discourse strand of women, as sexist attitudes and behaviours are
attributed to immigrants (see Jäger, 1996).


Collective symbols
An important means of linking up discourse strands is the use of collective symbols.
Collective symbols are ‘cultural stereotypes’, also called ‘topoi’, which are handed
down and used collectively (Drews et al., 1985: 265). They are known to all members of
a society. They provide the repertoire of images from which we construct a picture of
reality for ourselves. Through collective symbols we interpret reality, and have reality
interpreted for us, especially by the media.
An important technique for connecting collective symbols is catachreses (also called
image fractures). Catachreses establish connections between statements, link up spheres
of experience, bridge contradictions and increase plausibility. Thereby, catachreses
amplify the power of discourse. An example of a catachresis is the statement ‘the
locomotive of progress can be slowed down by floods of immigrants’. Here, the symbols
of the locomotive (meaning progress) and floods (meaning a threat from the outside) are
derived from different sources of images. The first one is taken from traffic and the
second from nature. With a catachresis, the images are connected.


Discourse planes and sectors
Different discourse strands operate on different discourse planes, such as the sciences,
politics, the media, education, everyday life, business, administration and so forth. These
discourse planes can be characterized as social locations from which speaking takes
place.
Discourse planes influence each other and relate to each other. For example, on the
media plane, discourse fragments from scientific specialist discourse or political
discourse are taken up. The media also take up everyday discourse, bundle it, bring it to
the point, or – especially in the case of the yellow press – spice it up with sensational and
populist claims. In this way, the media regulate everyday thinking and exert a
considerable influence on what is and what can be done in politics and everyday life. For
example, the larger-than-life image of Jörg Haider would hardly have come about without
the help of media reports that normalized right-wing populism.
A discourse plane consists of various sectors. For example, women’s magazines, TV
news broadcasts and newspapers are different sectors of the discourse plane of the
media.
A discourse plane is tightly interwoven in itself. For example, on the discourse plane
of the media, leading media may also repeat and build on contents that have already been
brought up in other media. It is therefore all the more justified to talk about the media
discourse plane, which – especially with regard to the dominant media in a society – can
be considered as integrated in its major aspects.


Discursive events and discursive context
All events are rooted in discourse. However, an event only counts as a discursive event if
it appears on the discourse planes of politics and the media intensively, extensively and
for a prolonged period of time.
A major reason why it is important to identify discursive events is that they influence
the development of discourse. For example, the Three Mile Island nuclear accident near
Harrisburg was comparable to the one in Chernobyl. But while the Three Mile Island
accident was covered up for years, the Chernobyl accident was a major media event and
influenced global politics. Whether an event, such as a nuclear accident, becomes a
discursive event or not depends on the power constellations at work in politics and the
media.
Discourse analysis can examine whether an event becomes a discursive event or not. If
it becomes a discursive event, it influences the further development of discourse: the
Chernobyl disaster contributed to a changing policy towards nuclear power in Germany.
Germany is now, albeit hesitantly, going to phase out nuclear power. Environmentalist
discourse, which had been developing for some time, could hardly have achieved this on
its own. At the same time, a discursive event like the Chernobyl disaster can influence the
whole discourse about new technologies, for example by drawing attention to the need to
develop alternative energy sources. Another example for a discursive event is the success
of the FPÖ (Freedom Party of Austria) in the 1999 Austrian National Parliamentary
Elections, and the FPÖ’s ensuing participation in government. While the FPÖ’s success in
the elections attracted considerable media coverage, the ensuing participation of the FPÖ
(and indirectly Jörg Haider) in government triggered a far greater worldwide response,
and became a discursive mega event that kept the European and US press in suspense for
months. It had an effect on the discourses of the extreme right in countries in Europe and
beyond.
Another reason why the identification of discursive events is important for the analysis
of discourse strands is that they outline the discursive context that a discourse strand
relates to. For example, a synchronic (i.e. cross-sectional) analysis of a discourse strand
can be enriched with diachronic (i.e. longitudinal) elements by adding a chronicle of the
discursive events belonging to it. Such historic references can be very helpful for
synchronic analyses of discourse strands (as, for example, demonstrated by Caborn,
1999).


Discourse positions
A discourse position describes the ideological position from which subjects, including
individuals, groups and institutions, participate in and evaluate discourse. Also, the
media take up discourse positions, which become evident in their reporting. (As noted
above, subject status is nothing natural and obvious, but something that in itself needs to
be established through discourse.)
Subjects develop a discourse position because they are enmeshed in various
discourses. They are exposed to discourses and work them into a specific ideological
position or worldview in the course of their life. This relationship also works the other
way around. Discursive positions contribute to and reproduce the discursive
enmeshments of subjects (Jäger, 1996: 47).
Discourse positions can be identified through discourse analysis. But a rough outline of
discourse positions is also part of people’s everyday knowledge. People know roughly
which politicians and newspapers tend towards the left, the right or the centre. Everyday
self-descriptions of one’s discourse position, however, should be taken with a grain of
salt. For example, newspapers often describe themselves as ‘independent’ and
‘impartial’, while from a discourse-theoretical perspective, this is an impossibility.
The discourse positions of subjects may vary widely. For example, with regard to the
discourse strand of the economy, many subjects take up a neoliberal discourse position
and favour privatization, free trade, low taxes, fiscal policy discipline and so on. Others,
in contrast, reject neoliberalism and take up Keynesianism or something even more
unorthodox as their discourse position.
Discourse positions are homogeneous only in their core and become diffuse with
regard to less central issues. For example, subjects who embrace the hegemonic
discourse position of neoliberalism agree that it is in principle right and important to
reduce the nation’s budget deficit. They do not question the current economic system.
However, they may have differing views on the best way to reduce the budget deficit.
Within a dominant discourse, discourse positions are fairly homogeneous, which itself
is already an effect of dominant discourse. Dissenting discourse positions often belong to
complete counter-discourses (e.g. a fundamental questioning of the current economic
system may not arise from economic discourse, but from ecology or ethics). However,
these counter-discourses can pick up arguments from dominant discourse and subvert
their meaning. For example, some people interpret the widespread saying that ‘time is
money’ with an anti-capitalist twist, as when saying ‘If time was money, I’d already be
rich.’
Overall societal discourse and global discourse
All the entangled discourse strands in a society together form the overall societal
discourse. A society is never totally homogeneous but consists of different subcultures. In
Germany, since reunification in 1989, overall societal discourse has become
ideologically more homogeneous, and it seems unlikely that this is going to change easily


(Teubert, 1999).
The overall societal discourse of a society, in turn, is part of global discourse. Even
though global discourse is very heterogeneous, it is probably safe to say that global
discourse has also become more homogeneous and has switched from a confrontation of
the West against communism to a confrontation of the West against the Islamic World.
Overall societal discourse is a very complex network. Discourse analysis aims to
disentangle this net. The usual procedure is to first identify single discourse strands on
single discourse planes (for example, the discourse strand of immigration on the
discourse plane of the media). Subsequently, analyses of this discourse strand on further
discourse planes, such as politics or everyday communication, can be added. At the end
of such analyses, the question is usually how the different discourse planes of a discourse
strand relate to each other. For example, one may examine whether and how the political
discourse plane is linked to the discourse planes of the media and everyday
communication, whether and how the media discourse plane influences the discourse
plane of everyday communication, and so on.
The history, present, and future of discourse strands
Discourse strands have a history, a present and a future. In order to identify the changes,
ruptures, ebbings and recurrences of a discourse strand, it is necessary to analyse longer
periods of time. To put it into Foucault’s words, an ‘archaeology of knowledge’ or a
‘genealogy’ is needed. On the basis of such an analysis, even prognoses about discourse
can be undertaken. These can take the form of scenarios based on different future
discursive events.
Of course, an analysis of the history, present and future of overall societal or even
global discourse is an enormous endeavour and can only be tackled in the form of many
single projects. Such single projects, however, are extremely helpful because they create
reliable knowledge about certain sub-zones of overall societal discourse. This scientific
knowledge can be the basis for a change of everyday, political and media knowledge, and
can change behaviours and policies. Work on the discursive plane of science can thus
influence the further development of a particular discourse strand.
On the completeness of discourse analyses
A discourse analysis fully captures the qualitative range of what can be said and how it is
said in one or more discourse strands. It is complete if further analysis leads to no further
new findings. Social scientists who mainly work with large amounts of quantitative data
will be surprised to learn that in discourse analysis, a relatively small amount of
qualitative data suffices to reach this point. The arguments and contents that can be read
or heard about a particular topic (e.g. immigration) at a particular time in a particular
social location are amazingly limited (often in both senses of the word). With regard to


methodology, this means that the analyst continues to analyse new materials until he
notices that arguments begin to repeat themselves. If this is the case, completeness (in the
sense of theoretical saturation) has been achieved.
While qualitative analysis is the bedrock of discourse analysis, quantitative analyses
can also be interesting. The analyst can examine with what frequency particular
statements occur. In this way, focal issues in discourse strands, or statements that have the
character of slogans and are therefore accompanied by a bulk of judgements and
prejudices, can be identified. If a statement occurs very frequently, it has sustained effects
and strongly solidifies a particular knowledge. In diachronic analysis, frequencies can
also be used to identify trends. However, for the explanatory power of a discourse
analysis, the qualitative aspect is of greater importance than the quantitative.
A little toolbox for discourse analysis
In this section, a brief summary of our toolbox for discourse analysis is presented. As
noted above, within the scope of this chapter, we cannot provide detailed methodological
justifications for each of the tools, but these can be found in the volume by Jäger (2004).
In our own research projects, we use short handouts like the following as memory aids or
checklists when first dealing with materials.
This outline deals with the practical procedures for subjecting empirically obtained
materials to discourse analysis. In an actual project, these elements are supplemented
with a clarification of the theoretical foundations and methodology used. The tools
presented in the remainder of this section are discussed using the example of a
hypothetical research project on the discourse strand of stem cell research in newspapers,
or to put it more concisely, in the newspaper sector of the discourse plane of the media.


Choosing a subject matter
The first step in a discourse analysis project is usually to choose a subject matter. In the
project report (usually in the introduction), a rationale for the project and its subject
matter has to be given.
It needs to be kept in mind that the relationship between a phenomenon of interest and
particular discourse strands is often not straightforward because a phenomenon may
permeate many discourse strands. For example, in a research project that aims to examine
how racism permeates the media, the researcher has to decide which discourse strand(s)
to focus on. To make the choice, the researcher has to have an initial concept of racism in
mind. (This concept may be developed further in the course of the analysis.) Theoretical
concepts are always debatable, and the researcher needs to clarify and justify which
concept he is working with.3 Equipped with this concept, the researcher can think about
promising discourse strands where racism may be found. In the case of racism, it is, for
example, the discourse strand of immigration, refugees and asylum-seeking. Of course, the
discourse strand of immigration could also be interpreted in the light of other research
interests. To choose a subject matter means to choose a phenomenon of interest and a
discourse strand which will be examined. This discourse strand delineates the scope of
materials for analysis.
Choosing a discourse plane and a sector and characterizing them
Typically, it will be necessary, at least initially, to confine the analysis to one discourse
plane (for example, the media). When examining a discourse plane, analysis may cover
one or several sectors of this plane (for example, the sector of newspapers). The choice
of sector needs to be justified. For example, a sector may be exemplary for how an issue
is dealt with in the media, or a sector may not have previously been examined in any
research project. In the latter case, of course, a review of previous research should
summarize the findings from an analysis of other sectors.
In some cases, it may be possible to examine several discourse planes at once. The
analysis of interactions of several discourse planes in the regulation of mass
consciousness is extremely interesting, but also very time-consuming. To achieve this
task, it is necessary to base the analysis on well-justified examples of sectors of these
discourse planes and instances of their interaction. The task becomes even more complex
if entanglements of discourse strands are also considered.


Accessing and preparing the materials
As a next step, the concrete corpus for analysis needs to be delineated. For example,
when analysing newspapers, the particular newspapers and the time periods under
consideration need to be decided on. Again, these choices have to be justified.
As a preparation for analysis, a general characterization of the newspaper(s) in
question needs to be provided: what is their political orientation, who are their readers,
what is their circulation, and so on?
Stem cell research is a topic that continually crops up in newspapers but is often not
treated very extensively. In this case, it makes sense to use different newspapers from the
period of a whole year, because even if the newspapers are read very carefully, the
whole qualitative variety of the discourse strand becomes apparent only in those
materials that cover a longer period of time.
In contrast, a project that examines the portrayal of women in pop songs could
probably rely on a few exemplary songs (though this would have to be demonstrated in
the particular project).


Analysis
The following sequence of steps can be modified and does not have to be adhered to
dogmatically. The steps usually have to be gone through several times. In these cycles of
analysis, connections between different levels of analysis are discovered, interpretations
are developed and weak arguments are discarded.
A structural analysis of the discourse strand
The detailed steps for a structural analysis of a discourse strand are as follows:
1. A list of all articles of relevance for the discourse strand is compiled. This list
should include bibliographical information, notes about topics covered in the article,
the literary genre, any special characteristics and the section in which the article
appears.
2. Structural analysis should roughly capture the characteristics of articles on particular
aspects of interest, such as any illustrations, the layout, the use of collective
symbols, the argumentation, the vocabulary and so on, and identify which forms are
typical for the newspaper. This outline will be needed later to identify typical
articles for the detailed analysis (see the next subsection).
3. A discourse strand encompasses various subtopics. These are first identified and
then summarized into groups. For example, in the case of the discourse strand of
stem cell research, subtopics may be summarized into groups such as the ‘legal
implications of stem cell research’, the ‘benefits of stem cell research’, the
‘technical procedures of stem cell research’, the ‘ethical problems of stem cell
research’, the ‘costs of stem cell research’ and so on. The development of groups of
subtopics is an iterative process, which should lead to a good compromise between
parsimony and discriminatory power.
4. The next step is to examine with what frequency particular groups of subtopics
appear. Which ones are focused on and which ones are neglected? Are there any
subtopics that are conspicuous by their absence?
5. If the analysis is diachronic, it will also examine how subtopics are distributed over
the course of time. Are some subtopics particularly frequent at particular times?
How does this relate to discursive events?
6. Discursive entanglements are then identified. For example, the discourse strand of
stem cell research is entangled with the discourse strands of ethics, business and
medicine.
The findings from these steps of analysis are combined and interpreted together. Thereby,
a characterization of the newspaper’s discourse position begins to emerge. For example,
does the newspaper perceive stem cell research positively or negatively?
The structural analysis of a discourse strand can and should already yield ideas for the


ensuing detailed analysis of typical discourse fragments (see the next subsection) and for
the final synoptic analysis (see the subsection on synoptic analysis). These ideas should
be written down immediately and marked accordingly.
Detailed analysis of typical discourse fragments
To identify the fine detail within the newspaper’s discourse position and to assess the
effects of this discourse on readers, certain discourse fragments are subjected to detailed
analysis. Discourse fragments that are typical of the particular newspaper are selected for
this purpose. Criteria for typicality are, for example, typical illustrations, typical use of
collective symbols, typical argumentation, typical vocabulary and so on. The typical
forms of these aspects have been identified in the preceding structural analysis.
To select typical discourse fragments, the researcher can proceed in several steps and
rate the articles according to defined criteria. To ensure that the selection is
intersubjectively plausible, several researchers can engage in this rating. The articles that
score highest on typicality are then subjected to detailed analysis. If time restraints
require it, detailed analysis may also be confined to one article only.
If structural analysis has shown that the discourse strand is very heterogeneous, and if
no single homogeneous discourse position can be discerned, the researcher can also
address several typicalities, i.e. several kinds of ‘typical’ articles.
The procedures for selecting typical articles should be systematic and transparent, but
not mechanical. What is an appropriate procedure depends on the concrete research
project and the discourse strand in question.
The detailed analysis of typical discourse fragments should cover the following
aspects:
1.
Context
Why was this article selected? Why is this article typical?
Who is the author? What is her position and status within the newspaper? What
are her special areas of coverage, and so on?
What was the occasion for the article?
In which section of the newspaper does the article appear?
2.
Surface of the text
What is the layout like? What kinds of pictures or graphs accompany the text?
What are the headings and subheadings?
How is the article structured into units of meaning?
What topics are touched upon in the article? (In other words, what discourse


strands is the article a fragment of?)
How do these topics relate to each other and overlap (entanglements of discourse
strands)?
3.
Rhetorical means
What kind and form of argumentation does the article follow? What
argumentation strategy is used?
What logic underlies the composition of the article?
What implications and allusions does the article contain?
What collective symbolism is used (linguistic and graphic, involving, for
example, statistics, photographs, pictures, caricatures, etc.)?
What idioms, sayings and clichés are used?
What are the vocabulary and style?
What actors are mentioned, and how are they portrayed (persons, pronouns
used)?
What references are made (e.g. references to science, information about the
sources of knowledge used)?
4.
Content and ideological statements
What concept of humankind does the article presuppose and convey?
What concept of society does the article presuppose and convey?
What concept of (for example) technology does the article presuppose and
convey?
What perspective regarding the future does the article give?
5. Other peculiarities of the article
6. Discourse position and overall message of the article.
In analysing each of these aspects, the researcher has to ask herself what this peculiarity
of the article means, what it implies. For example, what does it mean that a particular
image accompanies this text? What effect does this image create? Each of these
interpretations remains open to revisions. At the end of the detailed analysis, the
interpretations of single aspects are combined into a total interpretation of the article.
Usually, the interpretations of the single aspects fit together like the pieces of a jigsaw
puzzle and form a unitary picture. If one aspect stands out, it is often due to special
circumstances, such as when a photo or a headline has not been provided by the author
but by the editor, who had other purposes in mind, such as spicing up the article. Such


discrepancies also provide important insights into the newspaper’s discourse position.
Together with the findings from structural analysis, the findings from detailed analysis
form the basis for synoptic analysis.


Synoptic analysis
In synoptic analysis, a final assessment of the newspaper’s discourse position is made.
For this purpose, the findings from structural analysis and detailed analysis are
interpreted in relation and comparison to each other.
In conclusion, it needs to be emphasized that CDA is not a rigid formula that can be
followed mechanically to produce results. Depending on the research question and the
type of materials used, different procedures are appropriate. The researcher has to keep
this in mind when developing her analytical strategy. In doing so, she needs to be flexible
and imaginative. Therefore, in a way, the best way to learn CDA is to do CDA. An article
like the present one only provides initial insights into the wide range of possibilities. We
therefore close our ‘little toolbox’ with one more quotation from Foucault, talking about
methodology:
If you want an image, think of a network of scaffolding that functions as a point of relay between a project being
concluded and a new one. Thus I don’t construct a general method of definitive value for myself or for others.
What I write does not prescribe anything, neither to myself nor to others. At most, its character is instrumental
and visionary or dream-like. (Foucault, 1991: 29)
Initial thoughts on analysing dispositives
Discourses do not exist independently; they are elements of dispositives. A dispositive,
as outlined above, is the constantly evolving synthesis of knowledge that is built into
language, action and materializations. The concept of the dispositive can be visualized as
a triangle, or rather a rotating circle, with three transit points:
discursive practices (language and thought)
nondiscursive practices (action)
materializations (which are created through nondiscursive practices).


FIGURE 2.1 Dispositives
The visibility of materializations is upheld through discursive and nondiscursive
practices. Figure 2.1, which is a graphic simplification of the concept, summarizes this
relationship.
Though a dispositive has certain durability, it is also subject to historical changes and
is constantly influenced by other dispositives. A synchronic analysis serves to identify the
current state of a dispositive. A particular discursive practice, nondiscursive practice or
materialization can be relevant for various dispositives. For example, the dispositive of
‘traffic’ encompasses streets, cars, traffic jams, drivers, traffic signs and so on. But
‘traffic’ is also an economic problem that creates costs and affects business. ‘Traffic’ is
therefore embedded into the economic dispositive. The economic dispositive, in turn, is
embedded into the political dispositive. In a society, dispositives overlap and are
entangled with each other. These entanglements may be what unifies a society.
A dispositive analysis has to include the following steps:
1. Reconstructing the knowledge that is built into discursive practices (through
discourse analysis, as described above). This analysis is the basis for the further
steps in a dispositive analysis. It already creates an awareness of important aspects
of the dispositive, such as uncharted territories in discourse, significant
materializations and so on.
2. Reconstructing the knowledge that is built into nondiscursive practices.
3. Reconstructing the knowledge that is built into materialization, and the nondiscursive
practices that have created these materializations.
Reconstructing this knowledge usually results in texts. A dispositive analysis thus
translates nondiscursive and materialized knowledge into discursive knowledge.
A dispositive analysis should also consider the form in which the examined knowledge
occurs: is the knowledge manifestly apparent? Or is it implicit, for example hidden in
implicatures? Into what arguments is the knowledge packed? And so on. It should be
noted again that the concept of knowledge is here a very broad one, including not only
cognitions but also emotions. Knowledge includes all the contents that make up a human
consciousness.
Since the analysis of discursive elements of a dispositive has already been discussed
extensively above, the remainder of this section will focus on reconstructing the
knowledge that is built into nondiscursive practices and materializations.


Knowledge in nondiscursive practices
Nondiscursive practices, i.e. actions, can be observed and described. For a dispositive
analysis, the task is to reconstruct the knowledge that enables and accompanies these
practices.
For example, the analyst can observe a man who crosses a street and walks into a
bakery, where he buys a loaf of bread. The analyst’s task is now to find out what this man
knows and wants. The man knows that he has to go to a certain place to be able to buy
bread. He knows that for this purpose he has to dress in a certain way (e.g. put on shoes
and a coat). He knows that when crossing a road, he has to pay attention to the traffic and
observe the traffic rules. Moreover, he knows that the bakery is located in a particular
place, or how to look for a bakery. He knows that in a bakery he can buy bread, and that
he needs money for that. The simple act of buying bread is thus already based on a
considerable amount of knowledge, and this analysis only gives a small hint of it.
The following is a more complex example. Suppose the analyst observes a man who
has dug a hole at the side of a road, and is now standing in this hole and manipulating a
large pipe. To reconstruct the knowledge built into this practice, the analyst has to share
this knowledge and understand what the man is doing. Suppose that to a large extent she is
lacking this knowledge.
There are basically three things she can do to gain an understanding of what the man is
doing.
Firstly, the researcher can of course draw on existing texts. For example, she can
consult previous research, but also more mundane documents such as practitioners’
literature, instruction sheets, or field manuals.
Secondly, the analyst can ask the man what he is doing. In research methodology, this is
called an ethnographic interview (see, for example, Spradley, 1979). When the
researcher asks the man what he is doing, the man may answer: ‘I am repairing a burst
pipe.’ With this information, she already understands better what he is doing. Next, she
may ask him: ‘Why are you doing that?’ He may answer something like: ‘Because the
pipe has burst’, or ‘That’s my job’, or ‘I need to earn money somehow’, and so on. The
knowledge built into his activity is thus fairly complex and can be followed up to the
economic practice of dependent wage labour.
A large part of knowledge is only available to people in their practices (tacit
knowledge), and people cannot easily explicate it in talk. In other words, people will
know more than they can tell. As a third option, the researcher can therefore rely on
participant observation (see, for example, Agar, 2002; Emerson et al., 1995; Hammersley
and Atkinson, 2007; Spradley, 1980) to learn about this implicit knowledge and make it
explicit in her research. In the extreme case, the researcher may herself learn to dig holes
and mend burst pipes (a fascinating example of such work is Wacquant’s [2004] study of
boxing).


Knowledge in materializations
When an analyst observes an object, such as a house, a church or a bicycle, obviously he
cannot ask this object about its knowledge directly. However, there are indirect ways of
reconstructing the knowledge built into materializations. Methodological guidelines for
doing so can, for example, be found in multimodal discourse analysis (V
an Leeuwen,
2005) and artefact analysis (Froschauer, 2002; Lueger, 2004; for an example of empirical
work that combines multimodal discourse analysis and artefact analysis, see Maier,
forthcoming).
To analyse materializations, the researcher has to rely on his own and his fellow
researchers’ background knowledge. In addition, he should aim to extend this knowledge
by drawing on the pertinent literature, and by questioning users, producers and other
persons who are experts on the materialization in question.
Artefact analysis, as developed by Lueger (2004) and Froschauer (2002), suggests that
one of the first steps in analysing a materialization is to deconstruct the materialization by
dividing it into its constituent parts and transcribing it into a field protocol. The material
object is thus transformed into a text. Here, another problem arises, which incidentally
also applies to the field notes and observation protocols produced in the participant
observation of nondiscursive practices. The field protocols written by the researcher are
not neutral. Like any text, they pursue particular interests, and in the ideal case, this
interest should be to answer the research question.
In some cases, the researcher may even be able to draw on previous research that has
already discursified the materialization in question as, for example, Caborn (1999, 2006)
has done with regard to state architecture in Berlin.
It should be emphasized again that the meaning of a materialization is not fixed. The
knowledge built into a materialization today may be different from the knowledge it
contained in the past. ‘Legends’ might have formed around it, and meanings may have
changed. Moreover, a materialization may have different meanings for members of
different cultures (as well as cultures understood in the broad sense of the term). A good
case in point is the Aztec crown of feathers, which is exhibited in the Anthropological
Museum in Vienna. In pre-Columbian times, it was a ritual headdress, worn by priests or
even by the Aztec emperor Montezuma. For the Spanish conquistador Hernán Cortés, it
was a treasure which he stole. The Habsburg emperors bought it as an exotic curiosity. In
today’s Anthropological Museum, it is an exhibit of scientific value. For today’s
descendants of the Aztecs, the crown is a symbol of their cultural identity and stands for
the blossoming and ensuing destruction of their culture. They argue that the crown was
stolen from them, and that the Museum should return it. For Austrian politicians and
diplomats, the crown has thus become a cause for political dissonance with Mexico (for
an in-depth analysis of the transformations of exhibits in anthropological museums, see
Döring and Hirschauer, 1997).
As the example of the feather crown shows, each of the meanings assigned to a
materialization is tightly related to power relations (e.g. whether the crown is a ritual


item, a scientific exhibit, or a symbol of collective identity). In the materialization as
such, these power relations are invisible, and the task of the analyst is to bring them out
into the open. The analyst can only do this if he considers historical contexts (this touches
on the issue of historical discourse and dispositive analysis, which is currently
revolutionizing historical theory; see, for example, Sarasin, 2003).
As these initial thoughts on methods for analysing dispositives indicate, the task of a
dispositive analysis is very complex. It encompasses the analysis of knowledge in
discursive and nondiscursive practices as well as in materializations. An example of such
an analysis is Michel Foucault’s (1979) book Discipline and Punish. Also, Victor
Klemperer’s (2001) Diary of the Nazi Y
ears can be read as a dispositive analysis. Both
authors provided no explicit information on their methodology. They applied their
methodology implicitly, or as Foucault calls it, in the form of bricolage. They analysed
discourse, assembled knowledge, consulted statistics, deconstructed them critically, drew
conclusions, added their own opinions, and so on.
The thoughts on dispositive analysis presented in this chapter do not provide a recipe
or schema. However, they do give some ideas on how to approach dispositive analysis.
A central part of dispositive analysis is the discourse analysis of texts. Moreover,
dispositive analysis comprises the analysis of nondiscursive practices, for which methods
developed in ethnography, such as ethnographic interviews and participant observation,
provide important means. A final component is the analysis of materializations, which can
draw on methods such as multimodal discourse analysis and artefact analysis. An explicit
methodology for combining these approaches has yet to be developed. Such an endeavour
can probably only be achieved in connection with concrete research projects. It would
therefore be desirable for such projects to devote some space and time to explicit
reasoning about methodology. This would promote the development of dispositive
analysis, and would contribute to bridging the existing gaps between discourse analysis
and other methods of empirical social research.
Notes
1 We therefore keep the discussion of theoretical background as short as possible and do not present previous
empirical research projects at great length. To readers particularly interested in these aspects, we recommend the
works by Siegfried Jäger (2001b, 2004) and by Margarete and Siegfried Jäger (2007).
2 This French term literally means ‘tinkering’, ‘fiddling’, creative ‘do-it-yourself’, making use of any resources
that happen to be at hand
3 For example, a definition of racism that is generally justifiable and well-accepted in the sciences encompasses
the following three elements: (1) One or several people are for biological or cultural reasons constructed as an
ethnic group or even a race. (2) This group is evaluated (negatively or positively, e.g. when blacks are assumed to
be superior jazz musicians). (3) The construction and evaluation take place from a position of power (which in
discourse analysis is obvious, since discourse is per se ‘powerful’).


3
Critical Discourse Studies: A Sociocognitive Approach1
Teun A. van Dijk
Terminology and definitions
The discourse–cognition–society triangle
The example: the defense of capitalism
Topics: semantic macrostructures
Local meanings
The relevance of subtle ‘formal’ structures
Relating text and context: context models
Discourse semantics: event models
Social cognition
Social situations
Societal structures
Appendix
Terminology and definitions
Although critical approaches to discourse are commonly known as Critical Discourse
Analysis (CDA), I prefer to speak of Critical Discourse Studies (CDS). This more
general term suggests that such a critical approach not only involves critical analysis, but
also critical theory, as well as critical applications. The designation CDS may also
avoid the widespread misconception that a critical approach is a method of discourse
analysis.
For the same reason, I favour the term Discourse Studies (DS), rather than Discourse
Analysis, to designate a multidisciplinary field of scholarly activities that are obviously
not limited to the analysis of text and talk. Moreover, as a discipline, DS has many types
and methods of analysis: it is not ‘a’ method among others within the humanities and the
social sciences.
CDS is not a method, but rather a critical perspective, position or attitude within the
discipline of multidisciplinary Discourse Studies. Critical research makes use of a large
number of methods, both from Discourse Studies itself, as well as from the humanities,
psychology and the social sciences.
The critical approach of CDS characterizes scholars rather than their methods: CDS
scholars are sociopolitically committed to social equality and justice. They also show


this in their scientific research, for instance by the formulation of specific goals, the
selection and construction of theories, the use and development of methods of analysis
and especially in the application of such research in the study of important social
problems and political issues.
CDS scholars are typically interested in the way discourse (re)produces social
domination, that is, the power abuse of one group over others, and how dominated groups
may discursively resist such abuse.
CDS is not just any social or political research, as is the case in all the social and
political sciences, but is premised on the fact that some forms of text and talk may be
unjust. One of the tasks of CDS is to formulate the norms that define such ‘discursive
injustice’. CDS aims to expose and help to combat such injustice. It is problem-oriented
rather than discipline-or theory-oriented. Such a research policy presupposes an ethical
assessment, implying that discourse as social interaction may be illegitimate according to
some fundamental norms, for instance those of international human and social rights. At
the same time, critical analysis should be aware of the fact that such norms and rights
change historically, and that some definitions of ‘international’ may well mean ‘Western’.
As a criterion, we thus call any discourse unjust if it violates the internationally
recognized human rights of people and contributes to social inequality. Typical examples
are discourses that ultimately (re)produce inequalities of gender, race or class.
Finally, socially committed research should be carried out in close collaboration and
solidarity with those who need it most, such as various dominated groups in society. This
also means, not least for students, that CDS research and especially its practical
applications should be accessible, and avoid an esoteric style. In that and many other
senses, CDS researchers are profoundly aware of the role of scholarly activities in
society.
What are Critical Discourse Studies (CDS)?
Although it is virtually impossible to briefly and adequately define a type of scholarly investigation, critical studies
of discourse typically have the following properties:
They aim to analyse, and thus to contribute to the understanding and the solution of, serious social problems,
especially those that are caused or exacerbated by public text and talk, such as various forms of social power
abuse (domination) and their resulting social inequality.
This analysis is conducted within a normative perspective, defined in terms of international human rights, that
allows a critical assessment of abusive, discursive practices as well as guidelines for practical intervention and
resistance against illegitimate domination.
The analysis specifically takes into account the interests, the expertise and the resistance of those groups that are
the victims of discursive injustice and its consequences.


The discourse–cognition–society triangle
It is within this framework that I propose to formulate and illustrate some of the
principles I try to observe when doing CDS. Given my multidisciplinary orientation, the
overall label I sometimes use for my approach is that of ‘sociocognitive’ discourse
analysis. Although I dislike labels (because they are reductionist and because I have many
times changed my area and perspective of research), I have few quarrels with this one,
especially since it emphasizes that – unlike many of my colleagues in CDS and various
interactionist approaches – I value the fundamental importance of the study of cognition
(and not only that of society) in the critical analysis of discourse, communication and
interaction.
This means, among other things, that I am also interested in the study of mental
representations and the processes of language users when they produce and comprehend
discourse and participate in verbal interaction, as well as in the knowledge, ideologies
and other beliefs shared by social groups. At the same time, such an approach examines
the ways in which such cognitive phenomena are related to the structures of discourse,
verbal interaction, communicative events and situations, as well as societal structures,
such as those of domination and social inequality, as mentioned above.
What is ‘cognition’?
As is the case for other fundamental notions, ‘cognition’ is a notion that is jointly defined by all the disciplines
currently integrated under the label ‘cognitive science’, such as psychology, linguistics, philosophy and logic as
well as the brain sciences. Some typical cognitive notions used here are, for instance:
Mind, defined, for example, as a central function of the human brain.
Cognition as the set of functions of the mind, such as thought, perception and representation.
Memory: Short Term (Working) Memory (STM) and Long Term Memory (LTM).
Episodic (personal, autobiographic) Memory (EM) and Semantic (sociocultural, shared) Memory – as part of
LTM.
Semantic Mental Models (represented in EM) as the subjective representations of the events and situations
observed, participated in or referred to by discourse.
Goals as mental models of the situations to be realized by action.
Pragmatic Context Models: specific mental models of subjective representations (definitions) of the relevant
properties of communicative situations, controlling discourse processing and adapting discourse to the social
environment so that it is situationally appropriate.
Knowledge and its organization: shared, sociocultural beliefs that are certified by the (knowledge) criteria or
standards of a (knowledge) community.
Ideology as the shared, fundamental and axiomatic beliefs of specific social groups (socialism, neoliberalism,


feminism, (anti)racism, pacifism, etc.).
Attitudes as the socially shared, ideologically based opinions (normative beliefs) about specific social issues
having given rise to debate or struggle (abortion, divorce, euthanasia, immigration, etc.).
Cognitive processes such as the production and comprehension of discourse/interaction on the basis of specific
mental models, controlled by context models, and based on knowledge and ideologies.
The label of the ‘sociocognitive’ approach does not mean that I think that CDS should be
limited to the social and cognitive study of discourse, or to some combination of these
dimensions. It only means that (at present) I am personally most interested in the
fascinating sociocognitive interface of discourse, that is, the relations between mind,
discursive interaction and society. For instance, in my work on racism (V
an Dijk, 1984,
1987, 1991, 1993a, 2005, 2007b), and in my research on ideology (V
an Dijk, 1998) and
context (V
an Dijk, 2008a, 2009), I have shown that these are both mental and social
phenomena. It goes without saying, however, that the complex, ‘real-world’ problems
CDS deals with also need a historical, cultural, socioeconomic, philosophical, logical or
neurological approach, among others, depending on what one wants to know (see, for
instance, the various approaches represented in Van Dijk, 1997, 2007a).
Given the verbal–symbolic nature of discourse, explicit CDS of course also needs a
solid ‘linguistic’ basis, where ‘linguistic’ is understood in a broad sense. Whatever
cognitive and social dimensions of discourse CDS deals with, it always needs to account
for at least some of the detailed structures, strategies and functions of text or talk. These
may include grammatical, pragmatic, interactional, stylistic, rhetorical, semiotic,
narrative, argumentative or similar forms and meanings of the verbal, paraverbal and
multimodal structures of communicative events.
Having emphasized the necessity of a broad, diverse, multidisciplinary and problem-
oriented CDS, I thus limit my own endeavours to the domain defined by the discourse–
cognition–society triangle.
In a more or less informal way, we may view the combined cognitive and social
dimensions of the triangle as defining the relevant (local and global) context of discourse.
Indeed, the sociopolitical and problem-oriented objectives of CDS especially need
sophisticated theorization of the intricate relationships between text and context. We shall
see that adequate discourse analysis at the same time requires detailed cognitive and
social analysis, and vice versa, and that it is only the integration of these accounts that
may reach descriptive, explanatory and especially critical adequacy in the study of social
problems.
It should be emphasized that context, as I define it, is not simply some kind of social
environment, situation or structure – such as the social ‘variables’ of gender, age or
‘race’ in classical sociolinguistics. Rather, a context is a subjective mental
representation, a dynamic online model, of the participants about the for–them–now
relative properties of the communicative situation. I call such a representation a context
model (V
an Dijk, 2008a, 2009). It is this mental ‘definition of the situation’ that controls


the adequate adaptation of discourse production and comprehension to their social
environment. This is just one of the ways in which cognition, society and discourse are
deeply and mutually integrated in interaction.
Within the theoretical framework of the discourse–cognition–society triangle, context
models mediate between discourse structures and social structures at all levels of
analysis. This means that ‘society’ is understood here as a complex configuration of
situational structures at the local level (participants and their identities, roles and
relationships engaging in spatiotemporally and institutionally situated, goal-direction
interaction), on the one hand, and societal structures (organizations, groups, classes, etc.
and their properties and – e.g. power – relations), on the other hand. This side of the
triangle also includes the cultural and historical dimensions of interaction and social
structure, that is, their cultural variation as well as their historical specificity and change.
It is also at this side of the triangle that we locate the consequences of discursive
injustice, for instance in the form of social inequality.
Finally, it should be stressed that the use of the triangle is merely an analytical
metaphor representing the major dimensions of critical analysis. It should not be
interpreted as suggesting that cognition and discourse are outside society. On the
contrary, human beings as language users and as members of groups and communities, as
well as their mental representations and discourses, are obviously an inherent part of
society. It is also within social structure that language users interpret, represent,
reproduce or change social structures such as social inequality and injustice.
What is ‘discourse’?
Discourse analysts are often asked to define the concept of ‘discourse’. Such a definition would have to consist of
the whole discipline of discourse studies, in the same way as linguistics provides the many dimensions of the
definition of ‘language’. In my view, it hardly makes sense to define fundamental notions such as ‘discourse’,
‘language’, ‘cognition’, ‘interaction’, ‘power’ or ‘society’. To understand these notions, we need whole theories or
disciplines of the objects or phenomena we are dealing with. Thus, discourse is a multidimensional social
phenomenon. It is at the same time a linguistic (verbal, grammatical) object (meaningful sequences or words or
sentences), an action (such as an assertion or a threat), a form of social interaction (like a conversation), a social
practice (such as a lecture), a mental representation (a meaning, a mental model, an opinion, knowledge), an
interactional or communicative event or activity (like a parliamentary debate), a cultural product (like a telenovela)
or even an economic commodity that is being sold and bought (like a novel). In other words, a more or less
complete ‘definition’ of the notion of discourse would involve many dimensions and consists of many other
fundamental notions that need definition, that is, theory, such as meaning, interaction and cognition.
The example: the defense of capitalism
After a discussion of some of the general notions of CDS, I shall now be more specific
about the kind of discourse structures to be attended to in such a critical approach. At the


same time, I shall illustrate and further develop the theoretical notions introduced above
by analysing some properties of a specific example: a text – ‘A Petition Against the
Persecution of Microsoft’ of the Center for the Moral Defense of Capitalism (now called
Center for the Advancement of Capitalism) – downloaded from the internet in 2001
(www.moraldefense.com) (text no longer available on the website in 2008). This petition
criticizes the US government for its legal battle against Microsoft, and asks readers to
sign it.
I have chosen this text as an example because of the widely perceived socioeconomic
problem that vast international corporations may abuse their power in order to dominate
the market and hence limit the freedom of choice of consumers.
Context
Of the communicative situation of this, we do not know much more than that the text was
found on the internet in 2000, and that it was produced by the Center for the Moral
Defense of Capitalism, whose very name suggests a neoliberal, conservative think tank.
A new internet search in December 2007 presented the following definition of the goals
of the Center:
The Center for the Advancement of Capitalism is dedicated to advancing individual rights and economic freedom
through Ayn Rand’s philosophy of Objectivism. (www.moraldefense.com)
This means that readers who know this Center may already have a more detailed context
model of the communicative situation than other readers (such as information about the
ideological background, identity and goals of the Center), and can interpret the text in that
light. Intended recipients are people who use the web and understand English. A further
aspect of the communicative situation is the assumed previous knowledge about legal
actions against Microsoft because of its abuse of market power (a near monopoly,
because of the pervasive use of Windows as an operating system for PCs) to couple other
programs (such as its web browser Explorer) to this operating system. In other words, the
context analysis focuses on Setting (Time, Place), Participants and their properties and
relations, as well as on their Goals, the Knowledge presupposed by the participants, and
the Ideology of the participants.
Topics: semantic macrostructures
I often advocate beginning Critical Analysis (CrA) with an analysis of semantic
macrostructures, that is, with a study of global meanings, topics or themes. These are
what discourses are (globally) about; they are mostly intentional and consciously


controlled by the speaker; they embody the (subjectively) most important information of a
discourse, express the overall ‘content’ of mental models of events (see below), and
perhaps most importantly, they represent the meaning or information most readers will
memorize best of a discourse. Discursively, topics or themes are characteristically
expressed in titles, abstracts, summaries and announcements.
For contextual reasons, we select topics as a significant structure to study because they
are usually controlled by powerful speakers, because they influence many other structures
of a discourse (such as its global coherence), and because they have the most obvious
effects on the (memory and consequent actions of) recipients and hence on the process of
reproduction that underlies social power and dominance (for details, see V
an Dijk and
Kintsch, 1983).
In our sample text, the title, ‘A Petition Against the Persecution of Microsoft’ expresses not only part of the topic
(‘the persecution of Microsoft’), but also the self-categorization of the text genre (‘petition’). Theoretically and
psychologically, topics or macrostructures are derived from a text by inference – through a process of information
reduction that is being practised especially in text summarization. Thus, we may ‘summarize’ this text by, for
example, the following macropropositions:
M1 The freedom of enterprise is under attack by antitrust laws.
M2 Successful businessmen are being represented as tyrants.
M3 The suit against Microsoft is an example of this M1 and M2.
M4 Government should not limit the freedom of the market.
M5 Microsoft has the right to do what it wants with its products.
M6 Innovators should not be punished.
M7 We call that the case against Microsoft be dismissed.
In a further reduction, one can summarize these macropropositions with the overall macroproposition (topic): ‘The
US government is requested to stop its judicial persecution of the innovator Microsoft.’
We see that these various topics/macropropositions indeed represent very high level, sometimes abstract,
principles. In this case, these propositions are more or less a direct expression of some tenets of a classical
capitalist ideology about the freedom of enterprise. In other words, the macropropositions express the general
ideological principles of the freedom of the market, and then apply these to the special case of Microsoft. We shall
see later that this distinction reflects the difference between socially shared representations, on the one hand, and
more personal mental models, on the other.
Local meanings
Next, a CrA may focus on local meanings, such as the meaning of words (a study that also
may be called lexical, depending on one’s perspective), the structures and nature of
propositions, and coherence and other relations between propositions, such as
implications, presuppositions, levels of description, degrees of granularity and so on.
The reasons to give priority to semantic analysis in CrA are mostly contextual: local


meanings are a function of the selection made by speakers/writers in their mental models
of events or their more general knowledge and ideologies. At the same time, they are the
kind of information that (under the overall control of global topics) most directly
influences the mental models, and hence the opinions and attitudes of recipients. Together
with the topics, these meanings are best recalled and reproduced by recipients, and hence
may have the most obvious social consequences.
As is the case for many variable structures of discourse, local meanings may also be
controlled by context models. That is, not all local meanings are equally appropriate in
communicative situations, as we know from the general distinction between formal,
casual and popular discourse styles, as well as from social and cultural taboos. Indeed,
most institutional text and talk is contextually constrained by the specific aims and norms
of institutional interaction and organization.
Theoretically, this means that the generation of meanings based on mental models of
events talked about is controlled by the various categories and contents of context models.
One obvious controlling mechanism is that the mutual knowledge as indexed by the
context model requires that speakers ongoingly in principle only assert what the
recipients do not already know, as we also know from the appropriateness conditions of
the speech act of an assertion. Other constraints are defined for specific kinds of
participants and their identities, roles and relationship: there are often limitations of
‘content’ or meaning for specific categories of speakers, and this is especially so in
institutional situations.
At this local semantic level, we may for instance examine the choice of the word ‘persecution’ in the title of our
sample text, a choice that has various implications that express the ideological perspective of the author (The
Center for the Moral Defense of Capitalism): the action of the government is defined in negative terms, implying a
form of morally or legally reprehensible harassment or force, or abuse of power. At the same time, the choice of
this word implies that Microsoft is the victim of this aggression. In more general terms, lexical selection here
shows the familiar form of negative other-presentation, and positive self-presentation as an organization taking the
defence of the victims. As part of the main macroproposition, the choice of the concept of ‘persecution’ also
contributes to the organization of the local meanings in the rest of the text. In more cognitive terms, this means
that the choice of this word may influence the formation of the macronodes of the mental model of the readers of
this text.
Similarly relevant is the repeated use of the word ‘rights’ in the first paragraph, typically associated with
‘individual’ and ‘freedom’, all profoundly ideological concepts related to the constitution and prevailing ideology of
the United States. In order to be able to qualify the legal action of the government in the starkly negative terms of
a ‘persecution’, it needs to be shown that the rights of individuals are being violated, and what these rights are.
The emphasis on rights has several other functions, such as associating Us and Our position with something good
and legitimate, and thus preparing the negative evaluation of the US Government when it violates these rights.
Apart from polarizing the mental model being construed here, this paragraph at the same time functions as an
important premise in the overall argumentation of this text.
For CDS, especially interesting in such a local semantic analysis is the study of the many
forms of implicit or indirect meanings, such as implications, presuppositions, allusions,
vagueness and so on. Again, such meanings are related to underlying beliefs, but not
openly, directly or precisely asserted for various contextual reasons, including the well-
known ideological objective to de-emphasize Our bad things and Their good things.


In our sample text, there are many propositions that are implied or presupposed, but not explicitly asserted. When
the authors say that antitrust legislation comes ‘under the guise of “protecting the public”’, the expression ‘under
the guise’ and the quotes imply that it is not true (or merely alleged) that antitrust laws protect the public. Note
also that in the second paragraph, as well as throughout the text, many expressions have ideological
presuppositions, such as:
competitors are envious of successful business men
officials are power-hungry
the business world has creative geniuses
business empires are hard-won.
Apart from further emphasizing the polarization between Government and Business, the local meanings of the text
thus create another polarization between envious competitors and brilliant creators in the business. Notice also that
the lexical choice and metaphors further emphasize these polarizations: envious, power-hungry, hard-won, control,
regulators, and breaking to pieces, etc. are the negative concepts associated with Them, the government (and
some business people), whereas We and those we protect are associated with success, creative geniuses and by
litotes with ‘crime’ and ‘tyrant’. Again, such words not only contribute to the overall polarization of the conceptual
structure of the text, but also to the formation of a biased, polarized model of the events, where the Actors are
neatly differentiated between the Good and the Bad.
The first two paragraphs are formulated in general terms, and apply to rights and their violation, as well as to the
antitrust laws. The third paragraph begins with the functional move of Specification or Example: what has been
said so far specifically applies to the case of Microsoft. Theoretically, this means that the first paragraphs are
rather expressions of (general) social representations, such as attitudes and ideologies, whereas the third
paragraph describes the current case, Microsoft, and thus sets up the more specific mental model based on these
general social representations. Given the ideological slant of the first paragraphs, there is little doubt that this
model, as expressed by the Center, is also ideologically biased, and we may expect that the general polarization
constructed before will be applied here, as is indeed the case. Notice also that conceptual polarization is often
implemented in the text by various forms of hyperboles, as we have already seen in the lexical choice of ‘crime’,
‘tyrants’ and ‘geniuses’. Such hyperboles may even come close to outright lies, for instance when it is asserted
that Bill Gates has been deprived of his right to control his own company.
The use of ‘his’, ‘businessmen’ and ‘the men who have made this country great’ suggests that men, especially or
exclusively and no women, are involved in business and its success. Thus, apart from expressing a starkly
conservative neoliberal ideology, the Center also professes a sexist ideology by verbally excluding women, thus
contributing to a more overall conservative meta-ideology that also controls the nationalist ideology expressed in
the characteristic form of US self-glorification (the ‘greatness’ of this country).
Finally, among the many other semantic properties of this text, we should also mention the importance of what is
being left out in the text. Thus, it is suggested that the success of Microsoft is based on the principle of better
products for a lower price, but of course not the well-known practice of the forced bundling of products (like
Windows and its internet browser). Nearly trivially then, we may formulate the general rule that the negative
properties of Us (or those we defend) are either omitted or downgraded in the text. Note that, theoretically,
omission is only a relevant property of a discourse when it can be shown that the omitted information is part of the
mental model (the Center no doubt knows about the illegal practices of Microsoft), or of more general, shared
knowledge that is needed or may be used to produce or understand a text. In this case, the mental model of a
critical reader may of course be different from that persuasively expressed by the Center.
We now have a first impression of the theoretically based practical guidelines on which
discourse structures to study among many hundreds. Of course, this is only an example.
The point is that such a choice is twice context-bound: first, by our own (scholarly) aims,
our research problems, and the expectations of our readers, as well as the social
relevance of our research project. Second, by the relevance of specific discourse


structures studied in their own context, such as the aims and beliefs of the speaker or the
recipients, the social roles, positions and relations of participants, institutional
constraints and so on.
The relevance of subtle ‘formal’ structures
Besides or instead of the semantic structures just mentioned, we may be more interested
in those structures of text or talk that are usually less consciously controlled or
controllable by the speakers, such as intonation, syntactic structures, propositional
structures, and rhetorical figures, as well as the many properties of spontaneous talk, such
as turn-taking, repairs, pauses, hesitation, and so on.
These various ‘forms’ generally do not directly express the underlying meanings and
hence beliefs, but rather signal the ‘pragmatic’ properties of a communicative event, such
as the intention, current mood or emotions of speakers, their perspective on the events
talked about, their opinions of co-participants, and interactional concerns especially such
as positive self-presentation and impression formation. Thus, men may well be able to
hide their negative opinions of women, or white people of black people, but indirectly
their evaluations, position or face, and hence their identity, may be signalled by subtle
structural or formal characteristics of talk or the non-verbal properties of communicative
events (gestures, face work, body position, distance, and so on).
At both the global and local levels, our sample text also has several formal properties that enhance the general
underlying topic and argumentation. Indeed, as we have seen, the very argumentative structure of this petition is
one of the global, formal properties that organizes this text: the general premises, expressed in the first two
paragraphs, focus on constitutional rights on the one hand, and the alleged violation of such rights by the antitrust
laws on the other. Both are then applied to the more particular premise that Microsoft is the victim of this
violation. In the same way, several of the meanings in these and other paragraphs have specific argumentative
functions, such as the reference to the Declaration of Independence as an authoritative and hence credible set of
principles by which the government’s duties are evaluated.
Similarly, the discourse may enhance its effectiveness by various rhetorical moves, of which hyperboles have
already been mentioned (‘geniuses’, etc.). There is also the use of the opposite of what is being meant, for
instance in irony or litotes (such as the Microsoft ‘crime’ of being successful).
Indeed, the very structure of polarization of this kind of ideological discourse not only has a semantic property, but
also formal properties, such as the rhetorical contrast expressed in the fourth paragraph: here, the government’s
views that the ‘free’ market imposes ‘force’, and that ‘control’ is ‘freedom’, are criticized as an inversion of
reality as the Center sees it, and it does so by a construction of a contrast.
Finally, in the same way that the semantic and rhetorical polarizations of this text express and help construct
biased models of the case against Microsoft, its formal style is a marker of its genre: the official petition. This
formal style begins with the paraphrase of the Declaration of Independence, but is also lexically expressed in the
Center’s own petition, as in the repeated ‘We hold that …’, ‘not by anyone’s permission, but by absolute right’,
etc., signalling something like a Declaration of the Free Market.
One conclusion of this discussion of the criteria applied in the choice of the discourse
structures studied in CDS projects is that any ‘method’ or ‘approach’ that limits itself to
some genre or dimension of discourse only can by definition only provide a very partial


analysis. Trivially, grammarians usually study grammar, conversation analysts
conversations, and narratologists stories and their structures. Now, if some CDS
researcher, for the double contextual reasons explained above, precisely needs to study
some aspects of grammar, conversation or narration, it is obviously in these more specific
areas of research that one looks for relevant structures. But as soon as the ‘critical’ aims
of the research project require a broader approach, those scholars who limit themselves
to the study of a single genre or types of structure are often unable to fully deploy their
expertise. Hence also my oft-repeated criticism of the exclusive membership of one
school, approach or scholarly sect, and my plea for diversity, flexibility and
multidisciplinarity as general criteria for CDS. This obviously first of all applies to CDS
and critical scholars themselves! Indeed, there are many ways to do interesting and
relevant discourse analysis, and we also need to develop the more general theories,
concepts and methods that may (also) be used in critical analysis. Indeed, few of the
general notions used so far in our analysis were developed within critical studies.
Relating text and context: context models
It has been assumed above that the relation between discourse and society is not direct,
but needs to be mediated by so-called context models (V
an Dijk, 2008a, 2009). That is,
social structures – organizations, groups, gender, race, etc. – are phenomena that cannot
be directly linked to the mental processes of discourse production and understanding, as
was previously the case in traditional sociolinguistics.
Hence, we need a mediating cognitive device that is able to represent the relevant
structures of the social situation, both locally (micro) as well as globally (macro), and
that at the same time is able to control discourse, the mental processes of production and
comprehension and its situated variation.
Context models, defined as specific mental models, represented in episodic memory,
do just that. They make sure that language users adapt their discourse to the social
environment, so that it is socially appropriate.
Given more or less the same ‘content’ or ‘information’ as specified in the (semantic)
mental model of things talked about, context models are needed to appropriately
formulate more or less the ‘same’ content in different communicative situations. This
means that context models define the genre as well as the style of text and talk.
As summarized above, context models are organized by a relatively simple schema
consisting of fundamental categories, such as:
a spatiotemporal setting
participants


identities, roles, relationships
goals
knowledge
ideologies
the ongoing social action.
Context models are dynamic and are ongoingly adapted to the communicative situation, if
only because the knowledge of the recipients is constantly changing as a result of the very
discourse itself.
Since context models control all the variable aspects of discourse (intonation, syntax,
lexicon, etc.), they need to be kept activated at least in the background of working
memory – and hence cannot be too complex or voluminous (and represent dozens or
hundreds of aspects of the current communicative situation).
It goes without saying that context models as a crucial interface between discourse and
society also play a fundamental role in critical discourse studies, which are premised on
the detailed analysis of some of these discourse–society relationships, such as those of
power and domination.
In our example of a petition, the context defining the communicative event is rather obvious. The overall societal
domain for this text is that of business or the market, and the overall actions are those of advocating the freedom
of enterprise, and protecting business against government interference. The local setting of the communicative
event is the internet. The communicative role of the participant is that of speaker/writer, author and originator, the
interactional role that of a defender of Microsoft and as an opponent of the government, whereas the
socioeconomic role is that of an organization advocating the freedom of the market. The other participant, the
addressee, is explicitly referred to in the beginning of the text as ‘Fellow Americans’, thus pragmatically trying to
emphasize the unity of the ‘we’ group for which this Center claims to be the defender. It is interesting that
although the proposal for the petition is directed at ‘Fellow Americans’, the proposed petition itself is addressed to
the relevant final destinataries: the judge, the Senate Judiciary Committee, the Attorney General and the President
of the United States.
The current communicative action is that of publishing a text on the internet persuading readers to sign a petitition.
This action is being performed through the speech acts of accusing the government, and defending Microsoft. The
(complex) mental structures defining the cognitive dimension of the context consist of the various ideologies
analysed above, as well as the more specific attitudes and opinions (about the legal action of the government
against Microsoft) we have found expressed throughout the text. Although expressing group co-membership in
addressing ‘Fellow Americans’, the persuasive structure of the text presupposes that not all Americans may have
the same opinion about the practices of Microsoft. Finally, the text is meaningful for its readers only because it
presupposes a vast amount of common ground and commonsense knowledge, such as about the Declaration of
Independence, Microsoft, antitrust laws and so on, as well as specific (model-based) knowledge about the current
court case against Microsoft.
The important point is that throughout, the text adapts to this subjectively construed context model of the current
communicative situation, for example, as follows:
The meanings of the text are all understandable within the broader framework of the three semantic domains of
business, justice and goverment.
The genre and speech act of the petition is one form of implementing the overall defence of the free market,
which is the global aim of the Center.
The action of the government is defined as a violation of Our rights, and hence is a sufficient condition for the


success of the current genre and speech act of a petition.
The overall topic semantically realizes the reason for the speech act and genre of this specific petition: Microsoft’s
rights have been violated.
The argumentative structure is organized in such a way as to optimally sustain the communicative function of this
text as a form of persuasion.
The polarization of the opinions at all levels of the text expresses the attitudes and the ideology of the Center, and
tries to influence those of the readers – and final destinataries.
Lexical choice is appropriate for the genre of a formal, public petition.
The text presupposes existent general knowledge about what business, laws, governments, etc. are, as well as
specific knowledge about the process against Microsoft. However, it does not express or presuppose knowledge
that debilitates its defence (e.g. about the illegal practices of Microsoft).
For any kind of CDS research that links text with some social situation, it is important to
realize that whatever the broader social or political situation, it may not ‘reach’ or impact
on discourse simply because a speaker may find it irrelevant and further ignores the
relevant information in the construction of the context model. Also, the changes that
speakers apply in their discourses, for example, because of politeness or other forms of
persuasion, need to be taken into account.
We see that the notion of subjective context models theoretically implies the important
criterion of relevance, namely that only those properties of communicative situation are
construed as forming part of the context, if they are (now) relevant for the participant.
Note that relevance is not absolute or (only) socially determined, but is relative to the
current knowledge, goals, wishes, interests and personal experiences of the current
speaker or recipient at each moment of a communicative event.
Discourse semantics: event models
Crucial to any theory of discourse is its semantics, which provides a theory of discourse
meaning and interpretation. Traditionally, a linguistic semantics is formulated in terms of
abstract meanings: concepts, propositions and their mutual relations. Thus, local
coherence of discourse is defined as constraints on relations between propositions, on the
one hand, and on the relations between the referents (‘facts’ of some mental model) of
such propositions, on the other hand. For instance, a sequence of propositions may be
said to be coherent if the facts (states of affairs, events, actions, etc.) referred to by these
propositions are related, for instance by relations of causality or more generally by
relations of conditionality (such as enabling). We may call this referential or extensional
coherence. On the other hand, coherence may also be established by intensional
(meaning) relations among the propositions themselves, for instance when a proposition
Q is a Generalization, Specification, Example, Illustration, etc. of a previous proposition


P. Since Q is defined here in terms of its function relative to P, we may call this
functional coherence.
As suggested, such an account is rather abstract, and appears to have little empirical
relevance: this is not the way language users go about producing and understanding
meaningful discourse. Instead of an abstract theory of meaning, therefore, we may define
meaning and interpretation in cognitive terms, that is, in terms of mental operations and
representations.
Such an approach also solves a major problem of the more formal account, namely the
nature of reference: notions that define referential coherence, such as referents, facts and
causal relations between facts, are not defined in linguistic (grammatical) semantics. A
cognitive approach to discourse meaning not only may solve that problem, but at the same
time accounts for the subjectivity of coherence: discourses are not coherent in the
abstract, but are coherent for language users, and according to their intentions,
interpretations or understandings.
Thus, discourses are not so much coherent because their propositions refer to related
‘objective’ facts in some possible world, but rather to the episodes (events and
situations) as interpreted, defined and (seen to be) related by language users. We have
seen above that such subjective interpretations are represented in episodic memory as
mental models of events and situations. We may now simply say that a discourse is
coherent if language users are able to construct a mental model for it. We may call these
models event models in order to account for the fact that they subjectively represent the
events the discourse refers to. Whereas context models, as discussed above, are
pragmatic, event models are semantic.
Since context models are a specific kind of event model (namely a model of
communicative events), event models have more or less the same structure organized by a
schema with categories such as Setting, Participants and Actions/Events – and their
respective subcategories and properties.
Thus, in the analysis of our example, we have repeatedly seen how at all levels of the petition text, structures are
geared not only to the adequate expression of the mental model of the (authors in the) Center for the Moral
Defense of Capitalism, but also to the persuasive construction of a preferred model among the addressees. That
is, this intended model features the macro-opinion that the US Government through its antitrust laws in general,
and its case against Microsoft in particular, violates the basic principles of the freedom of the market. That is, the
current mental model of the Microsoft case is a fairly direct instantiation of more general attitudes about antitrust
legislation and their basic ideologies about the freedom of enterprise. The polarization between Us and Them, or
between Business and Government, and its respective Good and Bad qualities, is thus a specification of more
general opinions about ingroups and outgroups as we know them from the study of ideology (Van Dijk, 1998). In
other words, the authors of the text not only try to adequately express their own model of the events, but
formulate the text in such a way that the intended model be accepted by the readers. This is what persuasion is all
about, and it may be obvious that without an account of mental model structures, such a verbal act and its
concomitant verbal structures cannot be adequately described, let alone explained.
The notion of a mental model also explains another fundamental property of discourse
meaning: its incompleteness. Semantically speaking, a discourse is like the tip of an


iceberg: only some of the propositions needed to understand a discourse are actually
expressed; most other propositions remain implicit, and must be inferred from the explicit
propositions (given a body of world knowledge, to which we shall come back below). It
is the model that provides these ‘missing propositions’. Implicit or implied propositions
of discourse are thus simply defined as those propositions that are part of the mental
model for that discourse, but not present in its semantic representation. That is, for
pragmatic reasons as defined by the context model of a discourse (including the beliefs
attributed to the recipient by the speaker), only part of the propositions of a model need to
be expressed – for instance, because the speaker believes that such information is
irrelevant, because the recipient already knows these propositions, or because it may be
inferred from other propositions. Hence, mental models at the same time provide an
excellent definition of presuppositions, namely as those propositions of event models that
are implied but not asserted by the discourse.
Besides discourse coherence and implications, the notion of event models provides a
framework for many other, hitherto problematic, aspects of discourse and discourse
processing, briefly summarized as follows:
Event models are a crucial cognitive aspect of the constructionist way people view,
understand, interpret and recall ‘reality’. In other words, our personal experiences,
as represented in episodic memory, consist of mental constructs: models.
Event models are not only the result of discourse comprehension, but are also the
basis of discourse production. Event models may be part of our planning of
discourse (‘what we want to say’). Thus, stories are contextually appropriate
(relevant, interesting) formulations of underlying event models, for instance of
personal experiences as stored in episodic memory.
Event models are subjective (personal interpretations of events), but have a social
basis, because they instantiate socially shared knowledge and possibly also group
ideologies (see below). That is, context models explain how discourse may be
ideologically ‘biased’, namely when based on event models that instantiate
ideological propositions.
Event models account for the fact that different language users, members of different
communities and of different social (e.g. ideological) groups, may have different
interpretations of events, and at the same time, different interpretations of the same
discourse. This implies that the influence of discourse on the minds of recipients
may also be different.
Social cognition


CDS is not primarily interested in the subjective meanings or experiences of individual
language users. Power, power abuse, dominance and their reproduction typically involve
collectivities, such as groups, social movements, organizations and institutions (V
an Dijk,
2008b).
Therefore, besides the fundamental interface of personal mental models that account for
specific discourses, a cognitive approach also needs to account for social cognition, that
is, the beliefs or social representations they share with others of their group or
community. Knowledge, attitudes, values, norms and ideologies are different types of
social representations.
These social representations also play a role in the construction of personal models, as
we have seen in some detail in our brief analytical remarks about the Petition text. That
is, socially shared knowledge and opinions may be ‘instantiated’ in such models. In other
words, models are also the interface of the individual and the social, and explain how
group beliefs may affect personal beliefs and thus be expressed in discourse. Ethnic or
gender prejudice, which are typically defined for social groups, thus also appear as an
(instantiated) property of individual discourses. And conversely, if the personal mental
model of social events of an influential person is shared by others of a group or
community, mental models may be generalized and abstracted from to form social
representations such as knowledge, attitudes and ideologies. This is of course precisely
the aim of the Petition text.
It is one of the aims of CDS research to analyse specific discourses in this broader,
social framework, for instance by trying to infer (sometimes quite indirectly) which
shared social representations are being expressed or presupposed by discourse. Thus,
critical discourse studies of racism, sexism or classism need to relate properties of
discourse with these underlying, socially shared, representations, which group members
use as a resource to talk about (members) of other groups. Outgroup derogation and
ingroup celebration are the social–psychological strategies typically defining this kind of
chauvinist discourse.
Ideology
Dominance, defined as power abuse, is often based on, and legitimated by ideologies,
that is, by the fundamental social beliefs that organize and control the social
representations of groups and their members. Many forms of CDS research require such
an ideological analysis, especially because ideologies are typically expressed and
reproduced by discourse.
It is important to stress here that the cognitive framework sketched above suggests that
there is no direct link between discourse and ideology.  The basic beliefs of an ideology
(for instance, about the equality of women and men in a feminist ideology) organize
specific attitudes, that is, the socially shared opinions of a group (for instance, about


abortion, sexual harassment or equal pay), which in turn may influence specific event
models (about specific participants and actions), which finally may be related to
discourse under the final control of context models. In other words, to ‘read off’
ideologies from discourse is not always possible, precisely because ideologies need to
be very general and fairly abstract. Although we still ignore what the general structure of
ideologies are (van Dijk, 1998), it may be assumed that they are organized by a general
schema consisting of the basic categories that organize the self and other representations
of a group and its members, such as:
membership devices (who belongs to us?)
typical acts (what do we do?)
aims (why do we do it?)
relations with other (opponent) groups
resources, including access to public discourse.
Note that many of the features that were traditionally examined in the (critical or other)
analysis of discourse are here accounted for in more explicit, separate theories of
cognition. That is, meaningfulness, interpretation and understanding of text and context are
described here in terms of specific mental representations, such as event models, context
models and social representations. We are thus able not only to abstractly describe text
and talk, but also to explain how real language users go about producing and
understanding discourse, how their personal and socially shared beliefs affect discourse
production and how these are in turn affected by discourse. No critical account of
discourse is theoretically complete without such a cognitive interface.
Social situations
We shall be relatively brief about the third main component of our CDS approach:
society. For obvious reasons, the social dimensions of CDS usually receive more
attention from CDS researchers than its cognitive aspects, as is also shown in the other
chapters in this book. Note though that our sociocognitive theory explains how social
structures may affect (and be affected by) discourse structures via a theory of social
cognition.
An account of the role of social structures in CDS requires an analysis of both micro
(local) and macro (global) structures of society, that is, of individual social actors and
their situated interactions, on the one hand, and of social groups, movements,
organizations and institutions, as well as their relations, such as power and dominance, on
the other hand.
Note that the micro–macro distinction is only analytic. In real life, social members may


experience and interpret such structures at the same time: by ‘locally’ responding to a
question from a student, which may be part of the somewhat more comprehensive social
activity of giving a class, I at the same time may teach a course and reproduce the
organization of this university as well as higher education – at increasingly ‘higher’,
macro and abstract levels of analysis and (diminishing degrees of) awareness.
Unlike, for instance, therapists, CDS scholars are less interested in the account of
specific discourses, interactions and situations – such as, indeed, the example analysed in
this chapter. Rather, they focus on the more general ways specific discourses may be
instances of more general discourse properties and how such discourse may contribute to
social inequality, for instance by the formation of biased models and ultimately by the
formation or confirmation of ideologies.
Micro vs. macro
As is the case for micro sociologists, discourse analysts deal primarily with text and talk, and hence with a typical
‘micro’ dimension of society. Indeed, it is generally assumed that society and its structures – as well as its
structures of inequality – are ‘locally’ produced by its members. Yet, I additionally assume that such local
production in interaction is possible only if members have shared social representations such as
knowledge and ideologies. In that sense, ‘local’ social interaction is again ‘enabled’ by a macro dimension such
as the social cognitions of collectivities. But then again, such a macro dimension is itself constructed cognitively by
the mental representations of groups of individual social actors. We thus see how for CDS, the micro and macro
dimensions of society, and their analysis, are multiply integrated, as is also embodied in the slogan that CDS is
mainly interested in the discursive reproduction of the social structure of inequality. One of the reasons CDS
research (critically) analyses specific discourses is the methodologically important fact that these are more directly
analysable than abstract structures, and that abstract structures can only be inferred (as language users do) by
studying special cases. Although the macrosocial dimensions of society (such as social inequality) will usually be
the main reasons and aims of CDS, we can only observe and analyse such abstract structures in terms of how
they are expressed or enacted locally in social practices in general, and in discourses in particular, that is, in
specific situations.
As part of an analysis of social situations, let me briefly say a few words about two
central categories of social situations: action and actors.
Discursive action as social–political action
In a similar way as the abstract meanings of discourse are intricately related to beliefs
and other cognitive representations, the discursive acts accomplished in or by discourse
can also hardly be separated from the social acts that define social situations: discourse
is inherently part of both cognition and situations. Indeed, discursive acts are by
definition also social acts. However, since not all social acts are discursive, we need
more than just an analysis of speech acts, such as assertions, promises or threats, or
typical discursive interactions such as turn-taking, interruptions, agreeing, or the opening
and closing of a conversation. There are also a large number of social acts that are the


conditions, consequences, or implications of discursive (verbal) interaction.
Thus, holding a speech in parliament may involve a sequence of speech acts such as
assertions, questions, or accusations, as well as conversational moves and strategies such
as responding to critique, agreeing with members of your own party, refusing to be
interrupted, and many more. In this conversational aspect, parliamentary debates are not
fundamentally different from other forms of public dialogue. However, what is typical
and characteristic is that by such conversational moves, participants globally engage in
legislation, government support or opposition, representation of the voters, and other
global political actions. Similarly, by speaking negatively about refugees in order to
persuade parliament to enact tough legislation against immigrants, this at the same time
implies the social act of derogation and discrimination. Even quite local moves, such as
denials in disclaimers (‘I have nothing against blacks, but …’) may be part of a larger
social–psychological strategy of positive self-presentation (ingroup celebration) and
outgroup derogation which is so typical of contemporary racisms, especially of the elite.
In other words, in CDS, the action-analysis of text and talk is not limited to a study of
typically discursive doings but also examines the ways in which discursive acts and
structures are deployed in the enactment of broader social and political acts, especially
those that are part of systems of dominance (or resistance against dominance).
The same is true for the embedding of discursive interaction in broader social and
political acts, and the study of the social conditions and consequences of discourse. Thus,
an immigration debate in parliament presupposes the global acts of immigration, and may
globally result in keeping refugees out, and even more locally it may be a consequence of
a political act of government, for instance a decision to close the borders for a specific
group of refugees.
Actors
Similar remarks hold for the actors that define situations as participants in various roles,
such as communicative roles (various kinds of ‘producers’ or ‘recipients’ of text or talk),
social roles such as friends and enemies, occupational roles such as politicians, or
political roles such as members of parliament or members of a party. Note that in the
same way as an action may be defined at different levels, and thus relate discursive acts
(such as denials) with social acts (such as discrimination), actors may also at the same
time engage in various identities at the same time, although some identities or group
affiliations will be stronger and more salient than others in a particular context. As we
have emphasized before in the model theory of context, a relevant situational analysis of
discourse does not abstractly examine all the possible identities of speakers or recipients,
but only the locally relevant or more prominent ones, and how these affect or are affected
by discourse.
Note that a local actor analysis of discourse situations at the same time involves an


interface with societal structures: speakers act as members of various social groups, and
we thus have an obvious link between the macrostructures of groups and the
microstructures of interaction, namely via the relation of membership. A similar
relationship was established in mental models, namely between personal beliefs and the
socially shared beliefs of groups.
Societal structures
Local situations of interaction enact, manifest, or challenge global societal structures.
Participants speak and listen as women, mothers, lawyers, party members, or company
executives. Their actions, including their discursive actions, realize larger social acts and
processes, such as legislation, education, discrimination and dominance, often within
institutional frameworks such as parliaments, schools, families, or research institutes.
CDS is mainly interested in the role of discourse in the instantiation and reproduction
of power and power abuse (dominance), and hence is particularly interested in the
detailed study of the interface between the local and the global, between the structures of
discourse and the structures of society. We have seen that such links are not direct, but
need a cognitive and an interactional interface: social representations, including attitudes
and ideologies, are often mediated by mental models in order to show up in discourse,
and such discourse has social effects and functions only when it in turn contributes to the
formation or confirmation of social attitudes and ideologies. White group dominance can
only be ‘implemented’ when white group members actually engage in such derogating
discourse as an instance of discrimination. Racism and sexism are thus not merely
abstract systems of social inequality and dominance, but actually ‘reach’ down in the
forms of everyday life, namely through the beliefs, actions and discourses of group
members.
Similar remarks have been made in the analysis of our sample text. In order to fully understand and explain (the
structures of) this text, we not only need to spell out its cognitive and contextual conditions and consequences, but
also the broader societal structures on which such cognitions and contexts are ultimately based, and which at the
same time they enable, sustain and reproduce. We have seen how throughout the text and at all levels, the
negative opinion about the US Government in the Microsoft case is linked with the overall neoliberal ideology of a
free market, in which creative ‘businessmen’ are the heroes and the government (and its justice system) the
enemies, against whose attacks the Center plays its specific role of ‘defender’ of capitalist values. That is, the
ideology, as implemented in the mental models constructed for the Microsoft case and as more or less directly
expressed in the text, needs to be linked to societal groups, organizations, structures and relationships of power.
Indeed, the current text is in that respect just one of the myriad of (discursive and other) actions of the business
community in its power struggle with the State. It is only at the highest level of societal analysis that we are able
to fundamentally understand this text, its structures and functions.
It is this permanent bottom-up and top-down linkage of discourse and interaction with
societal structures that forms one of the most typical characteristics of CDS. Discourse


analysis is thus at the same time cognitive, social and political analysis, but focuses rather
on the role discourses play, both locally and globally, in society and its structures.
The relevant relationships run both ways. Societal structures such as groups and
institutions, as well as overall relations such as power or global societal acts such as
legislation and education, provide the overall constraints on local actions and discourse.
These constraints may be more or less strong, and run from strict norms and obligations
(for instance, as formulated in law, such as the acts of judges or MPs), to more flexible or
‘soft’ norms, such as politeness norms.
These global constraints may affect such diverse discourse properties as interaction
moves, who controls turn-taking or who opens a session, speech acts, topic choice, local
coherence, lexical style or rhetorical figures. And conversely, these discourse structures
may be ‘heard as’ (interpreted as, count as) actions that are instances or components of
such very global societal or political acts as immigration policy or educational reform.
It is precisely in these macro–micro links that we encounter the crux for a critical
discourse analysis. Merely observing and analysing social inequality at high levels of
abstraction is an exercise for the social sciences – and a mere study of discourse
grammar, semantics, speech acts or conversational moves, the general task of linguists,
and discourse and conversation analysts. Social and political discourse analysis is
specifically geared towards the detailed explanation of the relationship between the two
along the lines sketched above.
FURTHER READING
Since the topics dealt with in this chapter would require a vast number of references, I have not made specific
references in the text other than where I concretely refer to some of my earlier work, of which this chapter is a
sample. Obviously, many of the notions dealt with in this chapter have been based on, or inspired by, the work of
others. Thus, my ideas on CDS have been influenced by the many publications of the other scholars represented
in this volume, and I may for the sake of space simply refer to their chapters for detailed references. For the other
notions used in this chapter, see the following references and recommended readings:
Cognition, social cognition, memory, mental models, text processing: Augoustinos and Walker (1995);
Fiske and Taylor (1991); Graesser et al. (2003); Johnson-Laird (1983); Kintsch (1998); Moscovici (2000); Tulving
(1983); Van Dijk and Kintsch (1983); Van Oostendorp and Goldman (1999).
Context: Auer (1992); Duranti and Goodwin (1992); Gumperz (1982); Van Dijk (2008a, 2009).
Discourse and conversation structures: Schiffrin et al. (2001); Ten Have (1999); van Dijk (1997; 2007a,
2007b).
Social situation analysis: Argyle et al. (1981); Goffman (1970); Scherer and Giles (1979).
The analysis of social structure and its relations to discourse and cognition: Alexander et al. (2004);
Boden and Zimmerman (1991); Wuthnow (1989).
Discourse and ideology: Van Dijk (1998).
Discourse and power: Van Dijk (2008b).
Corporate and organizational discourse: Grant et al. (2004).


Neoliberalism: Rapley (2004).
Appendix
A Petition Against the Persecution of Microsoft
Sign the Petition – International Version (for non-US residents)
To: Members of Congress, Attorney General Janet Reno and President Bill Clinton.
Fellow Americans:
The Declaration of Independence proclaims that the government’s fundamental purpose is
to protect the rights of the individual, and that each individual has an inalienable right to
the pursuit of happiness. Throughout America’s history, this noble idea has protected the
individual’s right to pursue his own happiness by applying his energy to productive work,
trading the products of his effort on a free market and rising as far as his abilities carry
him.
Over the past century, however, this freedom has been under attack, and one notorious
avenue of this attack has been the antitrust laws. Under the guise of ‘protecting the
public,’ these laws have allowed envious competitors and power-hungry officials to
attack successful businessmen for the crime of being successful. It has led to the ugly
spectacle of the creative geniuses of the business world – the men who have made this
country great – being branded as oppressive tyrants, whose hard-won business empires
must be broken to pieces and subjected to the control of government regulators.
The Justice Department’s current suit against Microsoft is the latest example of this
trend. It is based on envy for the productive ability of Microsoft and its founder, Bill
Gates. The result of this suit, if successful, will be to deprive Mr. Gates of his right to
control his own company, and to deprive the company of its ownership and control of its
own products.
The Justice Department’s case – and indeed the entire edifice of antitrust law – is
based on the bizarrely inverted notion that the productive actions of individuals in the free
market can somehow constitute ‘force,’ while the coercive actions of government
regulators can somehow secure ‘freedom.’
The truth is that the only kind of ‘monopoly’ that can form in a free market is one based
on offering better products at lower prices, since under a free market even monopolies
must obey the law of supply and demand. Harmful, coercive monopolies are the result,
not of the operation of the free market, but of government regulations, subsidies, and
privileges which close off entry to competitors. No business can outlaw its competitors –


only the government can.
We hold that Microsoft has a right to its own property; that it has the authority,
therefore, to bundle its properties – including Windows 95 and Internet Explorer – in
whatever combination it chooses, not by anyone’s permission, but by absolute right. We
hold that to abridge this right is to attack every innovator’s right to the products of his
effort, and to overthrow the foundations of a free market and of a free society.
We do not want to live in a country where achievement is resented and attacked, where
every innovator and entrepreneur has to fear persecution from dictatorial regulators and
judges, enforcing undefined laws at the bidding of jealous competitors. We realize that
our lives and well-being depend on the existence of a free market, in which innovators
and entrepreneurs are free to rise as far as their ability can carry them, without being held
down by arbitrary and unjust government regulations.
As concerned citizens, we ask that the Justice Department’s case against Microsoft be
dismissed. We call for a national debate over the arbitrary and unjust provisions of the
antitrust laws and for an end to the practice of persecuting businessmen for their success.
Note
1 This text is a new, shorter and partly rewritten version of the author’s contribution to Wodak, R. and Meyer, M.
(eds) (2002) Methods of Critical Discourse Analysis. London: Sage, pp. 95-120.


4
The Discourse-Historical Approach (DHA)
Martin Reisigl and Ruth Wodak
Introducing key concepts and terms
Some tools of analysis and principles of DHA
Approaching the analysis of ‘discourses about climate change’
Conclusions
Introducing key concepts and terms
We start our chapter by introducing the notions of ‘critique’, ‘ideology’ and ‘power’.
These three concepts are constitutive for every approach in CDA, albeit frequently
employed with different meanings. Therefore, it is important to clarify how they are
conceptualized in the DHA. We then proceed with the delineation of other terms
significant for our purposes, such as ‘discourse’, ‘genre’, ‘text’, ‘recontextualization’,
‘intertextuality’ and ‘interdiscursivity’.
The second section summarizes some analytical tools and general principles of the
DHA, while in the third section, we illustrate our methodology step by step by focusing
on ‘discourses about climate change’. In the final section, we refer to the strengths and
limitations of the DHA and point to future challenges for the field.
‘Critique’, ‘ideology’ and ‘power’
Three concepts figure indispensably in all variants of CDA: critique, power, and
ideology.
‘Critique’ carries many different meanings: some adhere to the Frankfurt School, others
to a notion of literary criticism, some to traditional Marxist notions. Adhering to a
‘critical’ stance should be understood as gaining distance from the data (despite the fact
that critique is mostly ‘situated critique’), embedding the data in the social context,
clarifying the political positioning of discourse participants, and having a focus on
continuous self-reflection while undertaking research. Moreover, the application of
results is aspired to, be it in practical seminars for teachers, doctors and bureaucrats, in
the writing of expert opinions or in the production of school books.
The DHA adheres to the socio-philosophical orientation of critical theory.1 As such, it


follows a concept of critique which integrates three related aspects (see Reisigl, 2003:
78–82; Reisigl and Wodak, 2001: 32–35 for extended discussions):
1. Text or discourse-immanent critique aims at discovering inconsistencies, self-
contradictions, paradoxes and dilemmas in the text-internal or discourse-internal
structures.
2. Socio-diagnostic critique is concerned with demystifying the – manifest or latent –
persuasive or ‘manipulative’ character of discursive practices. Here, we make use
of our contextual knowledge and draw on social theories as well as other theoretical
models from various disciplines to interpret the discursive events.
3. Future-related prospective critique seeks to contribute to the improvement of
communication (for example, by elaborating guidelines against sexist language use
or by reducing ‘language barriers’ in hospitals, schools and so forth).
It follows from our understanding of critique that the DHA should make the object under
investigation and the analyst’s own position transparent and justify theoretically why
certain interpretations and readings of discursive events seem more valid than others.
Thompson (1990) discusses the concept of ideology and its relationships to other
concepts and especially to aspects of mass communication thoroughly. He points out that
the notion of ideology has been given a range of functions and meanings since it first
appeared in the late 18th century in France. For Thompson, ideology refers to social
forms and processes within which, and by means of which, hegemonic symbolic forms
circulate in the social world.
Ideology, for the DHA, is seen as an (often) one-sided perspective or world view
composed of related mental representations, convictions, opinions, attitudes and
evaluations, which is shared by members of a specific social group. Ideologies serve as
an important means of establishing and maintaining unequal power relations through
discourse: for example, by establishing hegemonic identity narratives, or by controlling
the access to specific discourses or public spheres (‘gate-keeping’). In addition,
ideologies also function as a means of transforming power relations more or less
radically. Thus, we take a particular interest in the ways in which linguistic and other
semiotic practices mediate and reproduce ideology in a variety of social institutions. One
of the aims of the DHA is to ‘demystify’ the hegemony of specific discourses by
deciphering the ideologies that establish, perpetuate or fight dominance.
For the DHA, language is not powerful on its own – it is a means to gain and maintain
power by the use ‘powerful’ people make of it. This explains why the DHA critically
analyses the language use of those in power who have the means and opportunities to
improve conditions.
‘Power’ relates to an asymmetric relationship among social actors who assume
different social positions or belong to different social groups. Following Weber (1980:


28), we regard ‘power’ as the possibility of having one’s own will within a social
relationship against the will or interests of others. Some of the ways in which power is
implemented are ‘actional power’ (physical force and violence), the control of people
through threats or promises, an attachment to authority (the exertion of authority and
submission to authority) and technical control through objects, such as means of
production, means of transportation, weapons, and so on (see Popitz, 1992).
Power is legitimized or de-legitimized in discourses. Texts are often sites of social
struggle in that they manifest traces of differing ideological fights for dominance and
hegemony. Thus, we focus on the ways in which linguistic forms are used in various
expressions and manipulations of power. Power is discursively exerted not only by
grammatical forms, but also by a person’s control of the social occasion by means of the
genre of a text, or by the regulation of access to certain public spheres.
‘Discourse’, ‘text’, ‘context’
By employing the DHA, we investigate multifaceted phenomena in our societies. This
implies that the study of (oral, written, visual) language necessarily remains only a part of
the whole enterprise – hence, our research must be interdisciplinary. Moreover, in order
to analyse, understand and explain the complexity of the objects under investigation, we
consider many different and accessible sources of data (in respect of external constraints
such as time, funding, etc.) from various analytical perspectives. Thus, we follow the
principle of triangulation, which implies taking a whole range of empirical
observations, theories and methods as well as background information into account (see,
for example, Heer et al., 2008; Wodak, 2007; Wodak et al., 1999). The specific choices
depend on the specific problem – in this chapter, on controversies on climate change.
We consider ‘discourse’ to be:
a cluster of context-dependent semiotic practices that are situated within specific
fields of social action
socially constituted and socially constitutive
related to a macro-topic
linked to the argumentation about validity claims such as truth and normative validity
involving several social actors who have different points of view.
Thus, we regard (a) macro-topic-relatedness, (b) pluri-perspectivity and (c)
argumentativity as constitutive elements of a discourse.2
The question of delimiting the borders of a ‘discourse’ and of differentiating it from
other ‘discourses’ is intricate: the boundaries of a ‘discourse’, such as a discourse on
global warming or climate change, are partly fluid. As an analytical construct, a
‘discourse’ always depends on the discourse analyst’s perspective. As an object of


investigation, a discourse is not a closed unit, but a dynamic semiotic entity that is open to
reinterpretation and continuation.
Furthermore, we distinguish between ‘discourse’ and ‘text’: ‘texts’ are parts of
discourses. They make speech acts durable over time and thus bridge two dilated speech
situations, i.e. the situation of speech production and the situation of speech reception. In
other words, texts – be they visualized and written or oral – objectify linguistic actions
(Ehlich, 1983).
Texts can be assigned to genres. A ‘genre’ may be characterized as ‘a socially ratified
way of using language in connection with a particular type of social activity’ (Fairclough,
1995a: 14). Consequently, a manifesto on combating global warming proposes certain
rules and expectations according to social conventions, and has specific social purposes.
A discourse on climate change is realized through a range of genres and texts, for example
TV debates on the politics of a particular government on climate change, guidelines to
reduce energy consumption, speeches or lectures by climatologists.
The 
DHA 
considers intertextual 
and interdiscursive relationships between
utterances, texts, genres and discourses, as well as extralinguistic social/sociological
variables, the history of an organization or institution, and situational frames. While
focusing on all these relationships, we explore how discourses, genres and texts change in
relation to sociopolitical change.
Intertextuality means that texts are linked to other texts, both in the past and in the
present. Such connections are established in different ways: through explicit reference to
a topic or main actor; through references to the same events; by allusions or evocations;
by the transfer of main arguments from one text to the next, and so on. The process of
transferring given elements to new contexts is labelled recontextualization: if an element
is taken out of a specific context, we observe the process of decontextualization; if the
respective element is then inserted into a new context, we witness the process of
recontextualization. The element (partly) acquires a new meaning, since meanings are
formed in use (see Wittgenstein, 1989). Recontextualization can, for instance, be
observed when contrasting a political speech with the selective reporting of the speech in
various newspapers. A journalist will select specific quotes which best fit the general
purpose of the article (e.g. commentary). The quotations are thus de-and recontextualized,
i.e. newly framed. They can partly acquire new meanings in the specific context of press
coverage.
Interdiscursivity signifies that discourses are linked to each other in various ways. If
we conceive of ‘discourse’ as primarily topic-related (as ‘discourse on x’), we will
observe that a discourse on climate change frequently refers to topics or subtopics of
other discourses, such as finances or health. Discourses are open and often hybrid; new
subtopics can be created at many points.
‘Field of action’ (Girnth, 1996) indicates a segment of social reality which constitutes
a (partial) ‘frame’ of a discourse. Different fields of action are defined by different
functions of discursive practices. For example, in the arena of political action, we


differentiate among eight political functions as eight different fields (see Figure 4.1). A
‘discourse’ about a specific topic can find its starting point within one field of action and
proceed through another one. Discourses then ‘spread’ to different fields and relate to or
overlap with other discourses.
We represent the relationship between fields of action, genres and macro-topics in the
area of political action as follows (Figure 4.1):3
FIGURE 4.1 Fields of political action, political genres and discourse topics (see Reisigl, 2007: 34–35)
Figure 4.2 further illustrates the interdiscursive and intertextual relationships between
discourses, discourse topics, genres and texts.


FIGURE 4.2 Interdiscursive and intertextual relationships between discourses, discourse topics, genres and texts
In this diagram, interdiscursivity is indicated by the two big overlapping ellipses.
Intertextual relationships are represented by simple bold arrows. The assignment of texts
to genres is signalled by simple arrows. The topics to which a text refers are indicated by
small ellipses with simple dotted arrows; the topical intersection of different texts is
indicated by the overlapping small ellipses. Finally, the specific intertextual relationship
of the thematic reference of one text to another is indicated by simple broken arrows.
Several of these relationships can be illustrated with respect to our case study, if we
choose three texts of the Czech president Václav Klaus, a fervid opponent of
environmentalist warnings on the dangers related to global warming. On 16 March 2007,
Klaus gave a speech entitled ‘Innsbruck Speech: Three Threats of our Freedom’ on the
occasion of receiving an honorary doctorate by the University of Innsbruck (= text 1 that
belongs to the ‘epideictic genre’ of speeches of gratitude). This speech is first and
foremost a part of the ‘discourse about freedom and liberalism’ (= discourse A), but to a
certain extent also of the ‘discourse about climate change’ (= discourse B), because
climate change and environmentalism are important topics of the speech.
Three days later, on 19 March 2007, Klaus answered five questions from Republican
politicians of the House of Representatives of the US Congress, in the Committee on
Energy and Commerce, on issues of mankind’s contribution to global warming and
climate change. This rather formalized pseudo-dialogic text (= text 2) was realized as a
written letter (dating from 19 March 2007) that was designated to answer the questions
which were formulated in a letter (dating from 6 March 2007) signed by the Ranking
Member of the Committee on Energy and Commerce, Joe Barton, and the Ranking
Member of the Subcommittee on Energy and Air Quality, J. Dennis Hastert. This letter
shares several topics with text 1, relating to climate change, environmentalism and the
threat of freedom, and is also part of various other discourses, for example the discourse
on energy economy. Text 2, thus, is a somewhat hybrid genre, as it adopts features of both
the (sub)genre of a written expert interview and the (sub)genre of a written letter which


resembles the (sub)genre of parliamentary questions and answers.
On 14 June 2007, Václav Klaus published an article in the Financial Times entitled
‘Freedom, not climate, is at risk’. This text (= text 3) is again part of both discourse A
and discourse B. It picks up many of the topics of text 2 but, of course, manifests
characteristics of another genre – the newspaper commentary. This text elicited many
reactions and questions by readers, some of which were published in the newspaper on
21 June 2007, and also answered by Klaus (see www.klaus.cz/klaus2/asp/-default.
asp?lang=EN&CatID=YJrRHRsP).
Our triangulatory approach is based on a concept of ‘context’ which takes into account
four levels:
1. the immediate, language or text-internal co-text and co-discourse
2. the intertextual and interdiscursive relationship between utterances, texts, genres and
discourses
3. the extralinguistic social variables and institutional frames of a specific ‘context of
situation’
4. the broader sociopolitical and historical context, which discursive practices are
embedded in and related to.
In our analysis, we orient ourselves to all four dimensions of context in a recursive
manner (see also Wodak, 2007, 2008a).
Some tools of analysis and principles of DHA
The DHA is three-dimensional: after (1) having identified the specific contents or topics
of a specific discourse, (2) discursive strategies are investigated. Then (3), linguistic
means (as types) and the specific, context-dependent linguistic realizations (as tokens)
are examined.
There are several strategies which deserve special attention when analysing a specific
discourse and related texts (see Step 5 below). Heuristically, we orientate ourselves to
five questions:
1. How are persons, objects, phenomena/events, processes and actions named and
referred to linguistically?
2. What characteristics, qualities and features are attributed to social actors, objects,
phenomena/events and processes?
3. What arguments are employed in the discourse in question?
4. From what perspective are these nominations, attributions and arguments expressed?


5. Are the respective utterances articulated overtly; are they intensified or mitigated?
According to these five questions, we elaborate five types of discursive strategies. By
‘strategy’, we generally mean a more or less intentional plan of practices (including
discursive practices) adopted to achieve a particular social, political, psychological or
linguistic goal. Discursive strategies are located at different levels of linguistic
organization and complexity.4
TABLE 4.1 A selection of discursive strategies
The first study for which the DHA was developed analysed the constitution of antisemitic
stereotyped images, as they emerged in public discourses in the 1986 Austrian
presidential campaign of former UN general secretary Kurt Waldheim, who, for a long
time, had kept secret his National Socialist past (Wodak et al., 1990).5 Four salient
characteristics of the DHA emerged in this research project: (1) interdisciplinary and


particularly historical aims and interests; (2) team work; (3) triangulation as a
methodological principle; and (4) an orientation towards application.
This interdisciplinary study combined linguistic analysis with historical and
sociological approaches. Moreover, the researchers prepared and presented an exhibition
about ‘Postwar antisemitism’ at the University of Vienna.
The DHA was further elaborated in a number of studies of, for example, racist
discrimination against migrants from Romania and the discourse about nation and national
identity in Austria (Matouschek et al., 1995; Reisigl, 2007; Wodak et al., 1999). The
research centre ‘Discourse, Politics, Identity’ (DPI) in Vienna, established by the second
author of this article (thanks to the Wittgenstein Prize awarded to her in 1996; see
www.wittgenstein-club.at), allowed for a shift to comparative interdisciplinary and
transnational projects relating to research on European identities and the European
politics of memory (Heer et al., 2008; Kovács and Wodak, 2003; Muntigl et al., 2000).
V
arious principles characterizing the approach have evolved over time since the study
on Austrian postwar antisemitism. Here, we summarize ten of the most important
principles:
1. The approach is interdisciplinary. Interdisciplinarity involves theory, methods,
methodology, research practice and practical application.
2. The approach is problem-oriented.
3. V
arious theories and methods are combined, wherever integration leads to an
adequate understanding and explanation of the research object.
4. The research incorporates fieldwork and ethnography (study from ‘inside’), where
required for a thorough analysis and theorizing of the object under investigation.
5. The research necessarily moves recursively between theory and empirical data.
6. Numerous genres and public spaces as well as intertextual and interdiscursive
relationships are studied.
7. The historical context is taken into account in interpreting texts and discourses. The
historical orientation permits the reconstruction of how recontextualization functions
as an important process linking texts and discourses intertextually and
interdiscursively over time.
8. Categories and tools are not fixed once and for all. They must be elaborated for each
analysis according to the specific problem under investigation.
9. ‘Grand theories’ often serve as a foundation. In the specific analyses, however,
‘middle-range theories’ frequently supply a better theoretical basis.
10. The application of results is an important target. Results should be made available to
and applied by experts and be communicated to the public.


Approaching the analysis of ‘discourses about climate change’
The DHA in eight steps
A thorough discourse-historical analysis ideally follows an eight-stage programme.
Typically, the eight steps are implemented recursively:
1. Activation and consultation of preceding theoretical knowledge (i.e.
recollection, reading and discussion of previous research).
2. Systematic collection of data and context information (depending on the research
question, various discourses and discursive events, social fields as well as actors,
semiotic media, genres and texts are focused on).
3. Selection and preparation of data for specific analyses (selection and downsizing
of data according to relevant criteria, transcription of tape recordings, etc.).
4. Specification of the research question and formulation of assumptions (on the
basis of a literature review and a first skimming of the data).
5. Qualitative pilot analysis (allows testing categories and first assumptions as well
as the further specification of assumptions).
6. Detailed case studies (of a whole range of data, primarily qualitative, but in part
also quantitative).
7. Formulation of critique (interpretation of results, taking into account the relevant
context knowledge and referring to the three dimensions of critique).
8. Application of the detailed analytical results (if possible, the results might be
applied or proposed for application).
This ideal-typical list is best realized in a big interdisciplinary project with enough
resources of time, personnel and money. Depending on the funding, time and other
constraints, smaller studies are, of course, useful and legitimate. Nevertheless, we
believe that it makes sense to be aware of the overall research design, and thus to make
explicit choices when devising one’s own project such as a PhD thesis. In the latter case,
one can certainly conduct only a few case studies and must restrict the range of the data
collection (to very few genres). Sometimes, a pilot study can be extended to more
comprehensive case studies, and, occasionally, case studies planned at the very beginning
must be left for a follow-up project.
Because of space restrictions, we only elaborate on a few of the research stages (1, 2,
4 and especially 5) in this chapter. We have decided to focus on argumentation analysis
in our pilot study, since other strategies such as nomination and predication strategies
(which we also take into consideration) are subordinated under the persuasive aims of the
text we want to analyse.


Analysing discourses on climate change and global warming
Step 1: Activation and consultation of preceding theoretical knowledge
The overarching research question on ‘global warming’ can be approached in various
ways:
(a) What does ‘climate change’ mean according to the existing (scientific) literature?
(b)
What does the relevant literature convey about the relationship between ‘climate
change’ and modern societies, i.e. the influence of human beings on the global
climate?
A first consultation of the relevant literature supplies us with the following answers:
(a) ‘Climate change’ in ordinary language use predominantly means ‘global warming’,
although other meanings can also be detected: ‘climate change’ sometimes denotes
‘global cooling towards a new ice age’ and sometimes relates to a ‘natural climatic
variation which temporarily leads to a warming or cooling’. In scientific terms, ‘climate
change’ refers to the change of the medial annual temperature, but also to various climatic
alterations including precipitation change, sea-level rise, the increase of extreme weather
events, ozone depletion and so on. A historical semantic reconstruction further reveals
that the scientific and political meaning of the phrase has been extended more recently:
whereas now ‘[i]t refers to any change in climate over time, whether due to natural
variability or as a result of human activity’, in the United Nations Framework Convention
on Climate Change (UNFCCC) of 1992, ‘climate change’ had exclusively been related ‘to
a change of climate that is attributed directly or indirectly to human activity […] in
addition to natural climate variability’ (Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change
(IPCC), 
2007a, 
p. 
1, 
downloaded 
from www.ipcc.ch/pdf/assessment-
report/ar4/syr/ar4_syr_topic1.pdf on 9 February 2008).
(b) Most scientists consider the relationship between ‘climate change’ and modern
societies to be a causal one in the sense that nature becomes more and more dependent on
human civilization, global warming being the anthropogenic consequence of the
greenhouse effect caused by the worldwide increase in the output of carbon dioxide and
other greenhouse gases.6
After this first orientation, we are now able to formulate a more general discourse-
related research question: what does ‘climate change’ mean in the specific public
discourse we focus on and how are human influences on climate represented and
discussed in this discourse?
Assumptions related to this question are that the discourse will comprise different and
maybe contradicting interpretations of the ‘nature’ of climate change (of its existence,
origins and consequences), of the relationship between climate and civilization, and of
possible measures against climate change. If this should be the case, we assume that such


differing discursive representations and positions make it difficult to achieve a political
compromise as a basis for political decisions. Viewed from a historical perspective, we
assume that the discourse (or some facets of the discourse) will have changed over time,
depending on a range of factors to be identified in our analyses.
Step 2: Systematic collection of data and context information
Depending on what data are accessible (by observation, audio-visual recording,
interview, research in archives) and on how much data can be analysed within the
respective research project, a range of empirical data could be collected, considering the
following criteria:
specific political units (e.g. region, nation state, international union) or ‘language
communities’
specific periods of time relating to important discursive events, which are
connected with the issue in question, for instance, climate summits or publications of
reports issued by the IPCC and their discussion in public
specific social and especially political and scientific actors (individual and
‘collective’ actors or organizations, for example, politicians with different party-
political affiliations, environmentalists, climatologists, national and international
councils on climate change, oil companies, car companies and so forth)
specific discourses – in our case, discourses about climate change and particularly
about global warming
specific fields of political action, especially the formation of public attitudes,
opinions and will (e.g. relating to media coverage), the management of international
relations (e.g. relating to international summits and agreements), the fields of
political control (e.g. relating to environmentalist actions), political advertising (e.g.
relating to the promotion of the energy business), the inter-party formation of
attitudes, opinions and will (e.g. relating to the inter-party coordination of
environmental policy), the law-making procedure (e.g. relating to tax laws on carbon
emissions), and specific policy fields, such as environmental policy, energy policy,
economic policy, health policy or migration policy
specific semiotic media and genres related to environmental policy (expert reports,
election programmes, political debates inside and outside parliament, press articles,
TV interviews and TV discussion, leaflets, car advertisements and popular scientific
texts).
In the present case, we focus on one single discourse fragment: Václav Klaus’s
‘Answers to questions from the House of Representatives of the US Congress, Committee
on Energy and Commerce, on the issue of mankind’s contribution to global warming and
climate 
change’ 
(19 
March 
2007; www.klaus.cz/klaus2/asp/default.-asp?


lang=EN&CatID=YJrRHRsP). We chose this text because it is rather brief, easily
accessible on the internet, has been published in several languages (thus guaranteeing a
remarkable communicative scope), and because it relates both to Europe and the United
States. In Step 5, we will have a closer look at this text.
Step 3: Selection and preparation of data for specific analyses
When preparing the corpus for analysis, the collected data are downsized according to
specific criteria such as frequency, representativity, (proto)typicality, intertextual or
interdiscursive scope/influence, salience, uniqueness and redundancy. If it proves
necessary, oral data have to be transcribed according to the conventions determined by
the research question. As we now focus on a single text example, there is no need to
continue the discussion of this step.
Step 4: Specification of the research question and formulation of assumptions
The research question could now be specified with regard to the question of whether:
global warming is perceived as being undisputed by the discourse participants or not
climate change is seen as a natural process or as co-caused by human beings.
Moreover, the research question has to consider opposing political accusations of abuse
and manipulation, and alternative appeals for action (see, for instance, Al Gore, 2007, p.
268 ff. in contrast to Klaus, 2007: 79, 95, 97 ff.). Hence, a possible point of departure for
the further elaboration of our research question could be the analysis of controversial
positions. As critical discourse analysts, we describe and assess such contradictory
positions and their persuasive character on the basis of principles of rational
argumentation and with regard to underlying manipulative strategies.
A second point of departure could be the analysis of media coverage and of the
relationship between the reporting of scientific statements about global warming and the
media recipients’ knowledge. Allan Bell (1994) has already focused on such issues two
decades ago. In his case study of the discourse about climate change in New Zealand, he
analysed the relationship between the media coverage of scientific explanations and
laypersons’ understanding of this coverage. Bell’s research, which led to the insight that
the knowledge about climate change is greater among the socially advantaged than among
socially disadvantaged media users (Bell, 1994: 59), could be compared with today’s
situation. The DHA pays special attention to such diachronic comparisons.
On the basis of all these concerns, our research question could be divided into the
following detailed questions:
What social (political, scientific, environmentalist, media) actors participate in the


specific discourse on climate change? What scientific, political, environmentalist
and other positions are adopted in the different fields of political action relating to
the discourse? (We assume that different actors pursue different and often
conflicting interests.)
What role do scientists play in the triangle of science, policy/politics and the mass-
mediated public sphere? How do they ‘translate’ their expert knowledge for
laypeople? How reliable are statements of scientists as epistemic and deontic
authorities? How are scientists ‘controlled’ in modern democratic societies? On the
basis of what criteria do laypeople judge scientific statements? (Here, we assume
that scientists play an important role as experts both in processes of political
decision-making and in the formation of public attitudes, opinions and will.)
What role do the mass media play in the ‘translation’ of expert knowledge for
laypeople? How are the media controlled in democratic societies? Is it difficult to
understand mass-media texts on climate change? (We assume that the media play a
crucial role in the formation of public attitudes, opinions and will as well as in
the field of political control.)
What validity claims of truth and normative rightness are explicitly made or
presupposed in the discourse in question? How are these claims related to party-
political and – in a wider sense – ideological alignments? (We assume that
different discourse participants will make different and often contradicting,
ideology-dependent claims on climate change.)
What are the main topics of the discourse? How is the influence of human beings on
the global climate represented and discussed? In more linguistic terms: what
descriptions, explanations, argumentations and narratives about the genesis,
diagnosis, prognosis and avoidance of climate change are presented or reported in
order to support the validity claims in question? What semiotic (especially linguistic
and visual) means are employed to persuade recipients? What contradictions are
constructed in the discourse? (Here, a basic assumption is that we will not find a
single and homogeneous depiction, but a wide range of differing representations
and argumentations.)
What aspects of the discourse change over time? What are the reasons for change?
(This question presupposes that there is a diachronic change involving partial
continuities and new developments.)
What other discourses does the discourse intersect with and relate to? (We assume
that the discourse in question has interdiscursive links with other discourses.)
Of course, we cannot respond to any of these questions exhaustively in this chapter. Only
large-scale interdisciplinary research projects would be able to investigate the above-
mentioned complexities adequately. Smaller projects and pilot studies will necessarily
only focus on some of these aspects.


Step 5: Qualitative pilot analysis
Our pilot study seeks to improve and differentiate the analytical instruments and to
elaborate the assumptions mentioned above. Accordingly, we restrict this qualitative pilot
investigation to one single text (which resembles the parliamentary genre of ‘question
time’) from a prominent Czech politician (President Václav Klaus) who participates very
actively in the American, Czech and German debates on climate change and global
warming from a strictly (neo-)liberal, anti-communist as well as anti-environmentalist
point of view. The text is a hybrid mix of a written expert interview and the written
version of parliamentary questions and answers. It is constructed as a formalized, quasi-
dialogic question–answer sequence composed of five questions and the respective
answers to representatives of the US Congress in the Committee on Energy and
Commerce. The text was originally published in English, but was reproduced in Czech
and German in Klaus’s book: Modrá, nikoli zelená planeta (Czech) and Blauer Planet
in grünen Fesseln! Was ist bedroht: Klima oder Freiheit? (German)7.
The questioners to whom Klaus is replying remain anonymous in the books. However,
a closer look at the political and historical context shows that Klaus’s text, from 19
March 2007, was submitted on 21 March 2007 by the Republican J. Dennis Hastert,
Ranking Member of the Subcommittee on Energy and Air Quality, in the Hearing of the
US House of Representatives on ‘Perspectives on Climate’ before the Subcommittee on
Energy and Air Quality of the Committee on Energy and Commerce and the Subcommittee
on Energy and the Environment of the Committee on Science and Technology. In the
official 
protocol 
of 
the 
Hearing 
(p. 
137, 
downloaded 
from
frwebgate.access.gpo.gov/cgibin/
getdoc.cgi?dbname=110_house_hearings&docid=f:37579.pdf on 10 April 2008), we
read that Klaus’s text has the form of a ‘letter’. On pages 141–146 of the protocol, we
learn that Klaus’s letter answers questions posed in another letter addressed to Klaus on
6 March 2007. This first letter was signed by the two Republicans Joe Barton and J.
Dennis Hastert, who seem to be responsible for the five questions. The two conservatives
invited the Czech president as well the political scientist and statistician Bjørn Lomborg
from the Copenhagen Business School, as a counterpart to the Democrat and
environmentalist Al Gore. Both Gore and Lomborg – the latter is often referred to by anti-
environmentalists, because he criticizes Gore for exaggerating the possible consequences
of global warming – were personally present and questioned at the Hearing on 21 March
2007, whereas Klaus’s letter was only submitted and accepted, without any objection. In
their letter, the two Republicans state the following reasons for inviting Klaus to respond
to their questions:
Over the past several decades, as an economist and political leader, you have developed an important perspective
on the forces that effect individual freedom and economic progress and abundance, especially as you have helped
to lead the Czech Republic out of the deadly stagnation of the former Soviet regime to become one of the fastest
growing vibrant economies in Europe. You have also taken public positions regarding the climate change debate.
We believe your perspective on the political, economic, and moral aspects of the climate change debate can be


useful as we seek to assess the potential impacts of proposed US climate-related regulations on the economic
well-being of its citizens and their ability to contribute to future economic vitality and innovation here and abroad.
The Republican Barton is well known as a vehement sceptic of the anthropogenic thesis
on global warming. During the hearing, Barton attacked Gore for being ‘totally wrong’ (p.
24) with regard to the depiction of the causal relationship of the change of CO2 levels and
the increase in temperature. Thus, it is understandable why Barton invited the sceptic
Klaus to tell the US Congress his viewpoint. In Table 4.2, the right column next to the text
lists the themes (‘T’ stands for ‘theme’) contained in the five questions and Klaus’s first
answer (we list the themes only for the first question; readers may attempt to generate
respective lists for the remaining questions). The third column points to plausible
argumentation schemes (i.e. topoi) and fallacious argumentation schemes (i.e. fallacies).
TABLE 4.2 Klaus’s answers to questions from the House of Representatives of the US Congress (text,
macrostructure/topics and argumentation)














Within argumentation theory, ‘topoi’ can be described as parts of argumentation which
belong to the required premises. They are the formal or content-related warrants or
‘conclusion rules’ which connect the argument(s) with the conclusion, the claim. As such,
they justify the transition from the argument(s) to the conclusion (Kienpointner, 1992:
194). Topoi are not always expressed explicitly, but can always be made explicit as
conditional or causal paraphrases such as ‘if x, then y’ or ‘y, because x’ (for more details,
see Reisigl and Wodak, 2001: 69–80).
Argumentation schemes are reasonable or fallacious. If the latter is the case, we label
them fallacies. There are rules for rational disputes and constructive arguing which allow
discerning reasonable topoi from fallacies (see the pragmadialectical approach of van
Eeemeren and Grootendorst, 1992). These rules include the freedom of arguing, the
obligation to give reasons, the correct reference to the previous discourse by the
antagonist, the obligation to ‘matter-of-factness’, the correct reference to implicit
premises, the respect of shared starting points, the use of plausible arguments and


schemes of argumentation, logical validity, the acceptance of the discussion’s results, and
the clarity of expression and correct interpretation. If these rules are flouted, fallacies
occur. However, we must admit, it is not always easy to distinguish precisely without
context knowledge whether an argumentation scheme has been employed as reasonable
topos or as fallacy.
We analyse this text (see pp. 102–109) by focusing on three aspects according to the
three dimensions of the DHA and the five strategies presented in Table 4.1:
1. First, we identify the main discourse topics of the text, extrapolating them from the
themes (listed in the second column).
2. Then, we focus on the main nomination and predication strategies to be found in
Klaus’s answers.
3. Third, we focus on the argumentation and more specifically on the principal claims
as well as on topoi and fallacies employed to justify these claims (listed in the third
column).
We provide an overview of the basic analytical tools for the specific analysis of
discourses about climate change by adapting the heuristic questions and strategies
presented above in Table 4.3 on pp. 112–113 (the right column contains some examples
of the text from Table 4.2).
Identifying the main discourse topics is based on generalizing the established list of
themes from Table 4.2. Figure 4.3 presents the main discourse topics and the three fields
of political action in which our text is primarily located.
The diagram represents the complex topical intersections in the text. It allows for a
first impression of the fact that neoliberal and policy-related topics dominate, whereas
scientific topics are backgrounded by Klaus.


FIGURE 4.3 Selected discourse topics in the questions to, and answers of, Vàclav Klaus
TABLE 4.3 Important categories to analyse discourses about climate change




Only a few aspects of nomination and predication can be addressed in this pilot study: the
six most important social actors who are discursively constructed in this text are ‘I’,
‘we’, ‘policymakers’, ‘environmentalists’, ‘developing countries’ and ‘(the) people’. The
most salient predications relating to these actors are listed in Table 4.4.
As Table 4.4 illustrates, Klaus constructs environmentalists only by means of negative
predications. Policymakers, on the one hand, appear as dependent agents wherever they
adopt environmentalist claims and, on the other, as social actors who are requested to
resist environmentalist recommendations in order to protect and foster (neo-)liberal
principles under all circumstances. The ‘I’ propagates (neo)liberal beliefs and
convictions as well. The ‘we-group’, which does not play an important role in the text,
oscillates between a ‘we of politicians’ (‘our citizens’), a vague addressee-inclusive we,
a ‘we of perceivers’, a ‘we of civilization’, and a ‘we of all terrestrials’. The
‘developing countries’ appear as completely dependent on the ‘developed countries’ and
as potential victims of environmentalist regulations. ‘The people’, finally, are represented


as being both endowed with liberal rights and in danger of being deprived of these rights
by environmentalist policies, and, furthermore, as potential beneficiaries of global
warming.
In addition to the (neo-)liberal patterns,8 it is worth looking at who is absent in the text,
i.e. not represented by nomination. Klaus does not name scientists as social actors. They
are only represented indirectly through the adjective ‘scientific’ that is attributed to
‘debate’. Thus, scientists are backgrounded.
The most important phenomenon in the text is ‘climate change’. It is primarily qualified
with predications such as being ‘uncertain’, ‘slow’, ‘natural’, ‘permanent’, and ‘probably
unstoppable […], caused not by human behaviour but by various exogenous and
endogenous natural processes (such as fluctuating solar activity)’.9 As we will see, this
representation of climate change as a possibly permanent natural process is salient in
Klaus’s argumentation, since it forms the basis on which the fallacies of nature and
uncertainty are grounded, with which Klaus attempts to justify his rejection of the Kyoto
Protocol and other similar initiatives.
V
arious predications and nominations are relevant elements of the text’s argumentation
structure. Klaus’s answers are highly persuasive. They contain many argumentative
devices; on the meta-linguistic level, words such as ‘argument’, ‘argumentation’,
‘debate’, ‘justify’, ‘conclusion’ and ‘disagree’ explicitly indicate the persuasive
character of the text. Hence, we recommend a focus on argumentation and particularly on
content-related argumentation schemes (topoi and fallacies) for the analysis of this text, in
addition to the analysis of nominations and predications (which are linked to and form the
basis for the argumentation schemes).
The analysis of typical content-related topoi and fallacies depends on the macro-topics
of a discourse. There is an impressive amount of literature dealing with field-and content-
related argumentation schemes in various discourses (see, for example, Kienpointner,
1996; Kienpointner and Kindt, 1997; Kindt, 1992; Reeves, 1989; Wengeler, 2003). In the
present context, we refer to several topoi which are mentioned in the literature, but we
also coin new names for topoi and fallacies which occur in our specific data.
TABLE 4.4 Main social actors and predications




Topoi and fallacies in Klaus’s text are listed in the right column of Table 4.2. They
possess the function of justifying Klaus’s main claims. These claims – most of which are
normative proposals of how policymakers and people in developed countries should act
– are formulated from a strictly (neo-)liberal perspective:
Claim 1: Anthropogenic climate change is a dangerous argument (claim of truth).
Claim 2: If policymakers address climate change, they must and should always stick
to the principles of free society (claim of normative rightness, realized as topos or
fallacy of freedom).
Claim 3: The Kyoto Protocol or similar initiatives should be rejected (claim of
normative rightness).
Claim 4: Regulations based on the so-called precautionary principle should be
rejected (claim of normative rightness).
Claim 5: Instead of the Kyoto Protocol or similar initiatives, many small
ecologically harmful things should be avoided; in all cases, freedom and the free
market have to be protected (claim of normative rightness).
Claim 6: If policymakers accept the (maximalist) ecological demands, this will have


negative consequences for national economies (claim of truth; topos or fallacy of
negative consequence).
Claim 7: If we have to choose between free market and cap-and-trade policies,
capand-trade policies are less important in the context of an irrational fight against
global warming (claim of truth; fallacy of secondary importance as fallacy of the
priority of free market over cap-and-trade policies).
Claim 8: Since developed countries have moral obligations towards developing
countries, they should not introduce large-emission reduction schemes (claim of
normative rightness; topos or fallacy of moral obligation).
These claims are mostly justified by fallacies. The overall structure of Klaus’s answers is
dominated by two fallacies:
1. The fallacy of uncertainty10 assumes that since science is uncertain in respect of the
existence, causes, consequences and avoidance of climate change, environmentalist
recommendations are not convincing and, thus, it does not make sense to follow
these recommendations.
2. The second recurrent fallacy in Klaus’s answers is the fallacy of nature: ‘since
climate change is natural, ecological regulations concerning greenhouse gases are
not reasonable, but irrational and wasteful’.
Both fallacies can be discredited by a topos of numbers that refers to the vast majority of
climatologists who agree that an anthropogenic climate change does exist with a very high
degree of certainty.11 In addition, the first fallacy can be countered by the topos of risk
minimization (as a specific topos of priority): if different alternatives carry various risks,
we have to minimize the risks by choosing the alternative with minimal risks. If we
consider this argumentation scheme, Klaus’s refusal of the precautionary principle
appears unjustified. Furthermore, the topos of risk minimization can also be directed
against the fallacy of secondary importance (claim 7).
We must interrupt our pilot analysis here. In sum, we are able to conclude that Klaus’s
argumentation is highly fallacious and that there are plausible reasons to reject Klaus’s
neoliberal position and to accept a just limitation of human freedom for specific
ecological reasons as concerning the well-being of the human species. A more detailed
case study, which would analyse the whole Hearing, Klaus’s entire book, and the
political role of Klaus as supporter of the US government’s negative position with respect
to international greenhouse-gas emission regulations, would differentiate this first pilot
analysis and would gain insight into the broader political and historical contexts of the
specific discourse on climate change.
Such an analysis would also focus on strategies of perspectivization, mitigation and
intensification.12 This would help to recognize the underlying ideological positioning in


this and other discourse fragments produced by Klaus. It would allow reconstructing how
the strict neoliberal perspective co-determines Klaus’s choice of various rhetorical,
pragmatic and argumentative devices and how frequent Klaus’s dogmatic anti-communist
stance leads to fallacious intensification strategies such as the one which dominates the
argumentation in the above text: the quasi-equation of environmentalism with communism
that aims to derogate many ecological positions (for more examples of perspectivization,
mitigation and intensification strategies, see Table 4.3, point 5). Moreover, a broader
study would focus on the various ways environmentalists are discursively constructed and
represented as exceptionally powerful and dangerous (topos of threat). In the text, we
analysed, for example, Klaus presupposes that ecological groups dominate and
manipulate politicians and bureaucrats. Such negative other-presentations prepare the
ground for ‘shifting the blame’ and ‘scapegoating’ strategies, which could eventually be
used to legitimize and explain political mistakes. Our analysis illustrates that Klaus
organizes most of his strategic discursive manoeuvres with a strict neoliberal, anti-
environmentalist and anti-communist ideological positioning in mind.
Step 6: Detailed case studies
This step consists of detailed case studies on the macro-, meso-and micro-levels of
linguistic analysis, as well as on the level of context. This step, which cannot be
illustrated in this chapter because of space restrictions, interprets the different results
within the social, historical and political contexts of the discourse(s) under
consideration.13
In the present case, this step would lead to general descriptions of the discourse on
climate change in respect of:
social actors and fields of political action
communication obstacles and misunderstandings
contradictory validity claims imbued by political or ideological orientation
salient topics and discursive features
aspects of historical change
interdiscursive relationships, particularly overlaps with other discourses (such as
discourses about globalization, migration or freedom/liberalism).
The overall interpretation would, for example, consider the question of whether the mass-
mediated discourse(s) on climate change and global warming in European states resemble
the discourses in the USA, where company lobbying frequently leads to a ‘balance as
bias’ in the media coverage: the prevailing scientific consensus on the anthropogenic
influence on global warming is not represented adequately in the media. In contrast,
media coverage seems to suggest that scientists do not agree on this issue quite so
strongly (see Boykoff and Boykoff, 2004; Oreskes, 2004 [both quoted in Rahmstorf and


Schellnhuber, 2007: 83]).
The overall interpretation could further refer to Viehöver’s stimulating research on
various discourses on climate change (Viehöver, 2003). Viehöver investigated the media
coverage from 1974 to 1995. On the basis of his comprehensive case study, he
distinguished between six ‘problem narratives’ about global climate change and its
definition, causes, (moral) consequences and possible reactions to it. According to
Viehöver, these ‘narratives’ gained different salience at different times. He observes that
currently the predominant ‘narrative’ seems to be the ‘global warming story’. ‘Stories’
competing with this ‘narrative’ were and still are, according to the German sociologist,
‘the global cooling story’, ‘the story of the climatic paradise’, ‘the story of the cyclical
sunspots’, ‘the story of the climatic change as scientific and media fiction’ and the ‘story
of the nuclear winter’ (see Viehöver, 2003: 268 ff. for more details).
Step 7: Formulation of critique
Our ‘critique’ is based on ethical principles such as democratic norms, human rights and
criteria of rational argumentation. It points to intended biases in representations
(especially media coverage) and to contradictory and manipulative relationships between
discourses and power structures.
In a theoretical sense, the critique – based on our empirical analysis and a theory of
discursive/deliberative democracy – offers analytical parameters that evaluate the
‘quality’ of public political discourses in which ‘collective’ learning and decision-
making are at stake.
In a practical sense, the critique might influence current discourses on global warming
and raise the awareness of involved social actors about the problem, more responsibility
and fallacious argumentations.
Step 8: Application of the detailed analytical results
The application of the analytical results stems from the critique. The application should
not only consist of the scholarly publication of the results. In addition, our insights should
also be made accessible to the ‘general public’ (e.g. by recommendations, newspaper
commentaries, training seminars, further education courses, radio transmissions and
political advising). Such a knowledge ‘transfer’ requires the recontextualization of
theory, methodology, methods and empirical results into other genres and communicative
practices. This is, of course, a challenging task.
Conclusions
The strengths of the discourse-historical approach include the following:


its interdisciplinary orientation, which allows avoiding disciplinary restrictions
the principle of triangulation, which implies a quasi-kaleidoscopic move towards
the research object and enables the grasp of many different facets of the object under
investigation
the historical analysis, which allows transcending static spotlights and focusing on
the diachronic reconstruction and explanation of discursive change
practical applications of the results for emancipatory and democratic purposes.
The DHA relates to other CDA approaches in many aspects. However, the DHA – like
any inter-or multidisciplinary enterprise – should avoid the combination of theoretically
incompatible scientific (re)sources. This caveat remains one of the main theoretical
challenges. Furthermore, many new discourse-related social phenomena (such as the one
discussed in the present chapter) need to be investigated in systematic and detailed ways
from the perspective of our approach.
FURTHER READING
Muntigl, P., Weiss, G., and Wodak, R. (2000) European Union Discourses on Un/Employment: An
Interdisciplinary Approach to Employment Policymaking and Organisational Change. Amsterdam:
Benjamins.
This book presents an interdisciplinary study of EU organizations which involved fieldwork, ethnography,
interviews and the analysis of written and oral data. This study cuts across CDA, sociology, political science and
European studies.
Reisigl, M. and Wodak, R. (2001) Discourse and Discrimination: Rhetorics of Racism and Antisemitism.
London, New York: Routledge.
A comprehensive presentation of the DHA, with case studies on racist, xenophobic and antisemitic rhetoric in the
postwar Austrian context.
Wodak, R. (1996) Disorders of Discourses. London: Longman.
A collection of case studies on organizational communication, framed in an integrated investigation of hospitals,
media and bureaucracies.
Wodak, R. (2009) ‘Politics as Usual’ – The Construction and Representation of Politics in Action.
Basingstoke: Palgrave.
A monograph which illustrates the kind of inter-and post-disciplinary research proposed in the DHA. The
‘backstage’ of politics is juxtaposed with the analysis of media soaps about politics and politicians.
Wodak, R. and Krzy anowski, M. (eds) (2008) Qualitative Discourse Analysis in the Social Sciences.
Basingstoke: Palgrave.
An introductory text for social scientists which focuses primarily on the analysis of diverse genres (press articles,
new media, documentaries, focus groups, interviews and broadcasts). The volume is particularly useful for non-
linguists.


Notes
1 See Habermas, 1996; Horkheimer and Adorno, 1969/1991 [1944].
2 Other approaches to CDA do not explicitly link ‘discourse’ with a macro-topic and more than one perspective
(see Reisigl, 2003: 91 ff.).
3 In three of the eight fields, we distinguish between attitudes, opinions and will. This distinction emphasizes the
difference in the emotional, cognitive and volitional dimensions.
4 Many of these strategies are illustrated in Reisigl and Wodak (2001). In this chapter, we will focus primarily on
nomination, predication and argumentation strategies.
5 The very first critical study which inspired the project on postwar antisemitism in Austria was Wodak et al.
(1985).
6 See IPCC, 2007a, p. 1, downloaded from www.ipcc.ch/pdf/assessment-report/ar4/syr/ar4_syr_topic1.pdf on 9
February 2008; IPCC, 2007b, p.6, downloaded from www.ipcc.ch/pdf/assessment-
report/ar4/syr/ar4_syr_topic2.pdf on 9 February 2008. See also Müller et al., 2007; Rahmstorf and Schellnhuber,
2007.
7 The German translation deviates from the English version on several points. The English translation of the
German title is: ‘Blue planet in green bonds. What is endangered: climate or freedom?’. The book has also been
translated into other languages.
8 The frequency of high-value words (miranda) such as ‘freedom’, ‘wealth’, ‘prosperity’ and ‘economic growth’
fits very well into Klaus’s (neo-)liberal ideology.
9 Here, the assertion that climate change cannot be influenced is mitigated by ‘probably’.
10 Klaus associates this fallacy with the fallacy of superficiality: if scientists don’t work seriously, but superficially,
their results are insignificant.
11 Klaus attempts to disparage this topos as a fallacy of numbers, i.e. a ‘myth of scientific consent’ (Klaus, 2007:
79).
12 See Reisigl (2003: 214–235); Reisigl and Wodak (2001: 81–85).
13 See, for example, Muntigl et al. (2000); Reisigl and Wodak (2001);Wodak et al. (1999) for such
comprehensive studies.


5
Checks and Balances: How Corpus Linguistics can Contribute to CDA
Gerlinde Mautner
Introduction
Key concepts and a worked example
Using a reference corpus to support interpretation: a second worked example
Summary and critique


Introduction
This chapter focuses on the role that corpus linguistics can play in CDA projects. It will
introduce readers to previous work in this area, explain basic concepts and techniques,
present two worked examples and encourage critical engagement with the methodology.
Those with previous experience of corpus linguistics will be aware that it is a
methodology that uses computer support – in particular, software called ‘concordance
programs’ – to analyse authentic, and usually very large, volumes of textual data. Its
potential usefulness for CDA, rather than for lexicography and grammar, may be less
familiar, though. Reflections on the potential of combining corpus linguistics and CDA go
back quite a long way now (e.g. Hardt Mautner, 1995), and in the 1997 edited volume on
discourse studies (V
an Dijk, 1997), de Beaugrande argued that ‘[l]arge corpuses offer
valuable support for the project of discourse analysis to return to authentic data’ (de
Beaugrande, 1997: 42). Still, none of the other contributors to that edition actually used
the method. Awareness of its potential does seem to be growing, however, and there has
been a spate of more recent CDA work using corpus linguistics (e.g. Baker and McEnery,
2005; Baker et al., 2007; Baker et al., 2008; Cotterill, 2001; Fairclough, 2000a; Mautner,
2007; Nelson, 2005; Orpin, 2005). Even so, it seems fair to say that the techniques of
corpus linguistics are not yet generally regarded as being at the core of CDA’s
methodological canon. That the present (second) edition of the volume includes this
chapter could thus be said to reflect a change in trend.
What, then, can one expect corpus linguistics to contribute to CDA? In a nutshell, the
potential of this methodology rests on three factors:
Corpus linguistics allows critical discourse analysts to work with much larger data
volumes than they can when using purely manual techniques.
In enabling critical discourse analysts to significantly broaden their empirical base,
corpus linguistics can help reduce researcher bias, thus coping with a problem to
which CDA is hardly more prone than other social sciences but for which it has
come in for harsh and persistent criticism (e.g. Widdowson, 1995, 2004).1
Corpus linguistics software offers both quantitative and qualitative perspectives on
textual data, computing frequencies and measures of statistical significance, as well
as presenting data extracts in such a way that the researcher can assess individual
occurrences 
of 
search 
words, 
qualitatively 
examine 
their 
collocational
environments, describe salient semantic patterns and identify discourse functions.
This chapter cannot offer detailed step-by-step guidance on project design and execution.
For that, there are other, and arguably more suitable, sources that readers may want to
turn to, notably Baker (2006) and McEnery et al. (2006). However, a few basics will be
covered in the following section, using original sample analyses as well as cross-


referencing existing work in this area. Throughout, the emphasis will be less on technical
detail than on enabling readers to make their own informed judgements on whether the
method is right for them. There are two worked examples: the first shows how a large
reference corpus can be mined for socially relevant information, establishing a
collocational profile of a key expression from the lexis of work, namely unemployed. The
second takes a single newspaper article as its starting point, and uses large-corpus data as
an aid in interpreting what appears to be a particularly ‘loaded’ expression from the
article – the adjective hard-working.
Both case studies are based on the assumption that language and the social are
inextricably, and dialectally, linked. In other words, the way in which labels, in this case
unemployed and hard-working, are used reflects social attitudes, perspectives and
categorizations. And the labels, in turn, shape the way in which social structures and
relationships are perceived. By referring to a person or group as unemployed, one cannot
help implying that being employed is the desired default, just as hard-working comes
with a host of positive connotations directly related to an essentially capitalist work
ethos.
Different approaches to discourse, and concomitant definitions of the term, exist in
abundance, as do various notions of what it means to carry out ‘critical analysis’ (see
Wodak, 2004: 198–199 and Wodak, 2006b for comprehensive overviews). The
perspective adopted in this chapter is functional and constructivist (as well as
unabashedly simple). Discourse is taken to refer to authentic texts used in multi-layered
environments to perform social functions. Analysing discourse is understood as the
systematic attempt to identify patterns in text, link them to patterns in the context, and vice
versa. Doing so critically means unveiling and challenging taken-for-granted assumptions
about language and the social, as well as recognizing discourse as a potentially powerful
agent in social change.
It will not have escaped readers’ attention that the title of this chapter contains two
hedging devices, one modal (can) and another lexical (contribute). These correspond to
two caveats which are worth spelling out right at the beginning. One is that the usefulness
or otherwise of this method, as of any other, depends crucially on recognizing what kinds
of research questions it is suitable for tackling. With corpus linguistics, the key limiting
factors are the capabilities of the software, as well as the features – mainly in terms of
composition and annotation – of the electronically held corpora that are used. At the
current state of play, and considering the limitations of those tools that are sufficiently
widely available, there is a very strong bias in favour of the individual lexical item and
clusters thereof. Put simply, ‘the word’ is the peg that everything else is hung on. It
follows that if the linguistic phenomenon you are interested in is in fact tied to, or at least
crystallizes around, discrete lexical items, then you are likely to find this method a boon
both as a practical and efficient time-saver, and as a powerful heuristic tool helping to
clear pathways to discovery. If, on the other hand, the phenomenon to be focused on is
one that is played out on a larger textual stage, and with varying and unpredictable lexical


realizations, then corpus linguistic methods will be of little or no help. However, at some
point or other, as soon as questions of micro-level linguistic realization are addressed,
even projects located very much at the macro end of the CDA spectrum will have
occasion to benefit from a corpus linguistic approach.
The second caveat, related to the ‘contributing’ role of corpus linguistics, is that we
need to recall one of the principal tenets of what might be termed ‘mainstream’ CDA
(broadly, the traditions shaped by Fairclough, Wodak and V
an Dijk 2), namely that the
analyst must, precisely, look beyond the text proper in order to unearth socially
meaningful interpretations that can then be enlisted to do socially transformative work.
We need our much-famed ‘context’, history, and as firm a grasp as possible of the
politics, in the widest sense, that have a bearing on the production and reception of the
text. This social hinterland and the textual evidence before us are intricately linked, but
rarely in a fully transparent, one-to-one type of relationship; hence the idea of making
corpus linguistics ‘contribute’ to CDA rather than it ‘doing CDA’ of its own accord. All
the same, at an Oscar night of methods, my vote would be on corpus linguistics as Best
Supporting Actor, and the present chapter sets out to make the case for that award.
In addition, there is the added benefit that if you decide to include corpus linguistic
methods in your CDA project design, you need not in fact discard, ‘unlearn’ or in any
other way throw overboard whatever more traditional methods you have grown
accustomed to using. As an ancillary method, corpus linguistics is flexible and
unobtrusive, and if handled appropriately, will enrich but not prejudice the rest of the
research design or the interpretation of the results.
Key concepts and a worked example
As with any method, researchers will want to know, first and foremost, what it can do,
what kind of data and research questions it is suitable for, and what obstacles may be
encountered when applying it. These are the concerns of the present section.
Concordancing software
Programs known as concordancers do not, by themselves, ‘produce’ analyses, but
perform operations on text that make it easier for humans to analyse it. Some of the
information that concordancers provide is quantitative, such as absolute and relative
word frequencies. Programs also compute measures that indicate the relative statistical
significance of the co-occurrence of items. Examples here are t-scores, which capture
certainty of collocation, and MI (‘mutual information’) scores, which tell us about the
strength of the bond between two items, that is, whether there is a higher-than-random
probability of the two items occurring together (Church and Hanks, 1990; Clear, 1993:


281; Hunston, 2002: 73; McEnery and Wilson, 2001: 86).3
To see how this works in practice, let us have a look at the first worked example of
this chapter: building a collocational profile of the adjective unemployed. Although this
serves as a stand-alone case study here, with a focus on method rather than content, it
could also form the nucleus of a substantive contribution to the existing body of
discourse-analytic research on unemployment (see Muntigl et al., 2000 and the 2002
special issue of Text4). As we shall see, the corpus linguistic approach allows the
researcher to work with enormous amounts of data and yet get a close-up on linguistic
detail: a ‘best-of-both-worlds’ scenario hardly achievable through the use of purely
qualitative CDA, pragmatics, ethnography or systemic functional analysis.
Given the key role that the mass media play in constructing social reality, a corpus of
newspaper articles would appear to be a suitable starting point. Wordbanks Online,5 a
multi-genre corpus of more than 500 million words of mainly British and American text,
includes a nearly 60-million-word corpus of articles from the British daily newspaper
The Times. This is the subcorpus we will turn to first. The search reveals that The Times
corpus contains 567 instances of unemployed. Table 5.1 gives the ten collocates with the
highest t-scores and MI scores respectively.6
The t-score part of the table is headed, as is invariably the case, by high-frequency
grammatical items. Here, these are an and are, with who, and and for not far behind.
Such ‘function’ words, devoid of separate meaning as they are, tend not to be as
interesting to discourse analysts as to grammarians, and it is generally safe in a CDA
setting to ignore them and indeed the whole t-score rank scale. Somewhat unusually
though, the ‘top ten’ by t-score here includes five content words (people, term, long,
million and workers), with the presence of both long and term probably being due to the
phrase long-term unemployed. Comparing this with the collocation list of two other,
randomly picked adjectives, happy and sad,7 we can see how unusual it is for content
words to appear so high up in the t-score rank scale: the group of top ten in the t-score list
for happy, for example, contains no content word at all, and the one for sad includes only
one (the intensifier very). For lexical items to be in the same t-score league as
grammatical ones points to a high degree of what one might call patterned bonding; that is,
of a lexical connection so formulaic that the degree of certainty with which it occurs
equals that of patterns involving grammatical items. Translated into CDA terms, the
‘phrase-ness’ of a noun group referring to people could point to the solidified discursive
construction of a social group (a necessary first step towards stereotyping).
TABLE 5.1 t-scores and MI scores for collocates of unemployed in The Times corpus of Wordbanks Online


Turning now to the right half of Table 5.1, which lists the top ten collocates according
to ‘Mutual Information’ scores, we can see which social attributes being unemployed is
associated 
with: unemployable, disadvantaged 
and homeless. Frequent nominal
collocates include several labels for marginalized, dependent and economically inactive
social groups: househusband, housewives, youths, pensioners, claimants.8 In a full-
blown study, rather than one done for demo purposes only, each of these high-frequency
collocates would be interesting entry points to the corpus. For example, it would be
worth looking at what kind of activities ‘unemployed youths’ are seen to engage in (by
running a search of unemployed youths followed by a verb form), how the usage of
househusband and housewife compares, how unemployed is linked syntactically to the
negative adjectives it frequently collocates with, how quantification (cf. the collocate 4m)
contributes to establishing the unemployed as a problem group, and so on.
These sorts of questions lead us to another feature of concordance programs, one that a
discourse analyst with a predominantly qualitative mindset might get more mileage out of
than frequencies and statistics: their eponymous capacity to produce concordances. These
are extracts from the corpus, displayed in such a way that the search word or phrase (also
referred to as the ‘node’) appears in the middle of a line. The text that the extract comes
from can be accessed at all times and with a simple operation such as a double mouse
click or selecting an option from a menu bar. Accessible co-texts vary from just over 500
characters (e.g. with Wordbanks Online) to full texts (e.g. with Wordsmith Tools). Lines
can be sorted alphabetically: for example, according to the word immediately preceding
or following the search word. When sorted like this, the collocational environment of the
search word can be assessed rapidly, with frequent patterns standing out clearly. As
shown in Table 5.2, for example, the concordance of unemployed followed by and and
another adjective shows up a preponderance of items (six out of a total of nine) with a
negative 
semantic 
load: desperate, 
disadvantaged, 
divorced, 
homeless 
and
unemployable (which occurs twice).
TABLE 5.2 Occurrences of unemployed, followed by and and another adjective, in The Times corpus of
Wordbanks Online


To make sure that this semantic pattern is not just confined to newspaper discourse, it
is worth checking the corresponding data from the British spoken corpus. The picture is in
fact very similar (Table 5.3).
TABLE 5.3 Occurrences of unemployed, followed by and and another adjective, in the British spoken corpus of
Wordbanks Online
These results are further confirmed if we extend the search to the complete 500+
million word corpus of Wordbanks Online. The adjectives joined to unemployed include
more occurrences of the items already identified in the two subcorpora (see Tables 5.2
and 5.3) as well as new and similarly negative collocates such as angry, demoralized,
destitute, disabled, dreary, drunk, excluded, poor, struggling  and underprivileged. By
examining concordances, therefore, we can see more or less at a glance that the search
word, unemployed, has a so-called negative ‘semantic aura’, or ‘semantic prosody’
(Hunston, 2004: 157; Louw, 1993; Partington, 2004). Alternatively, readers of this
volume will be interested to note, this concept has been referred to as ‘discourse
prosody’, for example by Stubbs (2001: 65), in order to emphasize its role in expressing
attitudes and in establishing coherence.
Detractors of corpus-based methods could argue, of course, that one hardly needs a
huge database of text and sophisticated software to ‘prove’ that being unemployed is not a
pleasant thing. On the other hand, we should not forget, first, that a fair proportion of any
empirical work is devoted, precisely, to finding evidence for the intuitively obvious.
Second, some insights may appear ‘obvious’ after having emerged from data but were
nothing of the kind before. Supposedly neutral words such as cause or provide, to use one
of Stubbs’s examples, can in fact be heavily skewed in terms of their evaluative content
when concordance evidence is examined. Patterns are revealed that are not easily
accessible even to native speakers’ intuition: cause, it turns out, collocates predominantly
with unpleasant events, such as damage, death, disease or trouble, whereas provide
occurs with desirable things, such as care, help, money or service (Stubbs, 2001: 65).
Thus, if a speaker or writer uses provide, that choice in itself implies that what is
provided is being presented as good rather than bad. Third, the concordancer does more


than highlight the evaluative polarity, be it good or bad, of an item’s collocational
environment. Collocates may also turn out to belong to a class of words that share a
semantic feature, that is, the search word may have a particular ‘semantic preference’
(Stubbs, 2001: 88). For example, Baker (2006: 79, 87) concludes from corpus evidence
that refugees has a semantic preference for quantification, collocating frequently with
numbers and phrases such as more and more (see also Baker and McEnery, 2005). In a
study using a similar approach, Mautner (2007) shows that elderly often co-occurs with
items from the domains of care, disability and vulnerability. By the same token, if we
return to our concordance output related to unemployed and its coordinated adjectives,
we can see that, broadly speaking, these denote either social states (e.g. available for
work, excluded, immigrant, nomadic, unemployable, unpaid), negative emotions (e.g.
angry, bored, depressed ), or indeed a condition at the interface of both (unloved). The
collocational profile thus points to the twin nature of unemployment as a social
phenomenon with a manifestly psychological impact on individuals.
Taken together, then, semantic preference and discourse prosody show us what kinds of
social issues a particular lexical item is bound up in, and what attitudes are commonly
associated with it. Importantly, collocational patterns are not merely instantiated in text,
but also cling to the lexical items themselves. ‘Words which are co-selected’, Tognini-
Bonelli (2001: 111) reminds us, ‘do not maintain their independence. If a word is
regularly used in contexts of good news or bad news or judgement, for example, it carries
this kind of meaning around with it’.
Finally, some software packages, such as Wordsmith Tools, allow the analyst to
compare word lists compiled from different corpora, determining which words are
statistically more frequent ‘keywords’ in a corpus (Baker, 2006: 125; Baker et al., 2008:
278; Mulderrig, 2006: 123). Fairclough’s (2000a) study, for example, focuses on the
keywords of New Labour – words, that is, that are more frequent in New Labour material
than in earlier Labour texts, and more frequent, too, than in general corpora (Fairclough,
2000a: 17).
To sum up, concordancing software offers the above features which are useful for CDA
applications (see Table 5.4).
TABLE 5.4 Tools and types of linguistic evidence provided by concordance software
Quantitative
evidence
Frequency lists
Comparisons of wordlists, giving information on relative frequency
(‘keyness’)
Measures of statistical significance:
t-score


‘Mutual Information’ (MI) score
Qualitative
evidence
Concordance lines sorted alphabetically, enabling the researcher to
identify:
semantic preference
semantic prosody
Corpus design issues
These days, when linguists talk about a corpus, they generally refer to ‘a collection of (1)
machine-readable (2) authentic texts […] which is (3) sampled to be (4) representative
of a particular language or language variety’ (McEnery et al., 2006: 5, original italics).
Let us look at each of these four characteristics in turn, with an eye to whatever specific
implications they may have for applications in CDA.
Machine readability is the obvious prerequisite for analysing language with the
concordancing software described in the previous section. This sounds straightforward
enough, but when it is coupled with the second feature – authenticity – issues of data
quality arise that critical discourse analysts will want to address. Standard concordancers
need ‘plain text’ files, stripped of formatting, layout and accompanying visuals. While
traditional lexico-syntactic research does not see this as a loss, critical discourse analysts
will (or should). After all, it is one of the foundational assumptions of discourse analysis,
whether of the critical persuasion or not, that meaning-making works simultaneously on
several levels, including the non-verbal. Elements of textual design, including typography,
colour and text–image relationships, are not merely embellishments, but play an integral
role in making text function as socially situated discourse (van Leeuwen, in this volume).
The semiotic reduction that concordancing inevitably entails (Koller and Mautner, 2004)
need not jeopardize the validity of one’s analyses, but there ought to be adequate
safeguards to ensure that whatever is lost along the way can be salvaged at a later stage.
In mundanely practical terms, this means collecting and storing hard-copy or scanned
originals for future reference, to be drawn upon should multimodality become an issue.
Likewise, audio or video recordings of spoken data ought to be preserved, so that
contextual clues lost through transcription and conversion into machine-readable format
can be retrieved if and when necessary.
As far as criteria (3) and (4) are concerned – sampling and representativeness – the
requirements for ensuring methodological rigour are basically no different here than they
are for other approaches (see Mautner, 2008). The first step is to identify the ‘universe of
possible texts’ (Titscher et al., 2000: 33), while the second involves sampling. This can


be random (i.e. done by first numbering the texts in the ‘universe’ and then selecting those
with the numbers that a random number generator has picked out). Alternatively, it may be
guided by criteria that are applied systematically and, in a top-down selection process,
narrow down the corpus to a manageable size (e.g. ‘take one article about Topic A from
newspapers B and C published each week between dates X and Y’). There is a third
sampling method, common in qualitative research but unlikely to be suitable for corpus
linguistic work, which uses a cyclical process, building a small and homogeneous corpus,
then analysing it and adding to it on the basis of the first results (Bauer and Aarts, 2000:
31). The process is repeated until ‘saturation’ has been reached – a situation, that is,
where adding new data does not yield any new representations (Bauer and Aarts, 2000:
34). The problem with this procedure from a corpus linguist’s point of view is the flip
side of what makes it appealing to the purely qualitative researcher: that you stop
collecting data as soon as what you find is simply more of the same. In corpus linguistics,
the frequency of an item or structure is taken to be a key indicator of its significance. If
you stop adding text to your corpus as soon as repetition becomes apparent, you are
effectively closing off any frequency-based line of inquiry. This may well be an
acceptable decision to take in a particular project; after all, the qualitative analysis of
concordance lines is as important and valuable as the quantitative inquiry that
concordancing software allows. But it would have to be a decision taken with full
awareness of the loss involved. Certainly, care must be taken not to indulge in hasty
judgements about what can be excluded from the corpus on the grounds that it is ‘similar’
to what is already there. Such rashness can easily defeat the whole purpose of the corpus-
building exercise, the point of which is, in a sense, to outwit the analyst who may be
tempted to know the data before rather than after the analysis.
Summing up, corpus design involves the following issues (Figure 5.1):
FIGURE 5.1 Corpus characteristics and issues of corpus design


Types of corpora and data capture
Corpora come in many shapes and sizes. There are huge, multi-million-word corpora
such as The British National Corpus9 (BNC) and Wordbanks Online, from which the
unemployed example in the previous section was taken. These are ready-made,
commercially available, and each comes with bespoke software unique to it (usually a
source of frustration if you want to use both corpora simultaneously). Both were the result
of large-scale projects spanning many years and involving teams of linguists and
computer experts. In CDA, such corpora are ideal for painting on a very large canvas,
investigating how broader social issues are reflected in the genres and discourses
represented in the corpus (such as fiction, newspapers and spoken dialogue). This
approach is used in studies such as those of Krishnamurthy (1996) on racism and Mautner
(2007) on ageism.
At the other end of the spectrum, there are much smaller, ‘do-it-yourself’ (DIY)
corpora (McEnery et al., 2006: 71), purpose-built by individual researchers or small
teams to investigate specific research questions. Issues of size apart, corpora may also be
classified according to whether they are synchronic, reflecting a language variety at any
given point in time, or diachronic, reflecting historical development. They can be general,
including a wide variety of genres and media, or specialized, focusing on a particular
genre (e.g. corporate mission statements), a particular medium and topic (e.g. web-based
texts on disability rights), a particular genre and topic (e.g. parliamentary speeches on
global warming), or a particular topic in various genres and media (e.g. the ‘Evolution
vs. Creationism’ debate in sermons, newspaper articles and web logs). Corpora may also
differ in terms of which meta-linguistic information is encoded with the text. Critical
discourse analysts will be particularly keen to insert codes describing extratextual
information (a procedure known as ‘corpus mark-up’), such as text type, speakers’ or
writers’ sociolinguistic characteristics, or indeed any feature that is relevant for a
particular research question. Mark-up plays a key role in allowing the analyst to relate the
examples shown up by corpus searches back to their original contextual environments
(McEnery et al., 2006: 22–23). In addition, corpora may have undergone what is called
‘annotation’, a process of inserting, for example, parts-of-speech tags, prosodic or
semantic information (Baker, 2006: 38–42). Table 5.5 summarizes the main types of
corpora.
TABLE 5.5 Main types of corpora


In building corpora of any size, the World Wide Web has emerged as a key resource.
With the exception of spontaneous spoken language (which, admittedly, is a very
significant exception), the web offers a huge variety of text and sheer unlimited amounts
of it. Cut-and-paste procedures have greatly facilitated the process referred to as ‘data
capture’ (Baker, 2006: 31–38; McEnery et al., 2006: 73). As a result, corpora running to
hundreds of thousands of words can be assembled within the space of a few weeks. (On
the copyright issues involved, see McEnery et al., 2006: 77–79.) More importantly still,
this can be done by individual scholars without the help of battalions of research staff,
access to whom is normally dependent on massive research grants and/or a position high
up in the institutional pecking order. Seen from this angle, enlisting corpus methods also
has a democratizing effect on critical research.
Thus, in terms of sheer corpus availability, most critical discourse analysts’ interests
will be catered for by the web (which makes it all the more surprising that until very
recently, only comparatively few CDA projects were actually based on online material –
see Mautner, 2005). Yet in spite of this new abundance, many of the old questions remain,
which brings us back to the design issues raised in the previous section. Modern
technology may have reduced the manual drudgery of corpus-building, but not the need for
brainpower to make the right choices. To recap briefly, the key issues involved – all of
them well known from traditional corpus-gathering – are: first, ensuring an adequate fit
between the corpus and the research question(s) to be tackled, and, second, the triangle of
issues concerning corpus size, homogeneity and representativeness.
Using a reference corpus to support interpretation: a second worked
example
It is true, as the previous section explained, that corpus linguistic methods can be applied
either to smaller, purpose-built corpora or to large reference corpora. Nonetheless,
critical discourse analysts are likely to get most mileage out of a combination of the two
approaches. Arguably, the smaller your own corpus, the more important it becomes to


validate interpretations by checking them against evidence from larger corpora. We might
feel, for example, that a certain word or phrase is used in a particular text because it
carries a particular evaluative load, but is this borne out by data from a reference corpus
reflecting general language use? What kind of collocational ‘baggage’ do words
occurring in the text carry in wider universes of discourse? It is through comparative
evidence from large corpora that suspicions can be confirmed or rejected, thus
safeguarding against ‘overinterpretation and underinterpretation’ (O’Halloran and Coffin,
2004). It has to be conceded, of course, that making sense of this comparative evidence
still involves acts of interpretation on the part of the analyst. Neither the quantitative nor
the qualitative evidence that large corpora lay before us speaks for itself and to claim that
it does so would be seriously misguided or, at the very least, naive. On the other hand,
surely, any improvement in CDA’s empirical credentials ought to be welcome, tempered
though it may be by the sobering realization that completely mechanized discourse
analysis is impossible. Or, were it possible, it would cease to be critical.
The idea of comparative evidence is illustrated by the second worked example. It
relates to a column in the British popular daily the Sun (25 July 2007), published at a
time when major floods were devastating large areas in central England. The headline
reads ‘It’s time to turn off the spongers’ money tap’ (with spongers, or scroungers,
referring to people who receive money but do nothing in return). The article is built
around the contrast between the lives of ‘hard-working people’ whose homes have been
destroyed by the flood in Gloucestershire, and a family with 12 children from Berkshire
(the scrounging Gillespies) who have been given a new council house paid for by the
hard-working taxpayer. The father of the family is quoted as saying, ‘if it was
economical for me to work then I would do’. A benefits system producing such attitudes,
the article demands, ought to be changed; also, foreign aid should be put on hold ‘until
our national crisis is sorted out’ (original italics). There are two large pictures, one of a
flooded house in Gloucester, and a second of the Gillespies’ £500,000 council home,
which has a small inset showing the couple surrounded by their 12 children. Addressing
politicians from both government and opposition, the columnist pleads: ‘The hard-
working people of Britain should come first’.
Like many opinion pieces in the popular press, this column develops a stark black-and-
white dichotomy, pitting ‘us’ against ‘them’. ‘Us’ refers to the grafting taxpayer (with
grafting being a colloquial British expression meaning ‘hard-working’), whose hard-
earned home has been flooded, whereas ‘they’ are the blatantly idle Gillespies of this
world and, less prominently, recipients of development aid in Africa. In establishing the
‘we’ group, the adjective hard-working clearly plays a central role. In an article of
around 1300 words, it occurs five times. In four of these instances, hard-working is part
of a noun group which includes at least one other ingroup marker (people of Britain,
British taxpayers, our own people, the communities). The occurrences, quoted below,
are spread fairly evenly throughout the text, contributing to its cohesion:


1. … there’s only one basic rule to remember: the hard-working people of Britain
should come first.
2. Yet frankly, when the hard-working British taxpayers need them most, our
politicians look as washed up as the million-plus doormats floating around the
streets.
3. … not to mention the indirect £8 billion of our taxes the PM [Prime Minister] has
recently pledged to Africa. But when our own hard-working people are in trouble,
there should be an instant amnesty on all other benevolent activity until our national
crisis is sorted out [original italics].
4. There’s more rain on the way, so I suggest Brown [= the Prime Minister], Cameron
[= the Leader of the Opposition] et al. get their galoshes on and show they care
about the blighted, hard-working communities (…) [original italics].
5. … the skewed thinking that the hard-working taxpayer is a cash cow only to be
milked and never fed.
On this evidence, it would be fair to claim that in this text, hard-working does
ideological work, establishing a ‘we’ group and attributing a positive quality to it. But
then, what is it about hard-working, exactly, that makes it such a powerfully positive
label? And is this evaluative load true of general language use, or specific to certain
discourses? In other words, is there a specifically ‘tabloid’ attitude towards ‘hard-
working’ people?
Let us see what the Wordbanks reference corpus has to say. First of all, the collocation
list for hard-working from the total 500+ million-word corpus, ordered by ‘mutual
information’ score, reveals a long list of other positive adjectives. Picking out those that
also have double-digit joint frequencies (that is, not only exhibit a strong collocational
bond with hard-working, evident through an MI score of five or above, but also occur at
least ten times), we arrive at the following list (see Table 5.6).
TABLE 5.6 Collocates of hard-working in the total 500+ million-word Wordbanks corpus, with joint frequencies
of at least 10 and MI scores of at least 5


Some of these are fairly closely related to the idea of working hard or in a particularly
focused manner (industrious, conscientious, dedicated, disciplined, ambitious, skilled),
but others refer to very general attributes that are quite independent of the domain of
employment: honest, loyal, sincere, decent and caring. There is a semantic preference
for character traits, and the semantic aura is unequivocally positive. To find that there is a
statistically significant collocational bond between these adjectives and hard-working
means that when someone is described as ‘hard-working’, there is a higher than random
possibility that one of these other, non-work-related qualities will appear in close
proximity. For each of these collocates, of course, we need to check what the syntactic
relationship with hard-working is, because ‘being close’ could also mean ‘close and
linked through but’, in which case the other adjective would be expressing a contrast, not
a confirmation, of the virtues implied in hard work (cf. the hypothetical, not attested,
phrase hard-working but caring). However, it can be established easily by examining the
relevant concordances – such as the one for decent, which is given in Table 5.7 – that the
‘virtuous’ adjectives are linked to hard-working through and or a comma and do in fact
refer to the same individuals or groups of people. In addition to showing how hard-
working 
and decent (highlighted in bold capitals) are related syntactically and
semantically when they appear together, the following concordance also reveals a number
of other positive attributes in close proximity (highlighted in bold), some with distinctly
moralizing overtones (e.g. honest family man, genuine and Christian, self-sacrificing).
Such instances of collocation – repeated, statistically significant and attested across a
multi-million-word corpus – ‘provide objective, empirical evidence for evaluative
meanings’, and these meanings ‘are not merely personal and idiosyncratic, but widely
shared in a discourse community’ (Stubbs, 2001: 215). Effectively, the frequent
collocates of a word become part of its meaning. Thus, by drawing on corpus-based
collocational information, a discourse analyst can replace his or her individual, intuitive
judgement on evaluative meaning with shared assumptions and judgements.
TABLE 5.7 Co-occurrence of hard-working and decent in the 500+ million-word Wordbanks Online corpus


In further attempting to put the use of hard-working in this Sun article into perspective,
another angle worth looking at is to see how it is used in a newspaper catering for a
different readership. The relevant subcorpus that Wordbanks Online offers is the nearly
60 million words from the British daily The Times. Whereas more than 60 per cent of the
Sun’s readers are in the C2, D and E social grades, 89 per cent of The Times’ readers
belong to the A/B/C1 socioeconomic group.10 The results (Table 5.8) show that hard-
working occurs more than twice as often in the Sun (in relative terms, that is, per million
words) than it does in The Times.
TABLE 5.8 Frequency of hard-working in the Sun and Times subcorpora of Wordbanks Online


Furthermore, although the lists of high-frequency collocates appear to be rather similar
in the two subcorpora, containing many of the items that showed up when we examined
the whole 500-million-word corpus (see Table 5.6), two differences between the Sun’s
and The Times’ collocation lists do stand out. One is that honest and decent, though
present in both lists, are relatively more frequent in the Sun corpus.11 The other is that the
collocation list for hard-working in the Sun includes a collocate – the one with the
highest MI score, in fact – that is not present in The Times’ list at all: abiding. Switching
from the collocation list to concordance mode, we can see that all six occurrences of
abiding are due to law-abiding being one of the positive attributes closely associated
with hard-working (Table 5.9).
TABLE 5.9 Co-occurrence of hard-working and law-abiding in the Sun corpus of Wordbanks Online
The social construction involved in this collocational link, rather than any ‘objective’
semantic association, could hardly be more obvious. After all, it is perfectly possible to
be ‘lazy’ and abide by the law, or work a very busy 70-hour week dedicated to breaking
it. Incidentally, taken by itself, law-abiding is also considerably more frequent in the Sun
(145 instances, or 3.2 occurrences per million words) than in The Times (111 instances,
or 1.86 per million).
Summing up, and relating the evidence back to the article that made us turn to the
reference corpus for support, we can draw the following conclusions:
Hard-working is much more than a descriptive label. Its semantic preference and
prosody, evident in the concordance lines, indicate that it is part and parcel of a
moralizing discourse, linking hard work with positive attributes such as decency,
honesty, loyalty, family values and the like.
These patterns are relatively more prominent in the popular, working-class tabloid
the Sun than they are in The Times, which caters for a predominantly middle-class
readership.
In a critical discourse analysis of a text using hard-working, a good case can
therefore be made for arguing that the contribution of hard-working to the overall
meaning of the text is based partly on the ideological baggage that the word carries,
and that this, in turn, is derived from attested patterns of usage in larger universes of
discourse.
Large-corpus evidence thus provides ‘checks and balances’ by opening a window on


values and attitudes present throughout a discourse community rather than held only by
individual researchers.
Summary and critique
Corpus linguistics has a lot to offer to CDA. It helps researchers cope with large amounts
of textual data, thus bolstering CDA’s empirical foundations, reducing researchers’ bias
and enhancing the credibility of analyses. On the other hand, critical discourse analysts
ought to be self-confident enough to assert that, conversely, corpus linguistics is enriched
by being applied to research questions inspired by social concerns, such as power,
inequality and change. Ultimately, through their ‘theoretical and methodological cross-
pollination’ (Baker et al., 2008: 297), both CDA and corpus linguistics ought to benefit.
Combining the two approaches typically involves the following steps:
compiling an electronically held corpus that allows the investigation of research
questions arising from social issues
running the corpus through concordancing software that compiles frequency lists,
identifies keywords and reveals statistically significant collocations
analysing concordances qualitatively in order to establish the dominant semantic
preferences and prosodies of lexical items relevant to the social issues under
investigation
putting the results from the purpose-built corpus into perspective by comparing them
with evidence gleaned from large reference corpora.
Alternatively, a multi-million-word reference corpus may itself serve as the starting
point, allowing researchers to build collocational profiles of socially contested lexical
items across a wide range of genres, media and geographical areas.
In spite of the clear benefits involved, there are some areas of potential concern, which
I will deal with in turn under five headings (Figure 5.2).
1. The skills gap and lack of standardization
This is a practical rather than a substantive issue, and may well disappear over time. At
the time of writing, though, it still looms rather large. To anyone advocating the
integration of corpus linguistics into mainstream CDA, it is quite tempting to downplay
the effort involved and make reassuring noises along the lines of ‘it’s not rocket science’.
Indeed it isn’t, but there is no denying the fact that becoming a confident user takes time
and effort. Not much, perhaps, for the mundane task of learning to master the tools; but


certainly a significant amount in order to develop the type of mindset that can appreciate
the potential of the method, recognize its limitations, hone your analytical skills and refine
your discovery procedures, so that ultimately you are able to fashion your research
designs accordingly.
FIGURE 5.2 Using corpus linguistics in CDA: key areas of concern
The continuing reluctance of many discourse analysts to become involved may well be
due in part to the deplorable lack of standardization within corpus linguistics. The British
National Corpus and Wordbanks Online, to use just two examples of multi-million-word
corpora, do not use the same software. The same is true of the various concordancing
packages available for analysing DIY corpora (such as Wordsmith Tools or Monoconc
Pro). Search commands differ, screens differ, analytical tools differ: not a happy state of
affairs if all you want to do is get on with the job.
2. Institutional barriers
The second point is related to the first, but located on the institutional rather than the
individual level. Critical discourse analysts and computer linguists do not necessarily
work in the same departments and, if they do, may not communicate well with each other.
They often go to different conferences and publish in different journals. As a junior
researcher, you are likely to be socialized into either the one methodology or the other,
but rarely into both. As most linguists know, but not all care to admit, it is often early
exposure to a particular methodology, rather than any inherent merits this may have, that
tends to bias one’s methodological choices for a long time.
At the risk of launching into after-dinner-speech mode, this is the moment to call for
more communication between critical discourse analysts and computer linguists. This
should not, I hasten to add, stop at CDA people begging for IT support, realistic though
this image may be, but should also lead to corpus linguists picking their CDA colleagues’
brains on how best to sharpen their computing tools so that they deliver the optimum
value for applications in socially relevant, applied discourse studies. Existing reference


corpora, too, could profit from some overhauling in that respect. In Wordbanks, for
example, source referencing – such a key factor in determining context – is notoriously
deficient.
3. Resisting temptation in data collection
Whereas the first and second issues related to potential hurdles encountered by those new
to the method, the third centres on the need to curb the enthusiasm of the newly converted.
We saw earlier that the World Wide Web and electronic processing have made for
temptingly laden data tables. And indeed, being able to assemble and analyse large
corpora is a key element in defusing the ‘cherry-picking’ charges frequently levelled at
CDA. Generally speaking, corpus size undoubtedly boosts representativeness, and this, in
turn, enhances the validity of analysts’ claims. On the other hand, as is so often the case, a
technological advance comes with strings attached. Somewhat paradoxically, the ease
with which corpora can be assembled can prove to be at once overwhelming and
tempting for the analyst, novice and seasoned researcher alike. They may well react like a
glutton at an all-you-can-eat diner, guzzling data ‘food’ indiscriminately without due
regard for the principles of discerning composition, be it of a menu or of a corpus. In our
case, these will revolve, as ever, around questions such as: what kinds of texts are most
likely to allow me to answer my research questions? Is the selection of texts which make
up my corpus reasonably representative of the ‘universe of discourse’ that is ‘out there’?
None of these questions, and the principles underlying them, have ceased to be relevant. If
anything, they have become more pressing, precisely because of the embarras de
richesses surrounding the analyst engaged in corpus-building. Amid the bewildering
surplus of easily storable text, it has become easier to lose sight of the need for constant
reflexivity, even in the early stages of a project, and particularly with regard to what
should go into the corpus. This is not a plea for allowing too much biased selectivity too
soon; if it were, it would amount to reverting to the very ‘cherry-picking’ procedure that a
corpus-based approach wishes to counteract (and which is why cyclical corpus-building
up to saturation was rejected in our discussion of sampling). The point is, rather, that
critical discourse analysts putting corpora together should, quite simply, not get carried
away.
4. Decontextualized data
The fourth area of concern, mentioned earlier but worth restating here, relates to the fact
that both the input to and output from concordancing software is decontextualized,
semiotically reduced language. Although programs allow instant access to wider co-texts
or even the full texts that the concordance lines come from, a considerable amount of non-
verbal information is lost when text is transferred to machine-readable form. Corpus


mark-up can help compensate up to a point but, with the current state of technological
development and commercial availability, it is impossible to run concordancing software
while preserving the full textual integrity of the original. This is an area, therefore, where
the idea of ‘checks and balances’ needs to work the other way round, with the analyst
having to make sure that whatever information concordancers cannot deal with, such as
typography and pictures, remains accessible somewhere and is not entirely and
irretrievably lost to the analysis.
In this context, we ought also to remind ourselves that concordancing software is
biased towards the discrete lexical unit. Larger-scale discursive phenomena, such as
argumentative patterns, may be captured through corpus linguistic techniques, but only if
they crystallize systematically around certain words, phrases or lexico-semantic patterns.
Finally, and precisely because corpus linguistics has this fantastic potential for
focusing on linguistic detail, there is a need to guard against becoming so engrossed in
building collocational profiles of ideologically loaded individual words that the bigger
picture is lost. There is a fine line between an eye for detail and myopia. Returning
briefly to the hard-working example in the previous section: were this part of a full-
blown study, it would of course be insufficient merely to look at hard-working (central
though it is to this newspaper article). In addition, one would not only have to explore the
full range of synonyms and related expressions that the article uses, but would also have
to delve deeper into the history, politics and social psychology of wage labour and the
work ethic.
5. Language innovation
The fifth issue to be borne in mind is that large and static reference corpora, such as the
BNC and Wordbanks Online, are useless for investigating developments at the sharp end
of language. Where social change is at its fastest – and arguably of keenest interest to
CDA – these corpora fall silent. Youth culture, advertising and code-switching varieties
emerging among new immigrant populations would be cases in point. For such
applications, building ad-hoc DIY corpora is the only solution.
Essentially, the last four areas of concern all relate to the same issue: the need for a
realistic assessment of a method’s potential. Our metaphorical tools for setting to work on
text are subject to very much the same limitations as tools in a literal sense. It makes as
much, or as little, sense to criticize corpus linguistic methods for not permitting more
contextually embedded analysis, or a static, ten-year-old corpus for being silent on the
latest neologisms, as it does to criticize a screwdriver for being no good at hammering in
nails.
What is more, it can be tempting to expect computer-based methods to work miracles
and to obscure or even compensate for flaws elsewhere in the research design. Put more
bluntly, if your sampling technique is faulty and your sample skewed, it will remain so


even when computerized, concordanced and subjected to every statistical procedure
under the sun. Similarly, if your choice of statistical techniques is such that the data are,
as Baker (2006: 179) graphically puts it, ‘subtly “massaged”’ in order to produce the
desired results; if the analyst reports results selectively, or ignores inconvenient
concordance lines, then the fault lies not with their methodology but with their integrity.
Whatever the limitations of corpus linguistics, the complexity of discourse is such that
any change in perspective and any insight not otherwise available ought surely to be
welcome as additions to the methodological toolbox. On the other hand, we should not
forget that, in choosing methods, there is a rather thin dividing line between, on the one
hand, eclecticism that is imaginative and productive, and, on the other, aimless
patchworking, which is neither. Whether your research design ends up on the right side of
this divide depends crucially on (1) a clear statement of the aims of your project, (2) a
rigorous assessment of what each method can and cannot do, and (3) robust theoretical
foundations capturing core assumptions about language and the social. If deployed wisely,
corpus linguistics provides an enriching complement to qualitative CDA, aiding
discovery and adding analytical rigour. To return to the metaphor introduced earlier: even
an Oscar-winning supporting actor cannot rescue a bad film, but they can make a good
film great.
FURTHER READING
Baker, P. (2006) Using Corpora in Discourse Analysis. London and New York: Continuum.
This book is ideally suited for critical discourse analysts who are first-time users of corpus linguistic methods. It
combines theoretical background with hands-on advice and several worked examples.
McEnery, T., Xiao, R. and Yukio Tono, Y. (2006) Corpus-based Language Studies: An Advanced Resource
Book. London and New York: Routledge.
This book caters for both novice and more experienced researchers, proceeding from the basics to a section with
key readings from corpus-based language studies. In a third section, six extended case studies are presented,
covering areas as diverse as pedagogical lexicography, L2 acquisition, sociolinguistics, and contrastive and
translation studies.
Stubbs, M. (1996) Text and Corpus Analysis: Computer-assisted Studies of Language and Culture. Oxford
and Cambridge, MA: Blackwell.
Stubbs, M. (2001) Words and Phrases: Corpus Studies of Lexical Semantics. Oxford and Cambridge, MA:
Blackwell.
Both volumes are seminal classics. Although the author positions them, as their respective subtitles reveal, as
‘Computer-assisted Studies of Language and Culture’ and ‘Corpus Studies of Lexical Semantics’, rather than
CDA, they make essential reading for critical discourse analysts, and especially those who may be ‘challenged’ in
terms of empirical rigour.


Acknowledgement
Material from the Bank of English® reproduced with the kind permission of Harper
Collins Publishers Ltd.
Notes
1 This criticism, in turn, has been refuted strongly by, for example, Fairclough (1996) and Wodak (2006a: 606–
609).
2 See Fairclough (1992a); Fairclough (1995a); Fairclough and Wodak (1997); Toolan (2002); van Dijk (2007a);
Wodak (2006b); Wodak and Chilton (2005).
3 The MI score relates the observed frequency of a given co-occurring item within a certain collocational span to
the left and right of the search word to the expected frequency of the co-occurring item in that span (McEnery et
al., 2006: 56). For details of the statistical computation involved, see Matsumoto (2003: 398–399).
4 The issue in question is Text 22(3). See, in particular, Graham and Paulsen (2002); Muntigl (2002a); Wodak and
van Leeuwen (2002).
5 See www.collins.co.uk/books.aspx?group=154
6 The cut-off point above which measures are considered to indicate statistical significance is 2 for t-scores and 3
for MI scores (Hunston, 2002: 71–72).
7 On the basis of the same number of occurrences, 567, as in the unemployed example.
8 In this particular corpus, steelmen is not as promising a collocate to follow up as it looks, because all nine
occurrences refer to the film The Full Monty.
9 See www.natcorp.ox.ac.uk/
10 According to figures from the National Readership Survey, available at www.nrs.co.uk, accessed 9 August
2007.
11 In a million words, there are 0.3 occurrences of honest in the Sun (15 instances) and 0.1 in The Times (seven
instances). The figures for decent are 0.26 per million for the Sun (12 instances) and 0.06 for the Times (four
instances).


6
Discourse as the Recontextualization of Social Practice: A Guide
Theo van Leeuwen
Introduction
Theoretical background
Discourse and social practice
Social action


Introduction
The term ‘discourse’ is often used to mean an extended stretch of connected speech or
writing – a ‘text’. ‘Discourse analysis’ then means ‘the analysis of a text, or type of text’.
Here, I use it in a different sense, building on the work of Michel Foucault (e.g. 1977) and
defining discourses (note the plural) as socially constructed ways of knowing some
aspect of reality which can be drawn upon when that aspect of reality has to be
represented, or, to put it another way, context-specific frameworks for making sense of
things. In this chapter, I will use discourses of ‘leadership’ as an example. Clearly, there
are different conceptions of what a ‘leader’ is and does. The discourse of the ‘opinion
leader’, for instance, which was developed in the context of US public communication
research (Katz and Lazarsfeld, 1955) is one in which leaders are ‘first among equals’,
role models who provide examples for others to follow. Such leaders may never be
formally recognized as leaders, but they will influence what their peers think, say and do.
In other discourses, leaders are constructed as fundamentally different from ordinary
mortals, and said to rule by ‘divine right’. In his book on Nazi language, Klemperer
(2000/2006 [1957]: 111 ff.) documents how the Nazi ideology ‘again and again
underlined [Hitler’s] uniquely close relationship with the Godhead, his special status as
the chosen one, his special sonship, his religious mission’ (Klemperer, 2000/2006
[1957]: 111), but in recent times, too, we have seen leaders such as Bush and Blair claim
divine approval for their actions. Clearly, discourses of leadership have a long history.
The New Testament introduced the discourse of the leader as ‘shep-herd’, Plato’s
Republic the discourse of the ‘philosopher king’, with the leader as expert. And ever
since then, political thinkers, philosophers and others have struggled to balance people’s
need for freedom and persuasion with society’s need for guidance and some form of
coercion.
In this chapter, I argue that discourses are ultimately modeled on social practices, so
that, for instance, knowledge of what ‘leadership’ is, is ultimately based on what leaders
do. However, discourses will transform these doings, for instance by leaving out some of
the less palatable things leaders may do, or by representing, not just what leaders do, but
also why they do it, and, therefore, why their actions are to be seen as legitimate (cf. V
an
Leeuwen, 2007). And different discourses, different ways of making sense of the same
aspect of reality, will do all this in different ways, including and excluding different
things, and doing so in the service of different interests.
As I have said, in this chapter, the term ‘discourse’ will not be synonymous with the
term ‘text’. Yet, evidence for the existence of discourses will inevitably have to come
from texts, from what is said or written about ‘leadership’, for instance. More
specifically, it will have to come from the similarity between what is said and written
about a given aspect of reality in different texts that circulate in the same context. It is on
the basis of such similar statements, repeated or paraphrased in different texts, and


dispersed among these texts in different ways, that we can put the puzzle back together
and reconstruct the discourses texts draw on. This chapter introduces methods for just this
kind of reconstruction. After discussing the theoretical background of my approach to
discourse, I will show (1) how to use text analysis to piece together a discourse, and to
connect it to the practice from which it ultimately derives its meaning, and (2) how to
analyse the processes of transformation, or recontextualization (Bernstein, 1981, 1986),
that occur as practices are turned into discourses.
I will use a single example – an online leadership questionnaire for assessing the
performance of managers and executives. Called ‘V
oices’, it was designed by the US
company Lominger-International, and is used by companies and other organizations the
world over. The person to be assessed, referred to by Lominger as the ‘learner’,
nominates five people to assess him or her in each of four categories: ‘direct reports’ (i.e.
people he or she is supervising), ‘peers’, ‘customers’ and ‘others’. In addition, the
‘learner’ is assessed by his or her boss and by the ‘learner’ him-or herself. The selected
‘raters’ complete the ‘tool’ online, rating the ‘learner’ in terms of 30 ‘competencies’,
such as ‘hiring and staffing’, ‘interpersonal savvy’, ‘sizing up people’, ‘problem-
solving’, ‘confronting direct reports’, ‘drive for results’, ‘customer focus’, ‘integrity and
trust’, etc., and also in terms of 30 ‘career stoppers and stallers’ which are formulated in
terms of ‘overuse’ of these same competencies. Each ‘competency’ and each ‘stopper and
staller’ is glossed by a paragraph of description, for example:
Conflict Management – Steps up to conflicts, seeing them as opportunities; reads situations quickly; good at
focused listening; can hammer out tough agreements and settle disputes equitably; can find common ground and
get cooperation with minimum noise. This contrasts then to the following ‘stopper and staller’:
Overuse of Conflict Management – May be seen as overly aggressive and assertive; may get in the middle of
everyone else’s problems; may drive for a solution before others are ready; may have a chilling effect on open
debate; may spend too much time with obstinate people and unsolvable problems.
Both competencies and their ‘overuse’ are then rated on a five-point scale.
Competencies are rated as (a) ‘a towering strength’, (b) ‘talented’, (c) ‘skilled/OK’, (d)
‘weakness’ or (e) ‘serious issue’. ‘Overuse’ is rated as happening (a) ‘constantly’, (b)
‘much of the time’, (c) ‘some of the time’, (d) ‘every so often’ or (e) ‘not at all’.
Competencies are also rated in terms of their perceived importance for the job of the
‘learner’: (a) ‘mission critical’, (b) ‘very important’, (c) ‘useful/nice to have’, (d)’ less
important’ and (e) ‘not important’.
As I have said, a single text does not provide enough evidence for reconstructing a
discourse, although it can of course be used for methodological demonstration, as I do in
this chapter. I would nevertheless argue for the special importance of texts such as
‘V
oices’. ‘V
oices’ is used very widely and is therefore not only a discourse about
leadership, but also constitutive of actual leadership practices and actual ways of talking
about these practices. When introduced in universities, as it was in the university where I
work, ‘V
oices’ plays a key part in the move from the old elected ‘first among equals’
style of leadership to new, corporate leadership discourses and practices (cf. Fairclough,


1993). And as ‘learners’ are obliged to discuss their ‘weaknesses’ with an ‘executive
coach’, they will more or less be forced to introduce the discourse of ‘V
oices’ into their
thinking and talking about their own role and identity as ‘leaders’. For all these reasons, it
is important to critically analyse texts such as ‘Voices’, so as to reveal how they construct
‘leadership’.
Theoretical background
Anthropologists and sociologists have always realized that representation is ultimately
based on practice, on what people do. The primacy of practice runs like a thread through
the classics of European as well as American sociology. It is true that sociologists
sometimes derive concrete actions from abstract concepts and processes from systems –
Durkheim’s ‘collective consciousness’, Bourdieu’s ‘habitus’, Talcott Parsons’ systems
theory (1977) and Levi-Strauss’s structuralist anthropology (1964) are examples. Yet the
primacy of practice also keeps asserting itself in the work of these writers, sometimes
against the grain of their methodology, at other times as a fundamental cornerstone of their
theory (e.g. Berger and Luckmann, 1966). Bourdieu elaborated the primacy of practice
and the fundamental difference between participant knowledge and ‘outsider’ knowledge
in his Outline of a Theory of Practice (1977) and elsewhere. Talcott Parsons, even in his
systems theory, can still say that ‘the subject of social interaction is in a fundamental
sense logically prior to that of social system’ (1977: 145), and even Levi-Strauss (1964)
at times derives the meaning of myths from social practices rather than from abstract
schemata. Durkheim leaves no doubt about it, especially in The Elementary Forms of
Religious Life (1976) and Primitive Classification (Durkheim and Mauss, 1963): myths
are modelled on rites, conceptual life on social life, representations of the world on
social organization. And Malinowski (1923, 1935) shows how representation originates
in action and in uses of language that are inextricably interwoven with action, and how
action is then twice recontextualized, first as representation, in ‘narrative speech’, and
then in the construction of new realities, in ‘the language of ritual and magic’, as
Malinowski calls it. Later, Bernstein’s theory of recontextualization applied a similar
idea to educational practices, describing how knowledge is actively produced ‘in the
upper reaches of the education system’ (1986: 5) and then embedded into a pedagogic
content in the ‘lower reaches’, where it is objectified and made to serve the contextually
defined purpose of a ‘discourse of order’, a form of ‘moral education’, in the
Durkheimian sense. In the approach to critical discourse analysis I present in this chapter,
I connect this idea to the term ‘discourse’, used in Foucault’s sense (e.g. 1977). This
definition of discourse has also been introduced into critical discourse analysis by
Fairclough (e.g. 2000a) and the emphasis on discourse as ‘social cognition’ has been
inspired by the work of Van Dijk (e.g. 1998).


Linguists have generally differed from sociologists in deriving processes (syntagms)
from systems (grammars, paradigms), rather than processes (practices) from systems
(institutions and objectified forms of knowledge). But when linguists began to study texts,
in the 1970s, many found it hard to conceptualize the production and interpretation of texts
without recourse to experience, to ‘world knowledge’ (e.g. Schank and Abelson, 1977)
or ‘background knowledge’ (e.g. Brown and Yule, 1983; Levinson, 1983). Martin (1984,
1992) reintroduced the ‘field’ of discourse, using lexical cohesion analysis to construct
‘activity sequences’ – sequences of represented activities. Together with the work of
Gleason (1973) and Grimes (1975) who paid attention, not just to represented activities,
but also to represented ‘roles’, ‘settings’, etc., this work has had a profound influence on
the ideas I present in this chapter, and the main difference is that I have extended it
beyond procedural and narrative texts, in which there tends to be a close relation between
the represented and representing activity sequences, and applied it also to other kinds of
text, in which there is a greater difference between the structure of the text, which may be
some rhetorical, argumentative structure, and the underlying discourse, i.e. the
representation/transformation of a practice together with the purposes, legitimations and
evaluations of that practice.
Finally, the study of the way discourses transform social practices, which in this
chapter is represented especially by my theory of social action, derives to a large degree
from the work of Halliday (1978, 1985), whose theory of transitivity made it possible to
interpret differently worded representations of the same reality as different social
constructions of that reality, and from the work of Kress, Hodge, Fowler, Trew and others
(Fowler et al., 1979; Kress and Hodge, 1979) who demonstrated how Halliday’s work
can be used and extended for the purpose of critical discourse analysis, or, as they said,
quoting Whorf (1956), how linguistics can become ‘an instrument of discovery,
clarification and insight’ for the analysis of the social world (Kress and Hodge, 1979:
14).
Discourse and social practice
As I have said, the approach to discourse I introduce in this chapter is based on the idea
that discourses are recontextualizations of social practices. To bring this out, I start with a
simple schema of the crucial elements of social practices. Actual social practices will
always contain all these elements. Specific discourses about social practices will select
from them, transform them and add further elements.
Actions
The core of a social practice is formed by a set of actions, which may or may not have to


be performed in a specific order. The ‘conflict management’ text above, for instance,
contains the following actions (I ignore for the moment that they have been transformed in
different ways, for instance by being generalized or represented in a relatively abstract
way):
stepping up to conflict
reading situations
listening
hammering out agreements
settling disputes
finding common ground
getting cooperation.
Performance modes
These actions may have to be performed in specific ways. In the ‘conflict management’
text, listening has to be focused, agreements have to be tough, and cooperation has to be
achieved with minimum noise. Clearly, it is not just important what leaders do, but also
how they do it – or how they should not do it, as can be seen in the ‘Overuse of Conflict
Management’ text, where ‘overly aggressive and assertive’ actions are disapproved of.
Actors
Social actors participate in practices in one of a number of roles – as ‘agents’ (doers of
action), ‘patients’ (participants to whom actions are done) or ‘beneficiaries’ (participants
who benefit from an action, whether in a positive or negative sense). In the ‘conflict
management’ text, the key participant is the ‘learner’ whose performance is being
assessed. Although the actions in the text would in reality require further participants (the
people who are in conflict, the people who are being listened to, etc.), they have been
deleted in this particular discourse. Only the actions of the ‘learner’ seem to matter – as
‘behaviour’, rather than as what they really are, interactions, actions undertaken for and
with other people. In the ‘Overuse of Conflict Management’ text, on the other hand, other
people are mentioned, though for the most part vaguely (‘everyone else’, ‘others’,
‘obstinate people’).
Presentation styles
The way in which actors present themselves (their dress, grooming, etc.) is an important


aspect of all social practices, even if it may be taken for granted in some representations,
as is the case in ‘V
oices’. In my experience, senior managers constantly evaluate each
other’s presentation style, but this is done informally, rather than as part of formal
performance-assessment procedures.
Times
Social practices (or parts of them) will take place at more or less specific times.
‘Focused listening’, for instance, will happen in regular, scheduled face-to-face meetings
with ‘direct reports’. I have italicized some examples in the text below:
Timely Decision Making – Makes decisions in a timely manner, sometimes with incomplete information and
under tight deadlines and pressure; able to make a quick decision.
Confronting Direct Reports – Deals with problem direct reports firmly and in a timely manner; doesn’t allow
problems to fester; regularly reviews performance and holds timely discussions; can make negative decisions
when all efforts fail; deals effectively with troublemakers.
Spaces
Social practices (or parts of them) also take place in specific spaces, chosen or arranged
as a suitable environment for the practice. The discourse of ‘V
oices’, however, steers
away from such concrete specifics, perhaps because it is designed to apply to many
different institutional contexts.
Resources
Social practices also require specific resources, specific tools and materials. ‘Providing
information’, for instance, may require computers, an intranet and so on. But these too
have been left out of the ‘Voices’ text as somehow not relevant to leadership practices.
Eligibility
Specific qualities of the concrete elements of social practices (the actors, settings and
resources) make them eligible to function as actors, settings or resources in those
practices. In fact, the whole of the ‘V
oices’ leadership questionnaire can be seen as a
discourse focusing specifically on ‘eligibility’, on the characteristics an actor needs to
have to be eligible to play the role of ‘leader’ in an organization. I will return to this point
below.
As I have already said, discourses are transformations, or recontextualizations of
social practices. Three types of transformation are particularly important.


Deletion
Some elements of a social practice may not be represented in a particular discourse. As
we have seen, in the ‘conflict management’ text, all actors other than the ‘learner’ are
deleted, and so are times, spaces and resources. Such deletions happen for context-
specific reasons. First of all, ‘V
oices’ centres on assessing ‘learners’, focusing on their
behavioural patterns, often in abstraction from the specific situations in which these
behaviours occur. ‘V
oices’ also has to be applicable to many different contexts and
therefore tends towards decontextualization, towards leaving out concrete specifics.
Substitution
The key transformation is of course the transformation from an actual element of an actual
social practice into an element of discourse, and this can be done in many different ways.
Actors, for instance, can be represented as specific individuals or as types of people,
they can be referred to in abstract or specific terms, and so on. In the next section, I will
deal in detail with the transformation of social action in discourse. V
an Leeuwen (2008)
provides an account of the ways in which actors, times and spaces can be transformed in
discourse.
Addition
Discourses can also add reactions and motives to the representation of social practices.
Reactions are the mental processes which, according to a given discourse, will
accompany specific actions of specific actors, for instance the way the actors feel about
specific actions, or the way they interpret specific actions. Needless to say, in different
discourses, different reactions may accompany the same actions of the same actors. In the
‘V
oices’ text, as in many other discourses, the focus is on the reactions of the ‘patients’,
the people on the receiving end of the leader’s actions. In the example below, for
instance, I interpret ‘being direct’ as a ‘performance mode’, and ‘being uncomfortable’
and ‘being off-guard’ as reactions:
Overuse of Integrity and Trust – May be too direct at times, which may catch people off guard and make them
uncomfortable; may push openness and honesty to the point of being disruptive …
The most important motives are purposes and legitimations. Different discourses may
ascribe different purposes to the same actions. In the following example, the purpose of
‘getting first-hand customer information’ is ‘to improve products and services’, because
the relevant ‘competency’ is ‘customer focus’. If the competency had been ‘profit focus’,
the same action might be given another purpose, for instance ‘meeting demand’ or
‘increasing sales’:


Customer Focus – Is dedicated to meeting the expectations and requirements of internal and external
customers; gets first-hand customer information and uses it for improvements in products and services …
Legitimations provide reasons for why practices (or parts of practices) are performed,
or for why they are performed the way they are. These reasons may be spelled out in
explicit detail or be communicated through what, elsewhere (V
an Leeuwen, 2007), I have
called ‘moral evaluation’. ‘Moral evaluation’ is an abstract way of referring to specific
actions which serves to highlight qualities of that action that carry positive connotations
(or, in the case of delegitimation, negative connotations). In the ‘conflict management’
text, for instance, a particular action is referred to as ‘getting cooperation’. This
formulation does not reveal much about what the leader is actually, concretely, doing
here. Persuading? Giving directives? Bribing? But it does legitimize the action, because it
suggests that it is based on voluntary ‘cooperation’, rather than on ‘compliance’ with top-
down orders, and it also reveals the purpose of the action (‘getting cooperation’).
To reconstruct a discourse (or rather, that part of it that is realized in a specific text), I
enter a text’s representations of the concrete elements of the social practice (actors,
actions, times, places and so on), as well as the reactions and motives that have been
added, in the different columns of a table, using the following principles:
1. Actions which are referred to several times in different wordings are combined, but
where an alternative wording adds a purpose or legitimation, it is entered separately
in the relevant column.
2. Where possible, actions are ordered chronologically, e.g.
Where actions are simultaneous rather than sequential, I use a ‘≈’ sign. Where there
is a choice of two (or more) possible actions, I use a flowchart notation. Where it is
not possible to decide on any chronological connection, I use a ‘+’ sign, e.g.
3. Elements other than actions are horizontally aligned with the actions to which they
pertain, e.g. timings with the actions they are timings of, spaces with the actions that
take place in that space, legitimations with the actions they legitimize, and so on.
The example below analyses the ‘conflict management’ text. For the sake of convenience,
I first show this text again.


Conflict Management – Steps up to conflicts, seeing them as opportunities; reads situations quickly; good at
focused listening; can hammer out tough agreements and settle disputes equitably; can find common ground and
get cooperation with minimum noise.
The text contains two overall labels for this particular episode of leadership practice,
a more neutral, technical one (‘conflict management’) and a more connotative one
(‘stepping up to conflict’) which adds a hint of ‘decisiveness’ or ‘boldness’, hence a
‘performance mode’ that pertains to the whole of the practice. I have bolded and
italicized such overall labels in the analysis.
Even this brief example reveals some aspects of the way the ‘V
oices’ discourse
defines leadership. Two motives intermingle: ‘decisiveness’ and ‘toughness’ on the one
hand, and ‘fairness’ and ‘attentiveness’ on the other hand. It is also clear that the
discourse focuses entirely on the leader and the way in which s/he performs the actions
that define his/her leadership. The other participants are, so to speak, kept out of the
frame.
Three further aspects of discourse need to be mentioned at this point.
1. Some discourses provide discursive resources for other discourses
In V
an Leeuwen (2008), I look at how the practice of ‘the first day at school’ is
recontextualized in different discourses and note that parent-and teacher-oriented ‘first
day’ discourses rely a great deal on a lay version of child psychology for legitimation.
Parents are advised to take their time ‘because children don’t like to be rushed’, and to
‘establish the same routine going to and from school’ because that ‘will make your child
feel secure’. Psychologists are quoted to lend authority to such pronouncements. Clearly,
certain discourses elaborate forms of knowledge (for instance about what children are
like) or systems of moral values (e.g. religions), that can be used in a wide range of
discourses to legitimize a wide range of different practices (cf. Berger and Luckmann,
1966). In my view, ‘V
oices’ is such an expert discourse, supplying legitimate eligibility
criteria for leaders and leadership that can be used in a wide range of settings, as borne
out by this quote from the website of Lominger-International:
TABLE 6.1 Analysis of the ‘conflict management’ text


Lominger’s Leadership Architect Competencies drive our research-based, experience-tested and integrated talent
management solutions. Flexible, useable and customizable, the suites can be deployed together as a fully integrated
system or individually to meet your immediate business needs. No matter where you start, the Leadership
Architect Competency Library allows you to maintain a common language for leadership …
2. Discourses may be modalized
‘V
oices’ uses a great deal of ability modality. The leader ‘can hammer out tough
agreements’, ‘can find common ground’ and so on. In other words, the ‘V
oices’ discourse
is not so much about what leaders actually do as about what they are able to do, and this
is probably true for all discourses that construct eligibility criteria for specific roles, and
for all discursive practices that test and certify what ‘learners’ can do.
‘Ability’ modality is not the only way in which discourses can be modalized. Practices
may be recontextualized as past or future practices, for instance as actual or possible
practices, or as right or wrong practices. Such modalizations should be indicated in the
analysis, for instance by using superscripts:
3. Discourses combine in specific ways
A given text may include several discourses. Nevertheless, one discourse is usually
central and other, ‘secondary’ discourses relate to it in specific ways. Texts may, for


instance, contrast past and present discourses about a given practice, usually to position
the present discourse as an improvement on the past, or ‘right’ and ‘wrong’ discourses, as
in the case of V
oices’ juxtaposition of competencies and ‘overuses’ of those
competencies. Other discourses may play the role of ‘preparatory’ discourses, dealing,
for instance, with practices or arranging spaces for the central practice, or with acquiring
the qualifications needed to participate in the central practice. ‘Secondary’ discourses
may also be legitimatory. In an interview with the CEO of a large company, conducted as
part of a research project on leadership in which I am currently involved, the CEO
interrupted his description of his company’s corporate responsibility practices with a
lengthy account of how he built his own house and included a rainwater tank and low
energy lightbulbs. He did this to show that he was personally engaged in sustainability
practices, and really believed in them, so positioning himself as a charismatic leader who
leads by example and inspires rather than imposes.
Needless to say, what in one context is a ‘central’ discourse may in another be
‘secondary’, and vice versa.
Social action
In this section, I deal with the ways social actions can be, and are, transformed in
discourse, again using ‘V
oices’ as my main example. I will begin by explaining the main
ways in which social actions can be transformed.
Actions and reactions
I have already touched on the way discourses may infuse a version of a social practice
with representations of the actors’ reactions to the actions that constitute the practice. As
Berger has said (Berger and Luckmann, 1966: 113), social practices involve not only ‘a
regulatory pattern for externally visible actions, but also the emotions and attitudes that
belong to these actions’, and these may be differently construed in different discourses
about these practices.
Reactions can be formulated in a number of ways. They can be unspecified (through
verbs like ‘react’, ‘respond’, etc.) or specified as cognitive (e.g. ‘grasp’), perceptive
(e.g. ‘has a nose for’) or affective (e.g. ‘feel’):
responds timely to problems with direct reports
quickly grasps the essence and underlying structure of anything
has a nose for talent
makes people feel his or her work is important.


In many discourses, different types of reactions are attributed to different social actors.
Some may be represented as engaging cognitively with social actions, for instance, with
others as reacting at a more emotional level.
Material and semiotic action
Actions can be interpreted as material, as ‘doings’ (e.g. ‘act’), or as semiotic, as
‘meanings’ (e.g ‘articulate’). Most of a leader’s actions are in fact speech acts, hence
semiotic actions, but they may be represented as material actions, to make them seem
more active and dynamic, as in the last two examples below:
acts with customers in mind
c a n articulate the strengths and limitations of people inside and outside the
organization
provides the information people need to know to do their job
creates mileposts and symbols to rally support behind the vision.
Material actions can be transactive, involving two participants, so that the action is
represented as actually having an effect on people or things (e.g. ‘hire’ and ‘assemble’),
o r non-transactive, involving only one participant, which represents the action as
‘display’, as ‘behaviour’ that does not affect anyone or anything other than the actor him-
or herself (e.g. ‘perform’):
hires the best people available
assembles talented staff
tends to trust people to perform.
Transactive material actions are interactive if they are realized by a verb that can only
take a human object (e.g. ‘be candid with …’) and instrumental if they can (also) take a
non-human object (e.g. ‘deal with’, ‘manage’). If the latter dominates in a given
discourse, there is clearly more of a sense of the actor ‘using’ people ‘instrumentally’, to
achieve goals, rather than thinking of them as people with their own goals and interests:
manages all kinds and classes of people equitably
deals effectively with trouble makers
can be candid with peers.
The same distinction applies to semiotic actions. They can be behaviouralized, in which


case the meanings conveyed by the speech acts are not included in the representation, for
example:
communicates effectively
can motivate many kinds of direct reports.
Or they can include those meanings, whether through quotation, ‘rendition’ (reported
speech) or by specifying the nature of the signified (topic specification), or the signifier
(form specification) as in:
talks about possibilities
can accurately restate the opinions of others
can easily pose future scenarios.
Objectivation and descriptivization
Actions and reactions can be activated, that is represented dynamically, as actions (e.g.
‘analyse’) or de-activated, represented in a static way, as though they are entities or
qualities rather than actions (e.g. ‘analysis’):
analyses both successes and failures for clues to improvement
is excellent at honest analysis.
Deactivated representations of social actions may be objectivated or descriptivized. In
the case of objectivation, actions or reactions are represented as though they were things,
for instance by means of nominalization or process nouns, or by various metonyms, such
as substituting the time of the action (temporalization) or the space of the action
(spatialization) for the action itself:
can diffuse even high tension situations comfortably
fosters open dialogue
may have a chilling effect on getting everyone’s input.
In the case of descriptivization, actions and reactions are represented as more or less
permanent qualities of social actors, that is, usually, either as ‘epithets’ or as ‘attributes’:
can be candid with peers


may be overly optimistic about how much people can grow.
De-agentialization
Actions and reactions can be agentialized, represented as brought about by human
agency, or de-agentialized, represented as brought about in ways that are impermeable to
human agency – through natural forces, unconscious processes and so on.
To mention three types of de-agentialization, in the case of eventuation, the action or
reaction is represented as an event, as something that ‘just happens’, without anybody
doing it. This may be done in a number of ways, for instance through verbs of involuntary
action, through verbs like ‘happen’ or ‘occur’, etc. I have not found an example of this in
the ‘Voices’ text.
In the case of existentialization, an action or reaction is represented as something that
simply ‘exists’, usually through an ‘existential process’, as in high tension situations.
In the case of naturalization, an action or reaction is represented as a natural process
through abstract verbs such as ‘vary’, ‘expand’, ‘develop’, etc., which link actions and
reactions to specific interpretations of material processes – to discourses of rise and fall
or ebb and flood; of birth and death; of growth and decay; of change and development and
evolution; of fusion and disintegration; of expansion and contraction and so on. This will
often have a legitimatory function. Examples in ‘V
oices’ include terms like growth,
development, workflow, turnaround, breakthrough and so on.
Generalization and abstraction
Actions and reactions may be generalized to different degrees. Generalizations abstract
away from the specific actions that make up a practice or some episode that forms part of
it, and label the practice or episode as a whole, as in our earlier example of ‘conflict
management’, and as also in the following examples:
distributes the workload appropriately
regularly reviews performance
provides challenging and stretching tasks and assignment.
Actions and reactions may also be represented abstractly, in which case a quality, often
apparently peripheral, is used to name the whole. This I refer to as distillation – a quality
is distilled from the whole that has particular relevance in the given context, usually for
purposes of legitimation, as in our earlier example of ‘getting cooperation’, and also in:


builds appropriate rapport
uses diplomacy and tact
eliminates roadblocks.
Overdetermination
I use the term overdetermination to refer to two specific types of representation where a
given social practice stands for more than itself. I have not found an example of this in the
‘Voices’ text.
In the case of symbolization, an – often fictional – social practice stands for a number
of social practices. This is the case in myths, and it is the reason why myths have such an
important function in society: ‘Myths are a model of social action based on a mythical
interpretation of the past’ (Wright, 1975: 188). The killing of the dragon in the myth can
stand for passing the entrance examination, winning the election, in short for any trial in
which the hero overcomes an obstacle towards achieving his or her goal. This accounts
for its enduring quality as a ‘model’ for many different practices.
In the case of inversion, one or more elements of the social practice are changed into
its opposite. In comic strips such as The Flintstones and Hagar the Horrible, the
characters, settings and objects are set in the past, but the way they interact and live are
more or less contemporary – the ways of contemporary suburban families. This gives a
kind of universality to these practices that helps legitimate them as natural and
unavoidable rather than culturally and historically specific.
The system network in Table 6.2 provides an overview of the categories I have discussed
and also indicates that transformations can and cannot co-occur. Square brackets are
‘either-or’ choices and curly brackets simultaneous choices. It is therefore possible, for
instance, for an action to be semiotic (behavioural) and objectivated and de-agentialized
and generalized (but not overdetermined), e.g. ‘workplace communication’ in a sentence
like ‘good workplace communication improves productivity’. But it is not possible for an
action to be both interactive and instrumental.
A text analysis using this network will allow two kinds of question to be asked:
1. What kinds of actions are attributed to what kinds of participants?
2. What kinds of actions tend to be objectivated, de-agentialized and so on?
Here are some observations resulting from my analysis of the ‘Voices’ text:
Most actions and reactions in the text are attributed to the leader (199), rather than to
employees (28) or customers (4).


About one third (9 out of 25) of the reactions attributed to employees, and all
reactions attributed to customers, are affective reactions such as like, respect, trust,
feel, etc., for instance. Only two of the reactions attributed to employees are
cognitive:
(employees) like working for (the leader)
(employees) feel their work is important
(employees) need further development
(the leader) gains (customers’) trust and respect.
On the other hand, out of a total of 64 reactions of the leader, only seven are
affective and 42 cognitive. The leader is aware of, assesses, plans, judges,
projects, learns, reads the situation and so on.
TABLE 6.2 Social action network
Most of the leader’s actions are material (101 out of 199) and semiotic actions (34)
tend to be ‘behaviouralized’ or ‘topic-specified’, as, for example, in:
(leader) represents his interests
(leader) diffuses high tension situations.
Of the leader’s 199 actions, only 32 impact on other humans (and only half of these


are interactive). The rest are non-transactive or instrumental. As mentioned before,
the way in which most of the leaders’ actions are represented leaves employees and
customers out of the frame, for example:
(leader) practises listening
(leader) holds development discussions.
We might ask: who is he listening to? And: who is he holding development
discussions with?
The leader’s actions are overwhelmingly generalized and often represented in terms
of distillations. The most common themes that emerge from these distillations are:
motivation and inspiration (inspire and motivate, create a climate in which people
want to do their best, etc.), future vision (look beyond today, project into the
future, etc.), relationship-building (build rapport, relate to), ‘instrumental’ methods
(use diplomacy and tact, use rigorous logic, etc.), and finally honesty (present
unvarnished truths etc.).
All the leader’s actions are agentialized.
Twenty-nine of the leader’s actions are descriptivized (is fair to, has a nose for, is
a teamplayer, is cooperative, is good at figuring out, etc.), whereas this is the case
for only two of the employees’ actions. Only eight of the leader’s actions are
objectivated, while the employees’ actions, on the other hand, are always
objectivated (career goal, trust, input, work) – only their reactions are activated.
What can we conclude from this? First of all, that in this discourse, leaders are
constructed as knowledgeable doers, who act at a broad, general level and whose actions
are imbued with specific purposes and motives. They are at once tough, decisive, quick to
act and patient, understanding and fair, at once practical and down to earth and visionary.
That sounds good, but it is as if they act all this out in front of a mirror. Mirror, mirror on
the wall, who is the toughest of them all? And the employees for and with whom they do
their work are under-represented, while their work is conveyed by nouns and
nominalizations which deprive it of its dynamic and productive character. The customers,
finally, are almost entirely absent. Not to put too fine a point on it, this is not a form of
leadership which is focused on doing, on service, facilitation, enablement, but a self-
obsessed form of leadership which is focused on being a leader, and on glorifying the
characteristic attributes of leaders, rather than their deeds.
FURTHER READING
Bernstein, B. (1990) The Structuring of Pedagogic Discourse. London: Routledge.
Chatper 5 presents the theory of recontextualization which has especially inspired the earlier part of this chapter.


It is difficult to read, but rewarding.
Fairclough, N. (1995a) Critical Discourse Analysis. London: Longman.
Norman Fairclough was the first critical discourse analyst to turn his attention to corporate discourses, as
exemplified by Chapters 5 and 6 in this volume.
Malinowski, B. (1923) ‘The problem of meaning in primitive languages’, in C.K. Ogden and I.A. Richards, The
Meaning of Meaning. London: Routledge and Kegan Paul.
Written in the 1920s, this is the classic account of how practice gets to be transformed, or ‘recontextualized’, into
discourse.
Van Leeuwen, T. (2006) ‘Critical Discourse Analysis’, in K. Brown (ed.), Encyclopedia of Language and
Linguistics. 2nd edn. Vol. 3. Oxford: Elsevier, pp. 290–294.
In this encyclopedia article, I have attempted a general overview of critical discourse analysis.
Van Leeuwen, T. (2008) Discourse and Practice – New Tools for Critical Discourse Analysis. New York:
Oxford University Press.
Chapters 1 and 3 provide a fuller account of the theories and methods presented in this chapter.
Van Leeuwen, T. and Wodak, R. (1999) ‘Legitimizing immigration control: A discourse-historical analysis’,
Discourse Studies 1(1): 83–119.
This was the first published version of the theory of discourse as recontextualized social practice.


7
A Dialectical–Relational Approach to Critical Discourse Analysis in Social
Research1
Norman Fairclough
Theory and concepts
Fields of application
Methodology
An example: political discourse analysis
An illustration: analysing political texts
Discussion
Appendix 1
Appendix 2
In this Chapter, I introduce and illustrate a methodology for using a dialectical–relational
version of CDA in transdisciplinary social research (Chouliaraki and Fairclough, 1999;
Fairclough, 2003, 2006). I begin with a theoretical section explaining the dialectical–
relational approach, including my view of discourse, of critical analysis, and of
transdisciplinary research. In the second section, I briefly discuss the fields of application
of this approach, and in the third section, I explain the methodology, presenting it as a
series of stages and steps, and identify a number of core analytical categories. In the
fourth section, I present an example, showing the application of this methodology in
researching a political topic, and illustrate the approach to political analysis in the fifth
section with respect to particular texts. The sixth section summarizes what can be
achieved with this methodology and discusses possible limitations.
Theory and concepts
First, a terminological point. Discourse is commonly used in various senses including (a)
meaning-making as an element of the social process, (b) the language associated with a
particular social field or practice (e.g. ‘political discourse’), and (c) a way of construing
aspects of the world associated with a particular social perspective (e.g. a ‘neoliberal
discourse of globalization’). It is easy to confuse them, so to at least partially reduce the
scope for confusion, I prefer to use semiosis for the first, most abstract and general sense
(Fairclough et al., 2004), which has the further advantage of suggesting that discourse
analysis is concerned with various ‘semiotic modalities’ of which language is only one


(others are visual images and ‘body language’).
Semiosis is viewed here as an element of the social process which is dialectically
related to others – hence a ‘dialectical–relational’ approach. Relations between elements
are dialectical in the sense of being different but not ‘discrete’, i.e. not fully separate. We
might say that each ‘internalizes’ the others without being reducible to them (Harvey,
1996) – e.g. social relations, power, institutions, beliefs and cultural values are in part
semiotic; they ‘internalize’ semiosis without being reducible to it. For example, although
we should analyse political institutions or business organizations as partly semiotic
objects, it would be a mistake to treat them as purely semiotic, because then we couldn’t
ask the key question: what is the relationship between semiotic and other elements? CDA
focuses not just upon semiosis as such, but on the relations between semiotic and other
social elements. The nature of this relationship varies between institutions and
organizations, and according to time and place, and it needs to be established through
analysis.
This requires CDA to be integrated within frameworks for transdisciplinary research,
such as the framework I have used in recent publications – ‘cultural political economy’ –
which combines elements from three disciplines: a form of economic analysis, a theory of
the state and a form of CDA (Fairclough, 2006; Jessop, 2004). Transdisciplinary research
is a particular form of interdisciplinary research (Fairclough, 2005b). What distinguishes
it is that in bringing disciplines and theories together to address research issues, it sees
‘dialogue’ between them as a source for the theoretical and methodological development
of each of them. For example, recontextualization was introduced as a concept and
category within CDA through a dialogue with Basil Bernstein’s sociology of pedagogy,
where it originated (Chouliaraki and Fairclough, 1999).
In what sense is CDA critical? Critical social research aims to contribute to
addressing the social ‘wrongs’ of the day (in a broad sense – injustice, inequality, lack of
freedom, etc.) by analysing their sources and causes, resistance to them and possibilities
of overcoming them. We can say that it has both a ‘negative’ and a ‘positive’ character.
On the one hand, it analyses and seeks to explain dialectical relations between semiosis
and other social elements to clarify how semiosis figures in the establishment,
reproduction and change of unequal power relations (domination, marginalization,
exclusion of some people by others) and in ideological processes, and how in more
general terms it bears upon human ‘well-being’. These relations require analysis because
there are no societies whose logic and dynamic, including how semiosis figures within
them, are fully transparent to all: the forms in which they appear to people are often
partial and in part misleading. On the other hand, critique is oriented to analysing and
explaining, with a focus on these dialectical relations, the many ways in which the
dominant logic and dynamic are tested, challenged and disrupted by people, and to
identifying possibilities which these suggest for overcoming obstacles to addressing
‘wrongs’ and improving well-being.
The social process can be seen as the interplay between three levels of social reality:


social structures, practices and events (Chouliaraki and Fairclough, 1999). Social
practices ‘mediate’ the relationship between general and abstract social structures and
particular and concrete social events; social fields, institutions and organizations are
constituted as networks of social practices (see Bourdieu on social practices and fields –
Bourdieu and Wacquant, 1992). In this approach to CDA, analysis is focused on two
dialectical relations: between structure (especially social practices as an intermediate
level of structuring) and events (or structure and action, structure and strategy) and, within
each, between semiotic and other elements. There are three major ways in which
semiosis relates to other elements of social practices and of social events – as a facet of
action; in the construal (representation) of aspects of the world; and in the constitution of
identities. And there are three semiotic (or discourse-analytical) categories
corresponding to these: genre, discourse and style.
Genres are semiotic ways of acting and interacting, such as news or job interviews,
reports or editorials in newspapers, or advertisements on TV or the internet. Part of doing
a job, or running a country, is interacting semiotically or communicatively in certain
ways, and such activities have distinctive sets of genres associated with them.
Discourses are semiotic ways of construing aspects of the world (physical, social or
mental) which can generally be identified with different positions or perspectives of
different groups of social actors. For instance, the lives of poor people are not only
construed through different discourses associated with different social practices (in
politics, medicine, social welfare, academic sociology) but through different discourses
in each which correspond to differences of position and perspective. I use ‘construe’ in
preference to ‘represent’ to emphasize an active and often difficult process of ‘grasping’
the world from a particular perspective (Fairclough, forthcoming).
Styles are identities, or ‘ways of being’, in their semiotic aspect – for instance, being a
‘manager’ in the currently fashionable way in business or in universities is partly a matter
of developing the right semiotic style.
The semiotic dimension of (networks of) social practices which constitute social
fields, institutions, organizations, etc. is orders of discourse (Fairclough, 1992a); the
semiotic dimension of events is texts. Orders of discourse are particular configurations of
different genres, different discourses and different styles. An order of discourse is a
social structuring of semiotic difference, a particular social ordering of relationships
between different ways of meaning-making – different genres, discourses and styles. So,
for example, the network of social practices which constitutes the field of education, or a
particular educational organization such as a university, is constituted semiotically as an
order of discourse. Texts are to be understood in an inclusive sense, not only written texts
but also conversations and interviews, as well as the ‘multimodal’ texts (mixing language
and visual images) of television and the internet. Some events consist almost entirely of
texts (e.g. a lecture or an interview), while in others, texts have a relatively small part
(e.g. a game of chess).
Discourses which originate in some particular social field or institution (e.g. to


anticipate the example, neoliberal economic discourse, which originated within academic
economics and business) may be recontextualized in others (e.g. in the political field or
the wider educational field). Recontextualization has an ambivalent character
(Chouliaraki and Fairclough, 1999): it can be seen as the ‘colonization’ of one field or
institution by another, but also as the ‘appropriation’ of ‘external’ discourses, often the
incorporation of discourses into strategies pursued by particular groups of social agents
within the recontextualizing field. For example, the ‘transition’ to a market economy and
Western-style democratic government in the formerly socialist countries of Europe (e.g.
Poland, Romania) has involved a ‘colonizing’ recontextualization of discourses (e.g.
discourses of ‘privatization’) which were however incorporated differently into the
strategies of new entrepreneurs, government officials, managers of state industries, etc.
(Fairclough, 2006).
Discourses may under certain conditions be operationalized or ‘put into practice’,
which is a dialectical process with three aspects: they may be enacted as new ways of
(inter)acting, they may be inculcated as new ways of being (identities), and they may be
physically materialized, e.g. as new ways of organizing space, for example in
architecture. Enactment and inculcation may themselves take semiotic forms: a new
management discourse (e.g. the discourse of marketized ‘new public management’ which
has invaded public sector fields like education and health) may be enacted as management
procedures which include new genres of interaction between managers and workers, or it
may be inculcated as identities which semiotically include the styles of the new type of
managers.
CDA oscillates, as I have indicated, between a focus on structures (especially the
intermediate level of the structuring of social practices) and a focus on the strategies of
social agents, i.e. the ways in which they try to achieve outcomes or objectives within
existing structures and practices, or to change them in particular ways. This includes a
focus on shifts in the structuring of semiotic difference (i.e shifts in orders of discourse)
which constitute a part of social change, and on how social agents pursue their strategies
semiotically in texts. In both perspectives, a central concern is shifting relations between
genres, between discourses and between styles: change in the social structuring of
relations between them which achieves relative permanence and stability in orders of
discourse, and the ongoing working and re-working of relations between them which is
regarded in this approach to CDA as a normal feature of texts.
The term interdiscursivity is reserved for the latter: the interdiscursivity of a text is a
part of its intertextuality (Fairclough, 1992a), a question of which genres, discourses and
styles it draws upon, and how it works them into particular articulations. Textual analysis
also includes linguistic analysis, and analysis where appropriate of visual images and
‘body language’, and these features of texts can be seen as realizing its interdiscursive
features.


Fields of application
The dialectical–relational approach addresses the general question: what is the particular
significance of semiosis, and of dialectical relations between semiosis and other social
elements, in the social processes (issues, problems, changes, etc.) which are under
investigation? This question is of interest right across the social sciences and humanities,
and I would not want to foreclose the range of potentially fruitful fields of application of
this approach, nor the range of genres or texts it might be applied to. It is true that certain
types of texts would seem to pose particular problems – literary texts, for example – but
that is a different matter. In general, I would oppose any view of method which seeks to
neatly match methods (methodologies) to fields or text types, or cultivates the view that
researchers need to seek the ‘right’ method for their data and research questions. In short,
I would not want to limit in advance the fields of application of the dialectical–relational
approach.
The relationship between ‘approach’ and ‘applications’ is not a simple one. The
dialectical–relational approach in its current form has changed through the process of
being ‘applied’ in various fields. The beginnings of this approach can be seen in my work
on discourse and social change in the early 1990s (see especially Fairclough, 1992a,
1995a), which itself arose out of earlier work on relations between language, ideology
and power (Fairclough, 1989, 1991). Early applications of that version of CDA included
the ‘marketization’ of higher education and the ‘enterprise culture’ project launched by
the Thatcher government, as well as various aspects of political and media discourse
(Fairclough, 1995b) and ‘critical language awareness’ in education (Fairclough, 1992b).
Important theoretical developments arising out of this work were the conceptualization of
orders of discourse (a concept used already in Fairclough, 1989, 1991, 1992a) as the
semiotic dimension of networks of social practices, and the development of
‘recontextualization’ as a CDA category in Chouliaraki’s research on classroom
discourse (Chouliaraki, 1995; Chouliaraki and Fairclough, 1999), and the foregrounding
of the dialectics of discourse. One application at this stage was to the political discourse
of New Labour (Fairclough, 2000a). Further theoretical developments arose through
exploring neglected semiotic issues in ‘critical realism’ (Fairclough et al., 2004), and the
incorporation of the dialectical–relational approach within ‘cultural political economy’
(Jessop, 2004), which I addressed specifically from a CDA perspective in my research
on globalization and ‘transition’ in Central and Eastern Europe2 (Fairclough, 2006).
Methodology
I have referred to a ‘methodology’ for using a dialectical–relational version of CDA in
transdisciplinary social research rather than a ‘method’, because I also see the process as


a theoretical one in which methods are selected according to how the object of research
(Bourdieu and Wacquant, 1992) is theoretically constructed. So it is not just a matter of
‘applying methods’ in the usual sense – we cannot so sharply separate theory and method.
This version of CDA is associated with a general method, which I discuss below, but the
specific methods used for a particular piece of research arise from the theoretical process
of constructing its object.
We can identify ‘steps’ or ‘stages’ in the methodology only on condition that these are
not interpreted in a mechanical way: these are essential parts of the methodology (a
matter of its ‘theoretical order’), and while it does make partial sense to proceed from
one to the next (a matter of the ‘procedural order’), the relationship between them in
doing research is not simply that of sequential order. For instance, the ‘step’ I refer to
below of constructing the ‘object of research’ does need to precede subsequent steps, but
it also makes sense to ‘loop’ back to it in the light of subsequent steps, seeing the
formulation of the object of research as a preoccupation throughout. It is also helpful to
distinguish the ‘theoretical’ and ‘procedural’ from the ‘presentational’ order one chooses
to follow in, for instance, writing a paper – other generally rhetorical factors will affect
the order in which one presents one’s analysis.
The methodology can be seen as a variant of Bhaskar’s ‘explanatory critique’
(Bhaskar, 1986; Chouliaraki and Fairclough, 1999), which can be formulated in four
‘stages’ and which can be further elaborated as ‘steps’:
Stage 1: Focus upon a social wrong, in its semiotic aspect.
Stage 2: Identify obstacles to addressing the social wrong.
Stage 3: Consider whether the social order ‘needs’ the social wrong.
Stage 4: Identify possible ways past the obstacles.
Stage 1: Focus upon a social wrong, in its semiotic aspect
CDA is a form of critical social science geared to a better understanding of the nature and
sources of social wrongs, the obstacles to addressing them and possible ways of
overcoming those obstacles. ‘Social wrongs’ can be understood in broad terms as aspects
of social systems, forms or orders which are detrimental to human well-being, and which
could in principle be ameliorated if not eliminated, though perhaps only through major
changes in these systems, forms or orders. Examples might be poverty, forms of
inequality, lack of freedom or racism. Of course, what constitutes a ‘social wrong’ is a
controversial matter, and CDA is inevitably involved in debates and arguments about this
which go on all the time.3
We can elaborate Stage 1 in two steps:
Step 1: Select a research topic which relates to or points up a social wrong and which


can productively be approached in a transdisciplinary way with a particular focus on
dialectical relations between semiotic and other ‘moments’.
We might, for instance, conclude that such an approach is potentially ‘productive’
because there are significant semiotic features of the topic which have not been
sufficiently attended to in existing social research. A topic might attract our interest
because it has been prominent in the relevant academic literature, or is a focus of
practical attention in the domain or field at issue (in political debate or debates over
questions of management or ‘leadership’, in media commentary and so forth). Topics are
often ‘given’, and they sometimes virtually select themselves – who could doubt for
instance that ‘immigration’, ‘terrorism’, ‘globalization’ or ‘security’ are important
contemporary topics, with significant implications for human well-being, which
researchers should attend to? Selecting such topics has the advantage of ensuring that
research is relevant to the issues, problems and wrongs of the day, but also the danger that
their very obviousness can lead us to take them too much at face value. We cannot assume
that such topics are coherent research objects; to ‘translate’ topics into objects, we need
to theorize them.
Step 2: Construct objects of research for initially identified research topics by theorizing
them in a transdisciplinary way.
Anticipating the example I shall discuss below, let us assume that the selected research
topic is the relationship between national strategies and policies and the ‘global
economy’: strategies and policies which are developed for the global economy, or the
adaptation of national strategies and policies for the global economy. We might pin this
down by focusing, for instance, on strategies and policies to enhance ‘competitiveness’ in
particular countries (the example I discuss relates to competitiveness policies in the UK).
As a topic for critical research, this seems plausible enough: a preoccupation of
contemporary governments is indeed adapting to the ‘global economy’, and this process
does indeed have implications for human well-being (it is widely presented as a way
towards greater prosperity and opportunity, but as entailing suffering and insecurity for
some people). One – controversial – formulation of the social wrong in this case might be
that the well-being (material prosperity, security, political freedom, etc.) of some people
– arguably the majority – is being unfairly or unjustly sacrificed for the interests of others.
I shall focus below on one particular, political aspect of the social wrong: the
suppression of political differences in favour of a national consensus on strategies and
policies.
Constructing an object of research for this topic involves drawing upon relevant bodies
of theory in various disciplines to go beyond and beneath the obviousness of the topic,
and since the focus is on a specifically semiotic ‘point of entry’ into researching it, these
should include theories of semiosis and discourse. There are no ‘right answers’ to the
question of which theoretical perspectives to draw upon: it is a matter of researchers’
judgements about which perspectives can provide a rich theorization as a basis for


defining coherent objects for critical research which can deepen understanding of the
processes at issue, their implications for human well-being and the possibilities for
improving well-being. One must work in a transdisciplinary way, either in research teams
which bring together specialists in relevant disciplines, or by engaging with literature in
such disciplines.
What theoretical perspectives might be drawn upon in this case? These might include
(political) economic theories which theorize and analyse the ‘global economy’ and may
take positions on whether and how it constitutes a ‘realm of necessity’, a fact of life; State
and political theory which probe the character and functioning of the State and of national
and international politics in the era of ‘globalization’; theories of ‘global ethnography’
which address how local groups and individuals seek to adapt to but also sometimes test
and challenge the ‘global economy’ as a realm of necessity. The importance of discourse
theory is indicated by this implicit questioning of the ‘global economy’: a central issue in
both the academic literature and practical responses to the ‘global economy’ in politics,
workplaces and everyday life is the relationship between reality and discourse – the
reality and the discourses of the ‘global economy’ and of its impact, implications and
ramifications. We can initially identify an analysis of the complex relationship between
reality and discourse as a general formulation of the object of research for a semiotic
‘point of entry’ into this topic, but I shall suggest a more specific formulation, linked to
the example I shall discuss, in the section below on political discourse analysis.
Stage 2: Identify obstacles to addressing the social wrong
Stage 2 approaches the social wrong in a rather indirect way by asking what it is about
the way in which social life is structured and organized that prevents it from being
addressed. This requires bringing in analyses of the social order, and one ‘point of entry’
into this analysis can be semiotic, which entails selecting and analysing relevant ‘texts’
and addressing the dialectical relations between semiosis and other social elements.
Steps 1–3 can be formulated as follows:
1. Analyse dialectical relations between semiosis and other social elements: between
orders of discourse and other elements of social practices, between texts and other
elements of events.
2. Select texts, and focuses and categories for their analysis, in the light of and
appropriate to the constitution of the object of research.
3. Carry out analyses of texts, both interdiscursive analysis, and linguistic/semiotic
analysis.
Taken together, these three steps indicate an important feature of this version of CDA:
textual analysis is only a part of semiotic analysis (discourse analysis), and the former


must be adequately framed within the latter. The aim is to develop a specifically semiotic
‘point of entry’ into objects of research which are constituted in a transdisciplinary way,
through dialogue between different theories and disciplines. The analysis of texts can
effectively contribute to this only in so far as it is located within a wider analysis of the
object of research in terms of dialectical relations between semiotic and other elements
which comprehend relations between the level of social practices and the level of events
(and between orders of discourse and texts).
I shall not elaborate much on the three steps at this stage, because I think they will be
clearer when I work through them using the example below.
There is one point about Step 3 however. I said above that although the particular
methods of textual analysis used in a specific case depend upon the object of research,
this version of CDA does have a general method of analysis. I alluded to this in the first
section: textual analysis includes both linguistic analysis (and if relevant analysis of other
semiotic forms, such as visual images) and interdiscursive analysis (analysis of which
genres, discourses and styles are drawn upon, and how they are articulated together).
Moreover, interdiscursive analysis has the crucial effect of constituting a mediating
‘interlevel’ which connects both linguistic analysis with relevant forms of social analysis,
and the analysis of the text as part of an event with the analysis of social practices – in
more general terms, the analysis of event (action, strategy) with the analysis of structure.
Why so? Because interdiscursive analysis compares how genres, discourses and styles
are articulated together in a text as part of a specific event, and in more stable and
durable orders of discourses as part of networks of practices, which (qua social
practices) are objects of various forms of social analysis.
Stage 3: Consider whether the social order ‘needs’ the social wrong
It is not awfully obvious what this means, and I shall try to clarify it by again anticipating
the example. I indicated above that the social wrong I shall focus on when I get to the
example is the suppression of political differences over the global economy and national
responses to it in favour of seeking to create a national consensus, which is substantively
realized in discourse. In what sense might the social order ‘need’ this? Perhaps in the
sense – again anticipating the discussion below – that the internationally dominant
strategy for globalizing an economic order based upon neoliberal principles requires that
states be able to operate in support of this strategy without being encumbered by the ‘old’
adversarial politics. Stage 3 leads us to consider whether the social wrong in focus is
inherent to the social order, whether it can be addressed within it, or only by changing it.
It is a way of linking ‘is’ to ‘ought’: if a social order can be shown to inherently give rise
to major social wrongs, then that is a reason for thinking that perhaps it should be
changed. It also connects with questions of ideology: discourse is ideological in so far as
it contributes to sustaining particular relations of power and domination.


Stage 4: Identify possible ways past the obstacles
Stage 4 moves the analysis from negative to positive critique: identifying, with a focus on
dialectical relations between semiosis and other elements, possibilities within the
existing social process for overcoming obstacles to addressing the social wrong in
question. This includes developing a semiotic ‘point of entry’ into research on the ways
in which these obstacles are actually tested, challenged and resisted, be it within
organized political or social groups or movements, or more informally by people in the
course of their ordinary working, social and domestic lives. A specifically semiotic focus
would include ways in which dominant discourse is reacted to, contested, criticized and
opposed (in its argumentation, its construal of the world, its construal of social identities
and so forth).
To conclude this section, let me list the core analytical categories of this approach to
CDA which I have introduced so far:
semiosis (and other social elements)
discourse/genre/style, order of discourse (and social practices)
text (and social event)
interdiscursivity (and interdiscursive analysis)
recontextualization
operationalization (enactment, inculcation, materialization).
An example: political discourse analysis
The texts I shall discuss below are political texts: the Foreword to a government
document written by former British Prime Minister Tony Blair, and a critique of Blair’s
‘New Labour’ government by two former members of the Labour Party. As I have said,
how a research topic is constituted as an object of research determines both the selection
of texts for analysis and the nature of the analysis. In this section, I shall suggest a more
specific formulation of the object of research for the research topic anticipated above
(‘adapting national strategy and policy for the global economy’), which entails some
discussion of political theories of the contemporary ‘political condition’, and the main
issues and priorities it suggests for analysis of politics and political discourse. I shall
discuss the theoretical perspectives on the character of contemporary politics and the
State especially in advanced capitalist countries like Britain, but I should emphasize that
this discussion is necessarily partial given the spatial limitations of the Chapter. The
material in this section will also help with Step 1 of Stage 2 of the methodology when we
get to the texts – analysing dialectical relations between semiosis and other elements,
especially at the level of social practices and orders of discourse.


Let me begin with a highly condensed summary analysis of the contemporary ‘political
condition’, in the form of four major claims:
Globalization in its dominant neoliberal form has been associated with changes in
the State and national (as well as international) politics (Harvey, 2003; Pieterse,
2004).
There is a tendency of the State to become a ‘competition state’ with the primary
objective of securing competitive advantage for the capital based within its borders
(Jessop, 2002).
There is an associated tendency within mainstream politics for the political division
and contestation (e.g. between political parties) characteristic of the previous period
to weaken, and for consensus to emerge on the main strategy and policy issues
(Rancière, 2006).
This tendency constitutes a fundamental political danger; not only is it a threat to
democracy, it also creates a vacuum which can be filled by nationalism and
xenophobia (Mouffe, 2005; Rancière, 1995).
The fourth point is based upon particular views of the general character of (democratic)
politics and of politics in modern democracies. I shall refer specifically to Rancière’s
version. He argues that democracies, both ancient and modern, are mixed forms, as
anticipated by Aristotle when he characterized ‘a good regime’ as a ‘mixture of
constitutions … there should appear to be elements of both (oligarchy and democracy) yet
at the same time of neither … the oligarch sees oligarchy and the democrat democracy’
(see Aristotle, Politics IV: 1294b, cited in Everson [1996]). This follows from the fact
that ‘the question of politics begins in every city with the existence of the mass of the
aporoi, those who have no means, and the small number of the euporoi, those who have
them’ (Rancière, 1995: 13). The task of politics is to calm and control the irreducible
conflict between rich and poor, which means curbing the excesses of democracy. What
we now call ‘democracies’ are actually oligarchies in which government is exercised by
the minority over the majority. What makes them specifically democratic is that the power
of oligarchies rests upon the power of the people, most obviously because governments
are elected. In democracies, oligarchy and democracy are opposing principles in tension,
and any regime is an unstable compromise between them. The public sphere is the sphere
of encounters and conflicts between these principles: governments tend to reduce and
appropriate the public sphere, relegating non-State actors to the private sphere;
democracy is the struggle against this privatization, to enlarge the public sphere and
oppose the public/private division imposed by government.
In contemporary democracies, the ‘conflictual equilibrium’ associated with popular
sovereignity is being undermined. The oligarchic system is being combined with a
‘consensual vision’ on the claim that contemporary reality, the global economy and the


prospect of endless ‘growth’ which it promises, do not leave us with a choice.
Government is the business of ‘managing the local effects of global necessity’, which
requires consensus and an end to the ‘archaic’ indulgence of political division.
Oligarchies are tempted by the vision of governing without the people, i.e. without the
division of the people, which means effectively without politics, rendering popular
sovereignty problematic. But the suppressed division inevitably returns, both in the form
of mobilization outside the political system (e.g. against the negative effects of neoliberal
globalization or the Iraq war) and in the dangerous form of extreme-right nationalism and
xenophobia.
A priority for political analysis is consequently contemporary processes of
depoliticization, which is by no means a new strategy (according to Rancière (1995), it
is ‘the oldest task of politics’) but is now emerging in a particularly profound and
threatening form. Depoliticization is the exclusion of issues and/or of people from
processes of political deliberation and decision – placing them outside politics. But
politicization is equally a priority if we are to analyse the tension between the principles
of oligarchy and democracy, the democratic response to depoliticization, and how
responses might develop a momentum capable of contesting the push towards
depoliticization. Others have also identified depoliticization and politicization as
priorities (Hay, 2007; Muntigl, 2002b; Palonen, 1993; Sondermann, 1997), but from
different theoretical perspectives.
This prioritization provides a basis for questioning the centrality which has been
attributed to other problems and issues. Let me briefly mention two. First, the centrality
attributed to ‘sub-politics’ or ‘life politics’ by theorists of ‘reflexive modernity’, which is
linked to the recent prominence of ‘identity politics’. This accords with the perspective
above in giving prominence to ‘grassroots’ political action, but clashes with it in
construing such politics as an alternative to adversarial politics centred around the
political system. The ‘grassroots’ politics of politicization is both defined and limited by
the opposing logic of depoliticization, which means that state-and government-focused
adversarial politics is by no means outdated. Second, the centrality attributed by, for
instance, those influenced by Habermas to ‘deliberative democracy’ also tends to be
associated with the assumption that adversarial politics can be superseded and to
construe political dialogue as a rational process of consensus-formation, rather than a
process which allows divisions, differences and conflicts to be contained within a shared
political community without the assumption that these are just ‘problems’ waiting to be
‘solved’. In different theoretical terms, we could say: these are contradictions, and
although they can be managed, they cannot be solved within the parameters of the existing
system (Jessop, 2002). This does not diminish or ignore cooperation in politics: conflict
in political dialogue requires cooperation (only those who are cooperating at a certain
level can stage a conflict), and adversarial politics necessarily includes cooperative
moments (e.g. the formation of alliances).
We can fruitfully develop a specifically semiotic ‘point of entry’ into analysing the


processes of depoliticization and politicization. I shall illustrate this below in my
analysis of the texts. This does not exclude other issues and associated categories which
have tended to receive more attention in political discourse analysis, and indeed I shall
refer to some (legitimation, manipulation, ideology, cooperation and identity). But it does
imply a different ‘mapping’ of the relations between categories which may lead to
reconceptualizing or changing some of them.
Politicization and depoliticization are high-level strategies or ‘macro-strategies’; so
are legitimation and delegitimation. Strategies combine goals and means, and these
macro-strategies are both means for achieving oligarchic or democratic goals (e.g.
governing with minimal interference from political divisions, or pushing political
differences into the public sphere), and goals in their own right associated with further
strategies as means. We can identify strategies for (de)politicization and (de)legitimation
– for instance, ‘authorization’ and ‘rationalization’ have been suggested as legitimation
strategies (V
an Leeuwen, 2007; V
an Leeuwen and Wodak, 1999). All of these are
political strategies, not semiotic (or ‘discourse’) strategies, though they are generally
realized semiotically.
I suggested above that the object of research could be broadly formulated as the
complex relationship between discourse and reality in adapting national strategy and
policy for the global economy. We can now reformulate it more precisely: semiotic
realizations of strategies of depoliticization and politicization in national responses to the
‘global economy’, focusing on the competitiveness policy in the UK.
An illustration: analysing political texts
I come now to the analysis of two sample texts. The one I shall begin with is the
Foreword written by the former British Prime Minister Tony Blair to the Department of
Trade and Industry’s White Paper on Competitiveness (DTI, 1998 – see Appendix 1). I
shall organize my comments according to the stages and steps listed in the Methodology
section, but I have just been effectively discussing aspects of Stage 1 so I shall keep my
comments on it brief.
Stage 1: Focus upon a social wrong, in its semiotic aspect
The social wrong I shall focus upon is the suppression or marginalization of political
differences over important issues of strategy and policy – how to respond nationally to
radical international economic changes (and the prior question of what the changes
actually are) – in favour of creating a consensus, which is, as I indicated above, a social
wrong in that it undermines democracy but also poses the danger that dissent, which
cannot be politically articulated, may emerge in nationalist or xenophobic forms. A


semiotic point of entry is possible and fruitful, focusing upon semiotic realizations of the
macro-strategy of depoliticization, in accordance with the construction of the object of
research which I have discussed above. The second text, an extract from a book (Brown
and Coates, 1996) written by former members of the Labour Party criticizing Blair’s
‘New Labour’ government, exemplifies semiotic realizations of the macro-strategy of
politicization. (Note that both macro-strategies may however be at work in the same text.)
Blair’s text is representative of the dominant tendency of the times towards
depoliticization; but this tendency coexists with politicizing responses such as that of the
second text, even if the latter often have a relatively marginal effect on government
strategy and policy. I have already discussed steps 1 and 2 above, on the construction of
an object of research for the research topic, in anticipation of the illustration, so we can
move on to Stage 2.
Stage 2: Identify obstacles to addressing the social wrong
I shall discuss Stage 2 by taking each of the three steps it includes in turn.
Step 1: Analyse dialectical relations between semiosis and other social elements (orders of discourse and elements of
social practices, texts and elements of events).
Step 1 also implicitly includes the dialectic between structures (at the intermediate level
of social practices) and events (and strategies). I have already (in the previous section)
given an indication of the social practices and orders of discourse at issue here, but let
me fill this out a little with respect to the ‘re-structuring’ and ‘re-scaling’ (Jessop, 2002)
tendencies associated with contemporary capitalism, and a brief note on New Labour in
Britain.
Re-structuring is changes in structural relations, notably between economic and non-
economic fields, which include extensive ‘colonization’ of the latter (including politics
and the State) by the former; re-scaling is changing relations between global, regional,
national and local scales of social life, including changes in government and governance.
Analysing these tendencies would help contextualize the UK strategies and policies which
are in focus – i.e. help determine what they are a part of. National governments are
increasingly incorporated within larger networks which include not only other
governments but also international agencies (e.g. the European Union, the World Bank,
the IMF), business networks and so forth. Governments, according to Castells (1996), are
increasingly coming to function as ‘nodes’ within a transnational network based upon a
business–government complex, whose central ‘functions’ are focused upon creating the
conditions (financial, fiscal, legal, ‘human capital’, etc.) for successful competition in the
‘global economy’. If the government strategies and policies in focus here are locked into
this powerful network, this in itself constitutes a substantial obstacle to addressing the
social wrong.
But these processes of re-structuring and re-scaling have an important semiotic


dimension: the networks of social practices which they entail are also orders of discourse
which themselves cut across structural and scalar boundaries. For example, the dominant
neoliberal discourse of globalization illustrated in the first text is dominant in education
as well as politics, and in the European Union, the World Bank and many other countries
apart from Britain. There are also genres and styles which are disseminated structurally
and in scale in a similar way (Fairclough, 2006). Moreover, the semiotic dimension is
fundamental to re-structuring and re-scaling, in the sense that these processes are
‘semiotically driven’. They begin as discourses which constitute ‘imaginaries’ (Jessop,
2004, 2008) – imaginary projections – for new relations of structure and scale in
economies, government, education and so forth; these may become hegemonic, or
dominant, and may be widely recontextualized; in so far as they do become hegemonic,
they are ‘operationalized’ in new structures, practices, relations and institutions; and the
operationalization itself has a partly semiotic aspect in the emergence and dissemination
of genres and ‘genre networks’ (see below), which enable the governance of these
complex new networks, as well as styles. The semiotic dimension, deeply embedded
within and constitutive of the new structural and scalar relations, is itself a part of the
obstacles to addressing the social wrong.
With respect to the dialectic between texts and other elements of social events, the
general point is that political texts are not some superficial embroidery upon political
events but a fundamental, constitutive part of them. In this case, for example, the strategies
and policies of the Blair government for building British ‘competitiveness’ in adapting to
the ‘global economy’ have a clearly textual character. They are formed, disseminated and
legitimized within complex chains and networks of events (committee meetings, reports,
parliamentary debates, press statements and press conferences, etc.) which are largely
chains and networks of texts – i.e. different types of texts which are regularly and
systematically linked together. They are linked for instance in accordance with the ‘genre
networks’ I referred to above – systematically linked genres (e.g. discussion, report,
debate) which semiotically constitute procedures – in this case, procedures of governance
(on ‘chains’ of events, texts and genres, see Fairclough, 2003). These strategy and policy
processes thus have a largely textual character, and require textual analysis. The
illustrative examples are just two small samples from the complex networks of texts
involved.
The analysis would need to go into some detail about politics and social change in
Britain. I have no space for such detail here, but let me make a couple of points (see
further Fairclough, 2000a). First, ‘New Labour’ abandoned the traditional social
democracy of the British Labour Party to embrace the neoliberalism of preceding
Conservative governments (those of Margaret Thatcher and John Major). The effect was
to produce a neoliberal consensus on major policy issues within mainstream politics and
a common political discourse – the associated tendency to exclude opposition is
precisely the ‘social wrong’ I am addressing. Second, the infamous preoccupation of
New Labour with media ‘spin’ (close management and manipulation of the presentation


of policies and events in the media) indicates the growing importance of semiotic
processes (political ‘communication’) in government. Thus, the form of politics which
has developed with New Labour poses specifically semiotic obstacles to addressing the
social wrong at issue.
Step 2: Select texts and categories for analysis
With respect to Step 2, the constitution of the object of research indicates the selection of
texts in which the macro-strategies of depoliticization and politicization are semiotically
realized. My examples here are both written texts, but one would also want to include, for
instance, not only discussions, debates and interviews on TV and radio, and websites, but
also material from campaigns, protests and demonstrations centred upon ‘the global
economy’ and government strategy and policy oriented towards it, and material
representing how people experience and react to the drive for ‘competitiveness’ in a
variety of situated contexts (e.g. conversations and discussions within workplaces).
Appropriate focuses and categories for the analysis include semiotic strategies which
realize de/politicization, including argumentation and rhetorical strategies, as well as
semiotic aspects and realizations of legitimation, manipulation, ideology, cooperation and
identity. I shall be more specific about some of these in discussing the texts.
Step 3: Carry out analyses of texts
The first text is structured as an argument whose structure we can schematically
reconstruct as follows:
Premises:
The modern world is changing.
There are opportunities to succeed and prosper in the modern world.
If we want to succeed and prosper, we must compete effectively.
Implicit premise: (We do want to succeed and prosper.)
Conclusion:
Therefore, we must compete (more) effectively.
The argumentation realizes semiotically the macro-strategy of legitimation, and
specifically the strategy of rationalization: it is an example of the government’s attempt to
legitimize its political strategy and the policies associated with it as necessary responses
to the situation.
The argument is formally valid, but whether it is sound or not (i.e. whether it is a
reasonable argument) depends upon the truth of its premises. We can challenge the
argument, argue that it is fallacious, by challenging the truth of its premises (Iet cu, 2006).
I want to specifically question the premises on the grounds that they (a) predicate the
possible success of a problematic identity category as subject (‘we’), and (b) falsely
claim that the change attributed to the modern world is simply an inevitable fact of life
which ‘we’ must accept. Both of these flaws in the premises can be associated with the
macro-strategy of depoliticization.


With respect to the first flaw, the identity category ‘we’ is problematic in that it is
based upon a false equation between ‘we’ = ‘Britain’ and ‘we’ = all the citizens of
Britain: if Britain achieves ‘success’ or ‘prosperity’, it does not follow that all of its
citizens do. This is the ‘fallacy of division’, when a general category has properties
which are mistakenly attributed to each of its parts. One sentence clearly implies that this
does follow: ‘That is the route to commercial success and prosperity for all’. This fallacy
is a banal feature of governmental discourse, but it is fundamental to the macro-strategy of
depoliticization, whose basic strategic goal is to dedifferentiate potentially antagonistic
identities – the internal division of the political community into ‘us’ and ‘them’. In this
sense, identity and the semiotic construal of identities are a major focus in analysis which
prioritizes depoliticization.
The issue in semiotic terms is personal deixis. There are two personal ‘deictic
centres’, or positionings of the author (Blair) with respect to identity: he positions himself
within two group identities – ‘we’ = the government, and ‘we’ = the country. It is
commonplace in the literature on identity that identity entails difference – ‘we’ entails
‘they’ (Connolly, 1991). We might say that ‘we’ = the government is implicitly construed
in opposition to ‘they’ = previous governments which pursued strategies which are
rejected because they ‘did not and cannot work’: ‘old-fashioned state intervention’ and
‘naive reliance on markets’; whereas ‘we’ = the country is construed in opposition to
‘competitors’. But notice that the construal of personal deixis excludes a ‘we/they’
division both within the political community (‘Britain’) and within the contemporary
political field (political system), where no contemporaneous political ‘opposition’ is
construed. The implication is that there is consensus within both the political community
and the political field. This is depoliticization.
Texts semiotically construe identities and simultaneously seek to make these construals
persuasive. The fact that we can show fallacies in Blair’s argument does not mean that it
will be widely perceived as fallacious, and we must consider what might make the
argument and construal of identities persuasive. This brings us to the second flaw, in the
construal of world change.
Dominant construals of ‘the new global order’ have certain predictable linguistic
characteristics (on the linguistic categories I mention below, see Fairclough, 2003):
processes of change are construed without responsible social agents; they are construed
in a timeless, ahistorical present; statements about the new economy (which are often very
familiar truisms) are construed categorically and authoritatively as unmodalized truths,
and there is a movement from the ‘is’ of the economic to the ‘ought’ of the political –
from what is categorically the case to what ‘we’ ought to do in response; the new
economic reality is construed as indifferent to place; and series of evidences or
appearances in the new economy are construed paratactically as lists. I have shown
elsewhere 
(Fairclough, 
2000b) 
that 
these features 
are 
sustained 
through
recontextualization, appearing in economic texts (e.g. texts of the World Bank), political
texts, educational texts and so forth, as well as on different scales.


They are also evident in Blair’s text, and they can be seen as aspects of the semiotic
realization of depoliticization. In the construal of economic change in the ‘modern world’,
there is an absence of responsible social agents. Agents of material processes are abstract
or inanimate. In the first paragraph, ‘change’ is the agent in the first (passive) sentence,
and ‘new technologies’ and ‘new markets’ are agents in the second – agents, notice, of
intransitive verbs (‘emerge’, ‘open up’) which construe change as happenings or
processes without agents. The third sentence is existential – ‘new competitors’ and ‘new
opportunities’ are merely claimed to exist, not located within processes of change. Notice
also that in the third paragraph, the inanimate ‘this new world’ is the agent of
‘challenges’, construing change itself as articulating what responses to it are necessary.
By contrast, when it comes to national responses to these implacable and impersonal
processes of world change, social agents are fully present – business, the government, the
DTI and especially ‘we’.
Turning to time, tense and modality, world change is construed in the ahistorical
‘timeless’ present tense, as indeed are national responses, and, in terms of modality,
through authoritative categorical assertions of truisms (e.g. ‘The modern world is swept
by change’, and indeed all five statements in the first paragraph). The only historical
reference is to the ‘old-fashioned’ strategies in paragraph 4. There is a movement from
‘is’ to ‘ought’. ‘Ought’ is implicit in paragraphs 2 and 3: ‘our success depends on how
well we exploit our most valuable assets’ implies that we should exploit them; ‘this new
world challenges business to be innovative’ and ‘government to create’ imply that
business and government should do these things. From paragraph 5 onwards, ‘ought’ is
explicit and recurrent – the modal verb ‘must’ occurs six times. The domain of ‘is’ is
world change; the domain of ‘ought’ is national responses: a divide is textually
constructed between economics and politics (there is an ‘industrial policy’, but focused
on enabling the economic process rather than radically shaping it), fact and value, which
excludes the former from the latter. This differs from the social democratic tradition from
which New Labour has come; earlier Labour governments used political power to change
the economy, for example by nationalizing private industries, taking them into state
control. In contrast with economic processes, political processes do have responsible
social agents: the agent in processes modalized with ‘must’ is in five cases ‘we’ and in
one case ‘the government’. Summing up, world change is a process without a history
which ‘we’ must respond to. Moreover, world change is implicitly construed as
indifferent to place – there are no place expressions in the first or third paragraphs.
The syntax is paratactic,4 in relations between both sentences and phrases within
sentences. The first paragraph, for instance, consists of three paratactically related
sentences (the second and third contain paratactically related clauses), listing evidences
of world change. The same is true of the second paragraph. Notice that the sequencing of
these sentences is not significant and is changeable (with minor rewording) without any
substantive meaning change. Indeed, what is included in this list of evidences is
somewhat arbitrary; for instance, the second sentence of the first paragraph might have


been ‘Huge amounts of money move across the globe in a fraction of a second, and even
our family cat, Socks, has his own homepage on the World Wide Web’. The second
clause is fanciful only in that Blair does not have a cat called Socks. It was actually
included in a very similar list in a book by Bill Clinton. What is significant, rhetorically,
is the relentless accumulation of evidences of change – what Clarke and Newman (1998)
call ‘the cascade of change’ – which persuasively (and manipulatively) establishes the
new economy as simple fact, what we must live with and respond to.
Summing up, change is authoritatively construed as lists of known appearances (and
truisms) in the present which are indifferent to place and whose social agency is effaced,
and which must be responded to in certain ways. These features together construe the new
economy as a simple fact to which there is no alternative. They locate the ‘global
economy’ within the ‘realm of necessity’, and therefore outside the ‘realm of contingency
and deliberation’, i.e. outside the realm of politics, semiotically realizing the macro-
strategy of depoliticization (Hay, 2007). We can say that in so far as this sort of discourse
achieves significant public acceptance, which it has, it is part of the obstacles to
addressing the social wrong.
Let me briefly comment on interdiscursive analysis. One can see Blair’s text as
recontextualizing analyses of the ‘global economy’ more fully elaborated in texts
produced such as within the World Bank, and their particular discourse (construals of,
narratives of and arguments about the ‘global economy’). Blair’s text is not primarily an
analytical text but an advocative text, arguing for ‘necessary’ policies. But it is
interdiscursively complex in grounding this advocative argument in the recontextualized
analysis, combining analytical and advocative genres (as well as economic and political
discourses). This type of recontextualization and interdiscursive hybridity is common as a
semiotic realization of a favoured legitimation strategy: legitimizing by appeal to expert
knowledge. Notice that the expert discourse is not the same here as it might be in
specialist economic texts. For instance, in the first paragraph, the construal of change in
the global economy is stripped down to three short sentences which furthermore
incorporate characteristic features of political rhetoric (the dramatic metaphor ‘swept by
change’, the antithesis of ‘new competitors but also great new opportunities’), and which
constitute dramatic and potentially persuasive formulations of premises in the argument.
Recontextualization involves transformation to suit the new context, which affects forms
of interdiscursive hybridity.
In discussing Stage 2, I have identified a number of obstacles to addressing the social
wrong at issue, and shown that they are partly semiotic in nature. Let me summarize them:
the national and international networks that government strategies and policies are
embedded within; the consensual character of mainstream politics in Britain; and an
influential political discourse, exemplified in the Blair text, which in various ways
contributes to depoliticizing the global economy and national responses to it.


Stage 3: Consider whether the social order ‘needs’ the social wrong
I anticipated this example in discussing Stage 3 in the Methodology section, where I
suggested how the suppression of political differences in favour of consensus might be
interpreted as necessary for states to operate effectively within the hegemonic, neoliberal
strategy. We might add that achieving a broad consensus within the political system
depends upon semiotic conditions – achieving semiotic hegemony, or broad acceptance of
the sort of discourse we have here. And as I noted above, this can be interpreted in terms
of ideology as the naturalization of meanings which sustain relations of power and
domination. So it seems plausible that the social order does ‘need’ the social wrong in
this case – addressing it might require wider changes in the social order – and that, since
the wrong has a partly semiotic character, it also ‘needs’ certain characteristics of
contemporary political discourse.
Stage 4: Identify possible ways past the obstacles
At this point, I shall introduce the second text (see Appendix 2), an extract from a book
(Brown and Coates, 1996) written by two longstanding members of the Labour Party
about New Labour’s view of what they call ‘capitalist globalization’. This will allow
some necessarily brief, partial and sketchy comments on the other main macro-strategy –
politicization.
I mentioned one adversarial feature in the first text: a rejection of the ‘old-fashioned
state intervention’ and the ‘naive reliance on markets’ of previous governments, while
implying that there were no contemporaneous divisions on the nature of ‘world change’ or
the national strategies needed to adjust to it. The second text, by contrast, enters into
adversarial dialogue with contemporaries, specifically Blairites. The macro-strategy of
politicization is semiotically realized in the text’s dialogicality. Specifically, there are
claims which are denials of claims made ‘elsewhere’, by New Labour politicians among
others: ‘What has changed is not that capital is more mobile’ and ‘it is not true that
national governments – and by extension the European Union – are totally lacking in
powers to employ against the arbitrary actions of transnational capital’. In this respect,
the strategy is to politicize by construing the nature of ‘world change’ and government
responses as controversial matters, subject to political difference and division.
Text 2 also politicizes by counterposing to the New Labour narrative of collaboration
between government and business a narrative of conflict between government and
business, capital and labour. Notice that both texts construe the global(ized) economy as a
reality which countries need to adjust to, but in radically different ways. In the second but
not the first, the construal of the global(ized) economy does include responsible social
agents: the companies, whose actions are construed in general and negative terms
(‘moving internationally from bases …’, ‘the arbitrary actions of transnational capital’,


‘divide and conquer’). The text also construes relations between the companies and
national governments, contrasting the ‘clientelist’ relations which tend to exist and which
New Labour advocates (‘nation-states … clients of transnational companies’) with
adversarial relations which could and by implication should exist (‘employing’ their
‘powers … against the arbitrary actions of transnational capital’, ‘making or withholding
tax concessions’, ‘bargaining’). The same contrast between what is and what
could/should be is construed in relations between the EU and national governments
(‘reinforcing’ the status of nation states as ‘clients’ of the companies, versus ‘offering a
lead and challenge to the nation states’).
In sum, whereas text 1 depoliticizes by construing a consensus on the global economy
as an inevitable fact of life and building national competitiveness as a necessary
response, text 2 politicizes by construing the globalized economy as a stake in struggles
between governments and transnationals, and capital and labour, and by opposing that
construal to the government’s consensualist construal. But the mere existence of texts
which politicize in this way does not amount to ‘ways past the obstacles’. This text offers
an imaginary for a different, politicizing strategy in response to a differently conceived
global(ized) economy; it shows that different imaginaries are possible and indeed exist,
but we would also need to consider how feasible it would be to operationalize this or
some other imaginary in a strategy which could actually succeed and be implemented in
the face of the sort of obstacles I have begun to indicate. It’s not impossible, but it’s
difficult to see how at present: there are abundant alternative imaginaries, but there is
currently no clear counter-hegemonic strategy. A fuller treatment than I have space for
would include an analysis of attempts to develop oppositional strategies and their
semiotic dimensions.
Discussion
The theoretical claim that relations between semiosis and other social elements are
dialectical in character, and the methodological focus on these relations rather than on
semiosis as such, mean that this approach to CDA is particularly attuned to
transdisciplinary research, to working with the grain of various bodies of social theory
and research, but at the same time bringing to them an enhancement of their capacity to
address often neglected semiotic dimensions of their research objects, as well as taking
from them perspectives and research logics which can contribute to the further
development of the dialectical–relational approach itself.
As with any approach, there are things about which the dialectical–relational approach
has little to say. We should distinguish however between issues and problems it has not
got around to because others seemed more pressing or more interesting or simply because
life is short, and issues and problems which fall outside its remit and are thus not issues


and problems for it (though they may be for other approaches). An example of the former
is a relative emphasis on the workings of power rather than the workings of reception,
reaction and resistance to power – I stress relative because the latter have not been
entirely neglected (see, for instance, Fairclough, 2006). Critics might reasonably say that
I have ‘done it again’ in this chapter, spending more time on depoliticization than
politicization. This has been a bias in my work, perhaps partly because of the sort of left-
wing politics I was involved with in the 1970s, but it is not in my opinion a limitation of
the approach as such. An example of the latter is a lack of attention to psychological and
cognitive matters. I would agree that cognitively oriented research on discourse can
complement the dialectical–relational approach, but I would not accept that an absence of
attention to cognitive issues is a ‘blindspot’ in the approach, still less that it in some
sense invalidates the approach.
Chilton, for example, has suggested that a proper understanding of the cognitive
capacities of humans may lead to the conclusion that CDA is trying to teach people what
they already know. ‘Put bluntly, if people have a natural ability to treat verbal input
critically, in what sense can CDA either reveal in discourse what people can … already
detect for themselves or educate them to detect it for themselves?’ (Chilton, 2005a). Yet
the closing sentences of Chilton (2004) note that ‘if people are indeed political animals
… then they are also in principle capable of doing their own political critique. The
important question is whether they are free to do so’. I agree. Chilton (2005a) argues that
although there are various conditions under which people are not free, ‘it is doubtful that
any of them can be elucidated by purely linguistic or discourse-analytical means. For they
would seem to have to do with economic forces or sociopolitical institutions’. The main
problem with this argument is indicated by the contrast between ‘purely’ linguistic or
discourse-analytical factors and economic forces or sociopolitical institutions. From a
dialectical–relational perspective, economic forces and sociopolitical institutions are in
part semiotic, and analysis has to be in part semiotic analysis. The fact that people have
cognitive capacities which make them in principle capable of seeing through manipulative
intentions and even doing their own political critique (which CDA, far from discounting,
presupposes) does not mean that they are generally capable in practice of seeing through
the complex dialectical relations between semiotic and non-semiotic elements which
constitute the social, political and economic conditions of their lives.
FURTHER READING
Chouliaraki, L. and Fairclough, N. (1999) Discourse in Late Modernity. Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press.
This book shows the relationships of an earlier version of this approach to various sources and influences in social
theory and research.
Fairclough, N. (2000a) New Labour, New Language? London: Routledge.
A popular introduction to analysis of political discourse, based upon a simplified version of this approach to CDA.


Fairclough, N. (2003) Analysing Discourse: Textual Analysis for Social Research. London: Routledge.
This book focuses on using textual analysis in social research within the dialectical–relational approach, with many
examples of possible applications.
Fairclough, N. (2005a) ‘Critical discourse analysis’, Marges Linguistiques 9: 76–94.
A recent overview of the dialectical–relational approach in an electronic journal available free of charge on the
internet.
Fairclough, N. (2006) Language and Globalization. London: Routledge.
This text exemplifies the application of the dialectical–relational approach in transdisciplinary research on
globalization.
Appendix 1 – Building the knowledge-driven economy
Foreword by the Prime Minister
The modern world is swept by change. New technologies emerge constantly; new markets
are opening up. There are new competitors but also great new opportunities.
Our success depends on how well we exploit our most valuable assets: our knowledge,
skills and creativity. These are the key to designing high-value goods and services and
advanced business practices. They are at the heart of a modern, knowledge-driven
economy.
This new world challenges business to be innovative and creative, to improve
performance continuously, to build new alliances and ventures. But it also challenges
government: to create and execute a new approach to industrial policy.
This is the purpose of this White Paper. Old-fashioned state intervention did not and
cannot work. But neither does naive reliance on markets.
The government must promote competition, stimulating enterprise, flexibility and
innovation by opening markets. But we must also invest in British capabilities when
companies alone cannot: in education, in science and in the creation of a culture of
enterprise. And we must promote creative partnerships which help companies: to
collaborate for competitive advantage; to promote a long-term vision in a world of short-
term pressures; to benchmark their performance against the best in the world; and to forge
alliances with other businesses and employees. All this is the DTI’s role.
We will not meet our objectives overnight. The White Paper creates a policy
framework for the next ten years. We must compete effectively in today’s tough markets if
we are to prosper in the markets of tomorrow.
In government, in business, in our universities and throughout society, we must do much
more to foster an entrepreneurial spirit: equipping ourselves for the long term, prepared


to seize opportunities, committed to constant innovation and enhanced performance. That
is the route to commercial success and prosperity for all. We must put the future on
Britain’s side.
The Rt Hon. Tony Blair MP, Prime Minister
Appendix 2
Capital has always been global, moving internationally from bases in the industrialized
countries. What has changed is not that capital is more mobile … but that the national
bases are less important as markets and production centres. In other words, the big
transnational companies are not only bigger but more free-standing … The European
Union, far from offering a lead and a challenge to the nation-states of Europe, reinforces
their status as clients of the transnational companies. Indeed, this clientism applies not
only to companies based in Europe … While it is true that a national capitalism is no
longer possible in a globalized economy, it is not true that national governments – and by
extension the European Union – are totally lacking in powers to employ against the
arbitrary actions of transnational capital. There is much that governments can do in
bargaining – in making or withholding tax concessions, for example … But such
bargaining has to have an international dimension or the transnational companies can
simply continue to divide and conquer … New Labour appears to have abandoned what
remained of Labour’s internationalist traditions … Yet the ICTFU, the European TUC and
the Geneva trade groups all offer potential allies for strengthening the response of British
labour to international capital (Brown and Coates, 1996: 172–4).
Notes
1 I am grateful to Isabela Iet cu, Michael Meyer and Ruth Wodak for commenting on a draft version of the
chapter.
2 Critical realism is a realist philosophy of science and social science which has been developed especially in the
work of Roy Bhaskar (Bhaskar, 1986). Cultural political economy is a version of political economy which
claims that economic processes and systems are culturally and semiotically conditioned and embedded, as well as
politically.
3 In the first edition of this book and in other publications, I referred to social ‘problems’ rather than ‘wrongs’. I
have changed this because I think that construing all wrongs as ‘problems’ which need ‘solutions’ – which can in
principle be provided even if they have not been so far in practice – is part of the self-justifying (and one might
say ideological) discourse of contemporary social systems in countries like Britain. The objection to it is that some
wrongs are produced by systems and are not resolvable within them.
4 Paratactic–syntactic relations are relations between sentences, clauses or phrases which are grammatically
equal, and are coordinated; they contrast with hypotactic relations, where there is one main sentence, clause or
phrase, and others are subordinated.


References
Agar, M. (2002) The Professional Stranger. 3rd unrevised edn. San Diego, CA: Academic Press.
Alexander, J. C., Marx, G. T. and Williams, C. L. (eds) (2004) Self, Social Structure, and Beliefs:
Explorations in sociology. Berkeley: University of California Press.
Altheide, D. L. and Johnson, J. M. (1994) ‘Criteria for Assessing Interpretive Validity in Qualitative Research’, in
N. K. Denzin (ed.), Handbook of Qualitative Research. Thousand Oaks: Sage, pp. 485–499.
Anthonissen, C. (2001) ‘On the Effectivity of Media Censorship: An analysis of linguistic, paralinguistic and other
communicative devices used to defy media restrictions.’ Unpublished PhD thesis, University of Vienna.
Anthonissen, C. and Blommaert, J. (eds) (2007) Discourse and Human Rights Violations. Amsterdam:
Benjamins.
Argyle, M., Furnham, A. and Graham, J. A. (1981) Social Situations. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Auer, P. (ed.) (1992) The Contextualization of Language. Amsterdam: Benjamins.
Augoustinos, M. and Walker, I. (1995) Social Cognition: An integrated introduction. London: Sage.
Baker, P. (2006) Using Corpora in Discourse Analysis. London: Continuum.
Baker, P. and McEnery, T. (2005) ‘A corpus-based approach to discourses of refugees and asylum seekers in
UN and newspaper texts’, Journal of Language and Politics 4(2): 197–226.
Baker, P., McEnery, T. and Gabrielatos, C. (2007) ‘Using collocation analysis to reveal the construction of
minority groups: the case of refugees, asylum seekers and immigrants in the UK press’, paper given at Corpus
Linguistics 2007, University of Birmingham, 28–30 July. Available at: eprints.lancs.ac.uk/602/.
Baker, P., Gabrielatos, C., Khozravinik, M., Krzy anowski, M., McEnery, T., and Wodak, R. (2008) ‘A useful
methodological synergy? Combining critical discourse analysis and corpus linguistics to examine discourses of
refugees and asylum seekers in the UK press’, Discourse and Society 19(3): 273–305.
Balke, F. (1998) ‘Was zu denken zwingt. Gilles Deleuze, Felxi Guattari und das Außen der Philosophie’, in J. Jurt
(ed.), Zeitgenössische Französische Denker: Eine Bilanz. Freiburg im Breisgau: Rombach Litterae, pp. 187–
210.
Bauer, M. W. and Aarts, B. (2000) ‘Corpus Construction: A Principle for Qualitative Data Collection’, in M. W.
Bauer and G. Gaskell (eds), Qualitative Researching with Text, Image and Sound. London: Sage, pp. 19–37.
Bell, A. (1994) ‘Climate of opinion: public and media discourse on the global environment’, Discourse and
Society 5(1): 33–64.
Bellah, R. N. (1973) Emile Durkheim: On morality and society – selected writings. Chicago: University of
Chicago Press.
Berger, P. and Luckmann, T. (1966) The Social Construction of Reality. Harmondsworth: Penguin.
Bernstein, B. (1981) ‘Codes, modalities and the process of cultural reproduction: a model’, Language and
Society 19: 327–363.
Bernstein, B. (1986) ‘On Pedagogic Discourse’, in J. Richardson (ed.), Handbook for Theory and Research in
the Sociology of Education. Connecticut: Greenwood Press.
Bernstein, B. (1990) The Structuring of Pedagogic Discourse. London: Routledge.
Bhaskar, R. (1986) Scientific Realism and Human Emancipation. London: Verso.
Billig, M. (2003) ‘Critical Discourse Analysis and the Development of New Science’, in G. Weiss and R. Wodak
(eds), Critical Discourse Analysis: Theory and Interdisciplinarity. London: MacMillan, pp. 35–46.
Billig, M. (2008) ‘Nominalizing and de-nominalizing: a reply’, Discourse and Society, in press.
Blau, P. M. (1964) Exchange and Power in Social Life. New York: Wiley.
Blommaert, J. (2005) Discourse. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Blommaert, J. and Bulcaen, C. (2000) ‘Critical Discourse Analysis’, Annual Review of Anthropology, 29: 447–
466.
Boden, D. and Zimmerman, D. H. (eds) (1991) Talk and Social Structure: Studies in ethnomethodology and


conversation analysis. Berkeley: University of California Press.
Bourdieu, P. (1977) Outline of a Theory of Practice. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Bourdieu, P. (1984) Homo Academics. Paris: Les Éditions de Minuit.
Bourdieu, P. (1989) La Noblesse d’État: Grandes écoles et esprit de corps. Paris: Éditiones de Minuit.
Bourdieu, P. (1991) Language and Symbolic Power. Cambridge: Polity Press.
Bourdieu, P. and Wacquant, L. (1992) An Invitation to Reflexive Sociology. Cambridge: Polity Press.
Boykoff, M. T. and Boykoff, J. M. (2004) ‘Balance as bias: global warming and the US prestige press’, Global
Environmental Changes – Human and Policy Dimensions 14: 125–136.
Brown, B. M. and Coates, K. (1996) The Blair Revelation: Deliverance for whom? Nottingham: Spokesman.
Brown, G. and Yule, G. (1983) Discourse Analysis. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Brünner, G. and Graefen, G. (eds) (1994) Texte und Diskurse. Opladen: Westdeutscher Verlag.
Bublitz, H. (1999) Foucaults Archäologie des kulturellen Unbewußten: Zum Wissensarchiv und
Wissensbegehren moderner Gesellschaften. Frankfurt am Main: Campus.
Burr, V. (2003) Social Constructionism, 2nd edn. Hove: Routledge.
Caborn, J. (1999) ‘Die Presse und die “Hauptstadtdebatte”: Konstrukte der deutschen Einheit’, in U. Kreft, H.
Uske and S. Jäger (eds), Kassensturz: Politische Hypotheken der Berliner Republik. Duisburg: DISS, pp. 61–
84.
Caborn, J. (2006) Schleichende Wende: Diskurse von Nation und Erinnerung bei der Konstituierung der
Berliner Republik. Münster: Unrast.
Castells, M. (1996) The Rise of the Network Society. Oxford: Blackwell.
Charteris-Black, J. (2006) Politics and Rhetoric. Basingstoke: Palgrave.
Chilton, P. (1994a) ‘“La plaie qu’il convient de fermer”: Les métaphores du discours raciste’, Journal of
Pragmatics 21(6): 583–619.
Chilton, P. (ed.) (1994b) Schémas cognitifs du discours raciste francais. Vol. 4. Rotterdam: Institute for Social
Policy Research.
Chilton, P. (ed.) (1996a) The Meaning of Security. East Lansing: Michigan State University Press.
Chilton, P. (1996b) Security Metaphors: Cold War discourse from containment to common European home.
Bern: Peter Lang.
Chilton, P. (2004) Analysing Political Discourse: Theory and practice. London: Routledge.
Chilton, P. (2005a) ‘Missing Links in Mainstream CDA: Modules, Blends and the Critical Instinct’, in R. Wodak
and P. Chilton (eds), A New Research Agenda in (Critical) Discourse Analysis: Theory and
Interdisciplinarity. (Reprinted in 2nd edn, 2007.) Amsterdam: Benjamins, pp. 19–52.
Chilton, P. (2005b) ‘Manipulations, Memes and Metaphors: The Case of Mein Kampf’, in L. D. Saussure and P.
Schulz (eds), Manipulation. Amsterdam: Benjamins.
Chilton, P. (2007) ‘Is it Possible to Compare Political Rhetoric across Cultures?’ International Round Table on
Discourse. Hong Kong: City University.
Chilton, P. (2008) ‘Critical Discourse Analysis’, in Cambridge Encyclopedia of the Language Sciences.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, in press.
Chilton, P. and Lakoff, G. (eds) (1995) Metaphor in Foreign Policy Discourse. Dartmouth: Aldershot.
Chilton, P. and Wodak, R. (2007) ‘Preface’, in R. Wodak and P. Chilton (eds), A New Research Agenda in
(Critical) Discourse Analysis: Theory and Interdisciplinarity. Amsterdam: Benjamins, pp. xi–xviii. (Revised
2nd edn.) Chilton, P., Tian, H. and Wodak, R. (eds) (forthcoming) New Discourses in Contemporary China.
Hong Kong: Hong Kong University Press.
Chouliaraki, L. (1995)‘Regulation and Heteroglossia in One Institutional Context: The Case of a “Progressivist”
English Classroom.’ Unpublished PhD thesis, University of Lancaster.
Chouliaraki, L. and Fairclough, N. (1999) Discourse in Late Modernity. Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press.
Church, K. and Hanks, P. (1990) ‘Word association norms, mutual information, and lexicography’,
Computational Linguistics 16(1): 22–29.


Clarke, J. and Newman, J. (1998) A Modern British People? New Labour and the reconstruction of social
welfare. Copenhagen: Department of Intercultural Communication and Management, Copenhagen Business
School.
Clear, J. (1993) ‘From Firth Principles: Computational Tools for the Study of Collocation’, in M. Baker, G. Francis
and E. Tognini-Bonelli (eds), Text and Technology: In Honour of John Sinclair. Amsterdam: Benjamins, pp.
271–292.
Connerton, P. (1976) How Societies Remember. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. (Reprinted 1996.)
Connolly, W. (1991) Identity/Difference. Ithaca: Cornell University Press.
Cotterill, J. (2001) ‘Domestic discord, rocky relationships: semantic prosodies in representations of marital violence
in the O. J. Simpson trial’, Discourse and Society 12(3): 291–312.
de Beaugrande, R. (1997) ‘The Story of Discourse Analysis’, in T. A. van Dijk (ed.), Discourse as Structure
and Process (Discourse Studies: A Multidisciplinary Introduction. Vol. 1). London: Sage, pp. 35–62.
de Cillia, R. and Wodak, R. (eds) (2008) Gedenken im Gedankenjahr. Innsbruck: Studienverlag.
Delanty, G., Wodak, R. and Jones, P. (eds) (2008) Migration, Identity and Belonging. Liverpool: Liverpool
University Press.
Deleuze, G. (1988) Foucault. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.
Denzin, N. K. (1970) The Research Act in Sociology. London: Butterworth.
Department of Trade and Industry (DTI) (1998) White Paper on Competitiveness. London: The Stationery
Office.
Döring, H. and Hirschauer, S. (1997) ‘Die Biographie der Dinge: Eine Ethnographie musealer Representation’, in
S. Hirschauer and K. Amann (eds), Die Befremdung der eigenen Kultur. Frankfurt am Main: Suhrkamp, pp.
267–297.
Drews, A., Gerhard, U. and Link, J. (1985) ‘Moderne Kollektivsymbolik: Eine diskurstheoretisch orientierte
Einführung mit Auswahlbiographie’, Internationales Archiv für Sozialgeschichte der deutschen Literatur
(IASL). Tübingen: Sonderheft Forschungsreferate, pp. 256–375.
Dreyfus, H. L. and Rabinow, P. (1982) Michel Foucault: Beyond Structuralism and Hermeneutics. Sussex:
The Harvester Press.
Duranti, A. and Goodwin, C. (eds) (1992) Rethinking Context: Language as an Interactive Phenomenon.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Durkheim, E. (1933) The Division of Labor in Society. New York: The Free Press.
Durkheim, E. (1976) The Elementary Forms of Religious Life. London: Allen and Unwin.
Durkheim, E. and Mauss, M. (1963) Primitive Classification. London: Cohen and West.
Duveen, G. and Lloyd, B. (eds) (1990) Social Representations and the Development of Knowledge.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Ehlich, K. (1983) ‘Text und sprachliches Handeln: Die Entstehung von Texten aus dem Bedürfnis nach
Überlieferung’, in A. Assmann, J. Assmann and C. Hardmeier (eds), Schrift und Gedächtnis: Beiträge zur
Archäologie der literarischen Kommunikation. Munich: Fink, pp. 24–43.
Emerson, R. M. (1962) ‘Power-dependence relations’, American Sociological Review 27: 31–41.
Emerson, R. M. (1975) ‘Social exchange theory’, Annual Review of Sociology 2: 335–362.
Emerson, R. M., Fretz, R. I. and Shaw, L. L. (1995) Writing Ethnographic Fieldnotes. Chicago: University of
Chicago Press.
Ensink, T. and Sauer, C. (eds) (2003) The Art of Commemoration. Amsterdam: Benjamins.
Everson, S. (ed.) (1996) The Politics and the Constitution of Athens. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Fairclough, N. (1989/1991) Language and Power. London: Longman. (Revised 2nd edn, 2001.)
Fairclough, N. (1992a) Discourse and Social Change. Cambridge: Polity Press.
Fairclough, N. (1992b) Critical Language Awareness. London: Longman.
Fairclough, N. (1993) ‘Critical discourse analysis and the marketization of public discourse’, Discourse and
Society 4(2): 133–168.
Fairclough, N. (1995a) Critical Discourse Analysis. London: Longman.


Fairclough, N. (1995b) Media Discourse. London: Edward Arnold.
Fairclough, N. (1996) ‘A reply to Henry Widdowson’s “Discourse analysis: a critical view”’, Language and
Literature 5(1): 49–56. (Reprinted in M. Toolan [ed.] [2002] Critical Discourse Analysis. Vol. 3. London and
New York: Routledge, pp. 148–155.)
Fairclough, N. (2000a) New Labour, New Language? London: Routledge.
Fairclough, N. (2000b) ‘Represenciones del cambio en discurso neoliberal’, Cuadernos de Relaciones
Laborales 16: 13–36.
Fairclough, N. (2003) Analysing Discourse: Text Analysis for Social Research. London: Routledge.
Fairclough, N. (2005a) ‘Critical discourse analysis’, Marges Linguistiques 9: 76–94.
Fairclough, N. (2005b) ‘Critical Discourse Analysis in Transdisciplinary Research’, in R. Wodak and P. Chilton
(eds), A New Agenda in (Critical) Discourse Analysis. Amsterdam: Benjamins, pp. 53–70.
Fairclough, N. (2006) Language and Globalization. London: Routledge.
Fairclough, N. (forthcoming) ‘Language, Reality and Power’, in J. Culpeper, F. Katamba, P. Kerswill and R.
Wodak (eds), English Language and Linguistics. London: Palgrave.
Fairclough, N. and Wodak, R. (1997) ‘Critical Discourse Analysis’, in T. A. van Dijk (ed.), Discourse as Social
Interaction (Discourse Studies: A Multidisciplinary Introduction. Vol. 2). London: Sage, pp. 258–284.
Fairclough, N., Jessop, B. and Sayer A. (2004) ‘Critical Realism and Semiosis’, in J. Joseph and J. Roberts (eds),
Realism, Discourse and Deconstruction. London: Routledge, pp. 23–42.
Falkner, G., Treib, O., Hartlapp, M. and Leiber, S. (2005) Complying with Europe. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Fay, B. (1987) Critical Social Science. London: Polity Press.
Fiske, S.T. and Taylor, S. E. (1991) Social Cognition. 2nd edn. New York: McGraw-Hill.
Foucault, M. (1975) Surveiller et punir: Naissance de la prison. Paris: Gallimard.
Foucault, M. (1977) Language, Counter-Memory, Practice. (D. F. Bouchard and S. Simon, eds.). Ithaca:
Cornell University Press.
Foucault, M. (1979) Discipline and Punish: The Birth of the Prison. Harmondsworth: Penguin Books.
Foucault, M. (1980a) ‘Truth and Power’, in C. Gordon (ed.), Power/Knowledge: Selected Interviews and Other
Writings 1972–1977 by Michel Foucault. New York: Pantheon Books, pp. 107–133.
Foucault, M. (1980b) ‘The Confession of the Flesh’, in C. Gordon (ed.), Power/Knowledge: Selected Interviews
and Other Writings 1972–1977 by Michel Foucault. New York: Pantheon Books, pp. 194–228.
Foucault, M. (1983) Der Wille zum Wissen: Sexualität und Wahrheit. Frankfurt am Main: Suhrkamp.
Foucault, M. (1991) Remarks on Marx: Conversations with Duccio Trombadori. Transl. by R. J. Goldstein
and J. Cascaito. New York: Semiotext(e).
Foucault, M. (1996) ‘What is Critique?’, in J. Schmidt (ed.), What is Enlightenment? Eighteenth-century
Answers and Twentieth-century Questions. Berkeley: University of California Press, pp. 382–398.
Foucault, M. (2002) The Archaeology of Knowledge. London: Routledge. (1st English edn, 1972.)
Fowler, R., Hodge, R., Kress, G. and Trew, T. (eds) (1979) Language and Control. London: Routledge.
French, J. R. P. and Raven, B. (1959) ‘The Bases of Social Power’, in D. Cartwright (ed.), Studies in Social
Power. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan, pp. 150–167.
Froschauer, U. (2002) ‘Artefaktanalyse’, in S. Kühl and P. Strodtholz (eds), Methoden der
Organisationsforschung. Reinbek: Rororo, pp. 361–395.
Gee, J. (2004) Discourse Analysis: Theory and method. London: Routledge.
Giddens, A. (1984) The Constitution of Society: Outline of the theory of structuration. Cambridge: Polity
Press.
Girnth, H. (1996) ‘Texte im politischen Diskurs: Ein Vorschlag zur diskursorientierten Beschreibung von
Textsorten’, Muttersprache 106(1): 66–80.
Glaser, B. and Strauss, A. L. (1967) The Discovery of Grounded Theory: Strategies for qualitative research.
Chicago: Weidenfeld and Nicolson.


Gleason, H.A.J. (1973) ‘Contrastive Analysis in Discourse Structure’, in A. Makkai and D. G. Lockwood (eds),
Readings in Stratificational Linguistics. Tuscaloosa, AL: University of Alabama Press.
Goffman, E. (1970) Strategic Interaction. Oxford: Basil Blackwell.
Gore, A. (2007) Angriff auf die Vernunft. Munich: Riemann.
Graesser, A. C., Gernsbacher, M. A. and Goldman, S. R. (eds) (2003) Handbook of Discourse Processes.
Mahwah, NJ: L. Erlbaum.
Graham, P. (2002) ‘Space and Cyberspace: On the enclosure of consciousness’, in J. Armitage and J. Roberts
(eds), Living with Cyberspace: Technology and Society in the 21st Century. London: The Athlone Press.
Graham, P. and Paulsen, N. (2002) ‘Third-sector discourses and the future of (un)employment: skilled labor, new
technologies, and the meaning of work’, Text 22(3): 443–467.
Grant, D., Hardy, C., Oswick, C. and Putnam, L. (eds) (2004) The Sage Handbook of Organizational
Discourse. London: Sage.
Grimes, J. (1975) The Thread of Discourse. The Hague: Mouton.
Gruber, H. (1991) Antisemitismus und Mediendiskurs. Die Affäre “Waldheim” in der Tagespresse.
Wiesbaden: Deutscher Universitätsverlag.
Gumperz, J. J. (1982) Discourse Strategies. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Habermas, J. (1967) Erkenntnis und Interesse. Frankfurt am Main: Suhrkamp.
Habermas, J. (1996) Die Einbeziehung des Anderen. Studien zur politischen Theorie. Frankfurt am Main:
Suhrkamp.
Halliday, M. A. K. (1978) Language as Social Semiotic. London: Arnold.
Halliday, M. A. K. (1985) An Introduction to Functional Grammar. London: Arnold. (2nd edn, 1994.)
Hammersley, M. and Atkinson, P. (2007) Ethnography: Principles in Practice. 3rd edn. London: Routledge.
Hardt-Mautner, G. (1995) ‘Only Connect: Critical Discourse Analysis and Corpus Linguistics.’ UCREL Technical
Paper 6, University of Lancaster, Lancaster. Available at www.comp.lancs.ac.uk/ucrel/tech_papers.html.
Harvey, D. (1996) Justice, Nature and the Geography of Difference. Oxford: Blackwell. Harvey, D. (2003)
The New Imperialism. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Hay, C. (2007) Why We Hate Politics. Cambridge: Polity Press.
Heer, H., Manoschek, W., Pollak, A. and Wodak, R. (eds) (2008) The Discursive Construction of History:
Remembering the Wehrmacht’s War of Annihilation. Basingstoke: Palgrave.
Horkheimer, M. and Adorno, T. W. (1969/1991 [1944]) Dialektik der Aufklärung: Philosophische Fragmente.
Frankfurt am Main: Fischer.
Hunston, S. (2002) Corpora in Applied Linguistics. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Hunston, S. (2004) ‘Counting the Uncountable: Problems of identifying evaluation in a text and in a corpus’, in A.
Partington, J. Morley and L. Haarman (eds), Corpora and Discourse. Bern: Peter Lang, pp. 157–188.
Iedema, R. (1997) ‘Interactional Dynamics and Social Change: Planning as morpho-genesis.’ Unpublished PhD
thesis, University of Sydney.
Iedema, R. and Wodak, R. (1999) ‘Introduction: organizational discourse and practices’, Discourse and Society
10(1): 5–19.
Iet cu, I. (2006) Discourse Analysis and Argumentation Theory. Bucharest: Editura Universit ii din Bucures ti.
IPCC (Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change) (2007a) Climate Change 2007: Synthesis report,
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change Fourth Assessment Report. Topic 1 (Downloaded from
www.ipcc.ch/pdf/assessment-report/ar4/syr/ar4_syr_topic1.pdf on 9 February 2008).
IPCC (Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change) (2007b) Climate Change 2007: Synthesis report,
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change Fourth Assessment Report. Topic 2 (Downloaded from
www.ipcc.ch/pdf/assessment-report/ar4/syr/ar4_syr_topic2.pdf on 9 February 2008).
Jäger, M. (1996) Fatale Effekte: Die Kritik am Patriarchat im Einwanderungsdiskurs. Duisburg: DISS.
Jäger, S. (2001a) ‘Dispositiv’, in M. S. Kleiner (ed.), Michel Foucault: Eine Einführung in sein Denken.
Frankfurt am Main: Campus, pp. 72–89.
Jäger, S. (2001b) ‘Discourse and Knowledge: Theoretical and methodological aspects of a critical discourse and


dispositive analysis’, in R. Wodak and M. Meyer (eds), Methods of Critical Discourse Analysis. London: Sage,
pp. 32–62.
Jäger, S. (2004) Kritische Diskursanalyse. 4th unrevised edn. Münster: Unrast.
Jäger, S. (ed.) (2008) Wie kritisch ist die Kritische Diskursanalyse? Münster: Unrast.
Jäger, M. and Jäger, S. (2007) Deutungskämpfe: Theorie und Praxis Kritischer Diskursanalyse. Wiesbaden:
VS Verlag.
Jessop, B. (2002) The Future of the Capitalist State. Cambridge: Polity Press.
Jessop, B. (2004) ‘Critical semiotic analysis and cultural political economy’, Critical Discourse Studies 1(2):
159–174.
Jessop, B. (2008) ‘The cultural political economy of competitiveness and its implications for higher education’, in
B. Jessop, N. Fairclough and R. Wodak (eds), Education and the Knowledge-based Economy in Europe.
Amsterdam: Sense Publishers, pp. 13–41.
Jessop, R., Fairclough, N. and Wodak, R. (eds) (2008) Higher Education and the Knowledge Based Economy
in Europe. Rotterdam: Sense Publishers.
Johnson-Laird, P. N. (1983) Mental Models. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Katz, E. and Lazarsfeld, P. F. (1955) Personal Influence. Glencoe: Free Press.
Kienpointner, M. (1992) Alltagslogik: Struktur und Funktion von Argumentationsmustern. Stuttgart-Bad
Cannstatt: Frommann-Holzboog.
Kienpointner, M. (1996) Vernünftig Argumentieren: Regeln und Techniken der Diskussion. Hamburg:
Rowohlt.
Kienpointner, M. and Kindt, W. (1997) ‘On the problem of bias in political argumentation: an investigation into
discussions about political asylum in Germany and Austria’, Journal of Pragmatics 27: 555–585.
Kindt, W. (1992) ‘Argumentation und Konfliktaustragung in Äußerungen über den Golfkrieg’, Zeitschrift für
Sprachwissenschaft 11: 189–215.
Kintsch, W. (1998) Comprehension: A paradigm for cognition. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Klaus, V. (2007) Blauer Planet in grünen Fesseln!Was ist bedroht: Klima oder Freiheit? Vienna: Carl
Gerold’s Sohn Verlagsbuchhandlung.
Klemperer, V. (1975/1947) LTI Lingua Tertii Imperii: Die Sprache des Dritten Reiches. Leipzig: Reclam.
Klemperer, V. (2000/2006 [1947]) The Language of the Third Reich: LTI – Lingua Tertii Imperii: A
Philologist’s Notebook. London: Continuum.
Klemperer, V. (2001) I Will Bear Witness: A diary of the Nazi years. New York: Modern Library.
Knight, K. (2006) ‘Transformations of the concept of ideology in the twentieth century’, American Political
Science Review 100(4): 619–626.
Koller, V. (2008) ‘Identity, Image, Impression: Corporate self-presentation and public reactions’, in R. Wodak and
V. Koller (eds), Handbook of Communication in the Public Sphere (Handbook of Linguistics, Vol. 4).
Berlin: de Gruyter, pp. 155–180.
Koller, V. and Mautner, G. (2004) ‘Computer Applications in Critical Discourse Analysis’, in A. Hewings, C.
Coffin and K. O’Halloran (eds), Applying English Grammar. London: Arnold, pp. 216–228.
Koller, V. and Davidson, P. (2008) ‘Social exclusion as conceptual and grammatical metaphor: a cross-genre
study of British policymaking’, Discourse and Society 19(3): 307–331.
Kovács, A. and Wodak, R. (eds) (2003) Nato, Neutrality and National Identity: The case of Austria and
Hungary. Vienna: Böhlau.
Kress, G. and Hodge, R. (1979) Language as Ideology. London: Routledge.
Kress, G. and Van Leeuwen, T. (1996) Reading Images. London: Routledge.
Krings, H., Baumgartner, H. and Wild, C. (1973) Handbuch philosophischer Grundbegriffe. Munich: Kösel.
Krishnamurthy, R. (1996) ‘Ethnic, Racial and Tribal: The language of racism?’ in C. R. Caldas-Coulthard and M.
Coulthard (eds), Texts and Practices: Readings in Critical Discourse Analysis. London: Routledge, pp. 129–
149.
Krzy anowski, M. and Oberhuber, F. (2007) (Un)Doing Europe. Bern: Peter Lang.


Krzy anowski, M. and Wodak, R. (2008) The Politics of Exclusion: Debating migration in Austria. New
Brunswick, NJ: Transaction Press.
Laclau, E. (1980) ‘Populist rupture and discourse’, Screen Education 34: 87–93.
Lakoff, G. (1987) Women, Fire and Dangerous Things. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Lakoff, G. and Johnson, M. (1980) Metaphors We Live By. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Lakoff, G. and Johnson, M. (1999) Philosophy in the Flesh. New York: Basic Books.
Lalouschek, J., Menz, F. and Wodak, R. (1990) Alltag in der Ambulanz: Gespräche zwischen Ärzten,
Schwestern und Patienten. Tübingen: Narr.
Lazar, M. (ed.) (2005) Feminist Critical Discourse Analysis. Basingstoke: Palgrave.
Le, E. (2006) The Spiral of ‘Anti-Other’ Rhetoric. Amsterdam: Benjamins.
Lemke, J. (1995) Textual Politics: Discourse and social dynamics. London: Taylor and Francis.
Lemke, J. (2001) ‘Discursive technologies and the social organization of meaning’, Special Issue of Folia
Linguistica 35(1–2): 79–96.
Lemke, J. (2002) ‘Multimedia Genres for Science Education and Scientific Literacy’, in M. Schleppegrell and C.
Colombi (eds), Developing Advanced Literacy in First and Second Languages. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence
Erlbaum, pp. 21–44.
Leont’ev, A. N. (1978) Activity, Consciousness, and Personality. Englewood Cliffs: Prentice Hall.
Leont’ev, A. N. (1982) Tätigkeit, Bewußtsein, Persönlichkeit. Cologne: Pahl-Rugenstein.
Levinson, S. C. (1983) Pragmatics. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Lévi-Strauss, C. (1964) Totemism. Harmondsworth: Penguin.
Link, J. (1982) ‘Kollektivsymbolik und Mediendiskurse’, kulturRRevolution 1: 6–21.
Link, J. (1983) ‘Was ist und was bringt Diskurstaktik’, kulturRRevolution 2: 60–66.
Link, J. (1992) ‘Die Analyse der symbolischen Komponente realer Ereignisse: Ein Beitrag der Diskurstheorie zur
Analyse neorassistischer Äußerungen’, in S. Jäger and F. Januschek (eds), Der Diskurs des Rassismus.
Oldenburg: Osnabrücker Beiträge zur Sprachtheorie 46, pp. 37–52.
Link, J. (1996) ‘Wie “ideologisch” war der Ideologiebegriff von Marx? Zur verkannten Materialität der Diskurse
und Subjektivitäten im Marxschen Materialismus’, in R. Scholz and K.-M. Bogdal (eds), Literaturtheorie und
Geschichte: Zur Diskussion materialistischer Literaturwissenschaft. Opladen: Westdeutscher Verlag, pp.
132–148.
Link, J. and Link-Heer, U. (1990) ‘Diskurs/Interdiskurs und Literaturanalyse’, Zeitschrift für Linguistik und
Literaturwissenschaft (LiLi) 77: 88–99.
Louw, B. (1993) ‘Irony in the Text or Insincerity in the Writer? The diagnostic potential of semantic prosodies’, in
M. Baker, G. Francis and E. Tognini-Bonelli (eds), Text and Technology: In honour of John Sinclair.
Amsterdam: Benjamins, pp. 157–176.
Lueger, M. (2004) Grundlagen qualitativer Feldforschung. 2nd edn. Vienna: WUV.
Lutz, B. and Wodak, R. (1987) Information für Informierte. Vienna: Verlag der österr. Akademie der
Wissenschaften.
Maas, U. (1984) Als der Geist der Gemeinschaft eine Sprache fand: Sprache im Nationalsozialismus.
Opladen: Westdeutscher Verlag.
Maas, U. (1989a) Sprachpolitik und politische Sprachwissenschaft. Frankfurt am Main: Suhrkamp.
Maas, U. (1989b) ‘Sprache im Nationalsozialismus: Analyse einer Rede eines Studentenfunktionärs’, in K. Ehlich
(ed.), Sprache im Faschismus. Frankfurt am Main: Suhrkamp, pp. 162–197.
Maier, F. (forthcoming) ‘Doing Hair – Doing Age: Perspectives of emancipated ageing’, in M. Beisheim, B.
Gusenbauer, L. Kreil and F. Maier (eds), Perspectives of Women’s Age at the Work Place. Bern: Peter Lang.
Malinowski, B. (1923) ‘The Problem of Meaning in Primitive Languages’, in C. K. Ogden and I.A. Richards
(eds), The Meaning of Meaning. London: Routledge and Kegan Paul.
Malinowski, B. (1935) Coral Gardens and their Magic. Vol. 2. London: Allen and Unwin.
Martin, J. R. (1984) ‘Lexical Cohesion, Field and Genre: Parceling experience and discourse goals’, in J. E.
Copeland (ed.), Linguistics and Semiotics: Text semantics and discourse semantics. Proceedings of the


Second Rice Symposium. Houston: Rice University Press.
Martin, J. R. (1992) English Text: System and structure. Amsterdam: Benjamins.
Martin, J. and Wodak, R. (eds) (2003) Re/reading the Past. Amsterdam: Benjamins.
Marx, K. (1992) Capital: A critique of political economy. London: Penguin. (1st German edn,1867.)
Matouschek, B., Wodak, R. and Januschek, F. (1995) Notwendige Maßnahmen gegen Fremde? Genese und
Formen von rassistischen Diskursen der Differenz. Vienna: Passagen Verlag.
Matsumoto, Y. (2003) ‘Lexical Knowledge Acquisition’, in R. Mitkov (ed.), The Oxford Handbook of
Computational Linguistics. Oxford: Oxford University Press, pp. 395–413.
Mautner, G. (2005) ‘Time to get wired: using web-based corpora in critical discourse analysis’, Discourse and
Society 16(6): 809–828.
Mautner, G. (2007) ‘Mining large corpora for social information: the case of elderly’, Language in Society 36(1):
51–72.
Mautner, G. (2008) ‘Analysing newspapers, magazines and other print media’, in R. Wodak and M. Krzy
anowski, (eds), Qualitative Discourse Analysis in the Social Sciences. Basingstoke: Palgrave, pp. 30–53.
McEnery, T. and Wilson, A. (2001) Corpus Linguistics. 2nd edn. Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press.
McEnery, T., Xiao, R. and Tono, Y. (2006) Corpus-based Language Studies: An advanced resource book.
London and New York: Routledge.
Merton, R. K. (1967) On Theoretical Sociology. New York: The Free Press.
Mitten, R. (1992) The Politics of Antisemitic Prejudice: The Waldheim phenomenon in Austria. Boulder, CO:
Westview Press.
Morse, J. M., Barrett, M., Mayan, M., Olson, K. and Spiers, J. (2002) ‘Verification strategies for establishing
reliability and validity in qualitative research’, International Journal of Qualitative Methods 1(2): 1–19.
Moscovici, S. (1982) ‘On Social Representations’, in J. P. Forgas (ed.), Social Cognition: Perspectives on
everyday understanding. London: Academic Press, pp. 181–209.
Moscovici, S. (2000) Social Representations. Cambridge: Polity Press.
Mouffe, C. (2005) On the Political. London: Routledge.
Mouzelis, N. P. (1995) Sociological Theory: What went wrong? Diagnoses and remedies. London: Routledge.
Mulderrig, J. (2006) ‘The Governance of Education: A Corpus-Based Critical Discourse Analysis of UK
Education Policy Texts 1972 to 2005.’ Unpublished PhD thesis, Department of Linguistics, Lancaster University.
Müller, M., Fuentes, U. and Kohl, H. (2007) Der UN-Weltklimareport: Bericht über eine aufhaltsame
Katastrophe. Cologne: Kiepenheuer und Witsch.
Mullins, W. E. (1972) ‘On the concept of ideology in political science’, American Political Science Review 66:
498–510.
Muntigl, P. (2002a) ‘Policy, politics, and social control: a systemic functional linguistic analysis of EU employment
policy’, Text 22(3): 393–441.
Muntigl, P. (2002b) ‘Politicization and Depoliticization: Employment policy in the European Union’, in P. Chilton
and Ch. Schäffner (eds), Politics as Text and Talk. Amsterdam: Benjamins, pp. 45–79.
Muntigl, P., Weiss, G. and Wodak, R. (2000) European Union Discourses of Un/employment: An
interdisciplinary approach to employment policymaking and organizational change. Amsterdam:
Benjamins.
Musolff, A. (2004) Metaphors and Political Discourse. Basingstoke: Palgrave.
Nelson, M. (2005) ‘Semantic associations in Business English: a corpus-based analysis’, English for Specific
Purposes 25: 217–234.
Ng, S. H. and Bradac, J. J. (1993) Power in Language. Newbury Park: Sage.
O’Halloran, K. and Coffin, C. (2004) ‘Checking Overinterpretation and Underinterpretation: Help from corpora in
critical linguistics’, in A. Hewings, C. Coffin and K. O’Halloran (eds), Applying English Grammar. London:
Arnold, pp. 275–297.
Oevermann, U., Allert, T., Konau, E. and Krambeck, J. (1979) ‘Die Methodologie einer “objektiven Hermeneutik”
und ihre allgemeine forschungslogische Bedeutung in den Sozialwissenschaften’, in H.-G. Soeffner (ed.),


Interpretative Verfahren in den Sozialund Textwissenschaften. Stuttgart: Metzler, pp. 352–434.
Oreskes, N. (2004) ‘Beyond the ivory tower: the scientific consensus on climate change’, Science 306: 1686–
1690.
Orpin, D. (2005) ‘Corpus linguistics and critical discourse analysis: examining the ideology of sleaze’,
International Journal of Corpus Linguistics 10(1): 37–61.
Palonen, K. (1993) ‘Introduction: From policy and polity to politicking and politicization’, in K. Paolonen and T.
Parvikko (eds), Reading the Political: Exploring the margins of politics. Helsinki: FPSA, pp. 6–16.
Panagl, O. and Wodak, R. (eds) (2004) Text und Kontext. Munich: Königshausen & Neumann.
Parsons, T. (1977) The Structure of Social Action. Chicago: The Free Press.
Parsons, T. and Shils, E. (eds) (1951) Towards a General Theory of Action. Cambridge, MA: University Press.
Partington, A. (2004) ‘Utterly content in each other’s company: semantic prosody and semantic preference’,
International Journal of Corpus Linguistics 9(1): 131–156.
Pelinka, A. and Wodak, R. (eds) (2002) ‘Dreck am Stecken’: Politik der Ausgrenzung. Vienna: Czernin.
Pieterse, J. (2004) Globalization or Empire? London: Routledge.
Popitz, H. (1992) Phänomene der Macht. Tübingen: Mohr.
Rahmstorf, S. and Schellnhuber, H. J. (2007) Der Klimawandel, 4th edition. Munich: Beck.
Rancière, J. (1995) On the Shores of Politics. London: Verso.
Rancière, J. (2006) Hatred of Democracy. London: Verso.
Rapley, J. (2004) Globalization and Inequality: Neoliberalism‘s downward spiral. Boulder, CO: Lynne
Rienner.
Reeves, F. (1989) British Racial Discourse: A study of British political discourse about race and related
matters. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Reisigl, M. (2003) ‘Wie man eine Nation herbeiredet. Eine diskursanalytische Untersuchung zur sprachlichen
Konstruktion der östereichischen Identität in politischen Gedenkreden.’ Unpublished PhD thesis, University of
Vienna.
Reisigl, M. (2007) Nationale Rhetorik in Fest-und Gedenkreden: Eine diskursanalytische Studie zum
‘österreichischen Millennium’ in den Jahren 1946 und 1996. Tübingen: Stauffenburg.
Reisigl, M. and Wodak, R. (2001) Discourse and Discrimination: Rhetorics of racism and antisemitism.
London: Routledge.
Renkema, J. (2004) Introduction to Discourse Studies. Amsterdam: Benjamins.
Richardson, J. (2004) (Mis)representing Islam. Amsterdam: Benjamins.
Richardson, J. and Wodak, R. (2008) ‘Visual argumentation in racist discourse’, Controversies (in press).
Rose, N. (1999) Powers of Freedom: Reframing political thought. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Rydgren, J. (2005) Movements of Exclusion. New York: Nova.
Sacks, H. (1992) Lectures on Conversation. 2 volumes. Oxford: Blackwell.
Sarasin, P. (2003) Geschichtswissenschaft und Diskursanalyse. Frankfurt am Main: Suhrkamp.
Schank, R. and Abelson, R. (1977) Scripts, Plans, Goals and Understanding. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence
Erlbaum.
Scherer, K. R. and Giles, H. (1979) Social Markers in Speech. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Schiffrin, D. (1994) Approaches to Discourse. Oxford: Blackwell.
Schiffrin, D., Tannen, D. and Hamilton, H. E. (eds) (2001) The Handbook of Discourse Analysis. Malden, MA:
Blackwell Publishers.
Silverman, D. (1993) Interpreting Qualitative Data. London: Sage.
Sondermann, K. (1997) ‘Reading Politically: National anthems as textual Icons’, in T. Carver and M. Hyvärinen
(eds), Interpreting the Political: New methodologies. London: Routledge, pp. 128–142.
Spradley, J. P. (1979) The Ethnographic Interview. New York: Holt, Rinehart and Winston.
Spradley, J. P. (1980) Participant Observation. Fort Worth: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich College Publishers.


Strauss, A. (1987) Qualitative Analysis for Social Scientists. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Strauss, A. and Corbin, J. (1990) Basics of Qualitative Research. Newbury Park: Sage.
Stubbs, M. (1996) Text and Corpus Analysis: Computer-assisted studies of language and culture. Oxford:
Blackwell.
Stubbs, M. (2001) Words and Phrases: Corpus studies of lexical semantics. Oxford: Blackwell.
Talbot, M. R. (2003) Language and Power in the Modern World. Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press.
Ten Have, P. (1999) Doing Conversation Analysis: A practical guide. London: Sage.
Teubert, W. (1999) ‘Zum Verlust von Pluralität im politisch-gesellschaftlichen Diskurs: Das Beispiel
Besitzstände’, in U. Kreft, H. Uske and S. Jäger (eds), Kassensturz: Politische Hypotheken der Berliner
Republik. Duisburg: DISS, pp. 29–48.
Thompson, J. B. (1988) Critical Hermeneutics (4th edn.) Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Thompson, J. B. (1990) Ideology and Modern Culture. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Titscher, S., Meyer, M., Wodak, R. and Vetter, E. (2000) Methods of Text and Discourse Analysis. London:
Sage.
Tognini-Bonelli, E. (2001) Corpus Linguistics at Work. Amsterdam: Benjamins.
Toolan, M. (ed.) (2002) Critical Discourse Analysis: Critical concepts in linguistics. 4 vols. London:
Routledge.
Triandafyllidou, A., Wodak, R. and Krzy anowski, M. (eds) (2009) European Media in Crisis and the
European Public Sphere. Basingstoke: Palgrave.
Tricento, T. (ed.) (2005) Introduction to the Study of Language Policies. Oxford: Blackwell.
Tulving, E. (1983) Elements of Episodic Memory. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
US Congress (2007) ‘Hearing on Perspectives on Climate Change’ (downloaded from
frwebgate.access.gpo.gov/cgi-bin/getdoc.
cgi?dbname=110_house_hearings&docid=f:37579.pdf on 10 April 2008).
Van Dijk, T. A. (1984) Prejudice in Discourse: An analysis of ethnic prejudice in cognition and
conversation. Amsterdam: Benjamins.
Van Dijk, T. A. (1987) Communicating Racism: Ethnic prejudice in thought and talk. Newbury Park, CA:
Sage.
Van Dijk, T. A. (1991) Racism and the Press. London: Routledge.
Van Dijk, T. A. (1993a) Elite Discourse and Racism. Newbury Park, CA: Sage.
Van Dijk, T. A. (1993b) ‘Principles of critical discourse analysis’, Discourse and Society 4(2): 249–283.
Van Dijk, T. A. (ed.) (1997) Discourse as Structure and Process (Discourse Studies: A Multidisciplinary
Introduction. 2 vols.) London: Sage.
Van Dijk, T. A. (1998) Ideology: A multidisciplinary approach. London: Sage.
Van Dijk, T. A. (2005) Racism and discourse in Spain and Latin America. Amsterdam: Benjamins.
Van Dijk, T. A. (ed.) (2007a) Discourse Studies. 5 vols. London: Sage.
Van Dijk, T. A. (ed.) (2007b) Racismo y Discurso en América Latina. Barcelona: Gedisa. (English version to
appear with Lexington Books.)
Van Dijk, T. A. (2008a) Discourse and Context. A sociocognitive approach. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Van Dijk, T. A. (2008b) Discourse and Power. Basingstoke: Palgrave.
Van Dijk, T. A. (2009) Society and Discourse: How context controls text and talk. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Van Dijk, T. A. and Kintsch, W. (1983) Strategies of Discourse Comprehension. New York: Academic Press.
Van Eeemeren, F. H. and Grootendorst, R. (1992) Argumentation, Communication and Fallacies: A
pragmadialectical perspective. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Van Leeuwen, T. (2005) Introducing Social Semiotics. London: Routledge.
Van Leeuwen, T. (2006) ‘Critical Discourse Analysis’, in K. Brown (ed.), Encyclopedia of Language and


Linguistics. 2nd edn. Vol. 3. Oxford: Elsevier, pp. 290–294.
Van Leeuwen, T. (2007) ‘Legitimation in discourse and communication’, Discourse and Communication 1(1):
91–112.
Van Leeuwen, T. (2008) Discourse and Practice: New tools for critical discourse analysis. New York:
Oxford University Press.
Van Leeuwen, T. and Wodak, R. (1999) ‘Legitimizing immigration control: a discourse-historical analysis’,
Discourse Studies 1(1): 83–118.
Van Oostendorp, H. and Goldman, S. R. (eds) (1999) The Construction of Mental Representations During
Reading. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Vass, E. (1992) ‘Diskursanalyse als interdisziplinäres Forschungsgebiet.’ Unpublished MA thesis, University of
Vienna.
Verdoolaege, A. (2008) Reconciliation Discourse. Amsterdam: Benjamins.
Viehöver, W. (2003) ‘Die Wissenschaft und die Wiederverzauberung des sublunaren Raumes. Der Klimadiskurs
im Licht der narrativen Diskursanalyse’, in R. Keller, A. Hirseland, W. Schneider and W. Viehöver (eds),
Handbuch Sozialwissensch-aftliche Diskursanalyse. Vol. 2: Forschungspraxis. Opladen: Leske and Budrich,
pp. 233–270.
Vygotsky, L. S. (1986) Thought and Language. Revised edn. Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press. (Originally
published in 1934.)
Wacquant, L. (2004) Body and Soul: Notebooks of an apprentice boxer. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Wagner, W. (1994) Alltagsdiskurs: Die Theorie sozialer Repräsentationen. Göttingen: Hogrefe.
Waldenfels, B. (1991) ‘Ordnung in Diskursen’, in F. Ewald and B. Waldenfels (eds), Spiele der Wahrheit:
Michel Foucaults Denken. Frankfurt am Main: Suhrkamp, pp. 277–297.
Webb, E. J., Campbell, D. T., Schwartz, R. D. and Seclrest, L. (1966) Unobtrusive Measures: Nonreactive
research in the social sciences. Chicago: Rand-McNally.
Weber, M. (1980) Wirtschaft und Gesellschaft. 5th edn. Tübingen: Mohr.
Weiss, G. and Wodak, R. (eds) (2003) Critical Discourse Analysis: Theory and interdisciplinarity.
Basingstoke: Palgrave.
Wengeler, M. (2003) Topos und Diskurs. Tübingen: Niemeyer.
Wetherell, M., Taylor, S. and Simeon, Y. (eds) (2001) Discourse as Data. London: Sage
Whorf, B. L. (1956) Language, Thought and Reality. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Widdowson, H. G. (1995) ‘Discourse analysis: a critical view’, Language and Literature 4(3): 157–172.
(Republished in M. Toolan [ed.] [2002] Critical Discourse Analysis. Vol. 3. London and New York: Routledge,
pp. 131–147.)
Widdowson, H. G. (2004) Text, Context, Pretext. Oxford: Blackwell.
Wittgenstein, L. (1989 [1952]) ‘Philosophische Untersuchungen’, in L. Wittgenstein (1989) Werkausgabe Band
1: Tractatus logico-philosophicus – Tagebücher 1914–1916 – Philosophische Untersuchungen. Frankfurt
am Main: Suhrkamp, pp. 224–580.
Wodak, R. (1986) Language Behavior in Therapy Groups. Los Angeles: California University Press.
Wodak, R. (ed.) (1989) Language, Power and Ideology. Amsterdam: Benjamins.
Wodak, R. (1996) Disorders of Discourse. London: Longman.
Wodak, R. (2004) ‘Critical Discourse Analysis’, in C. Seale, G. Gobo, J. Gubrium and D. Silverman (eds),
Qualitative Research Practice. London: Sage, pp. 197–213.
Wodak, R. (2006a) ‘Dilemmas of discourse (analysis)’, Language in Society 35: 595–611.
Wodak, R. (2006b) ‘Critical linguistics and critical discourse analysis’, in J.-O. Östman and J. Verschueren (eds),
Handbook of Pragmatics. Amsterdam: Benjamins, pp. 1–24.
Wodak, R. (2007) ‘Pragmatics and critical discourse analysis’, Pragmatics and Cognition 15(1): 203–225.
Wodak, R. (2008a) ‘Introduction: Terms and concepts’, in R. Wodak and M. Krzy anowski (eds), Qualitative
Discourse Analysis in the Social Sciences. Basingstoke: Palgrave, pp. 1–42.
Wodak, R. (2008b) ‘The Contribution of Critical Linguistics to the Analysis of Discriminatory Prejudices and


Stereotypes in the Language of Politics’, in R. Wodak and V. Koller (eds), Handbook of Communication in the
Public Sphere (Handbook of Linguistics, Vol. 4). Berlin: de Gruyter, pp. 291–316.
Wodak, R. (2008c) ‘“Us” and “Them”: Inclusion/Exclusion – discrimination via discourse’, in G. Delanty, R.
Wodak and P. Jones (eds), Migration, Identity and Belonging. Liverpool: Liverpool University Press, pp. 54–
78.
Wodak, R. (2009) ‘Politics as Usual’: The discursive construction and representation of politics in action.
Basingstoke: Palgrave.
Wodak, R. and Chilton, P. (eds) (2005) A New Agenda in (Critical) Discourse Analysis. Amsterdam:
Benjamins. (2nd edn 2007.)
Wodak, R. and de Cillia, R. (2006) ‘Politics and Language: Overview’, in K. Brown (ed.), Encyclopedia of
Language and Linguistics. 2nd edn. Vol. 9. Oxford: Elsevier, pp. 706–719.
Wodak, R. and de Cillia, R. (2007) ‘Commemorating the past: the discursive construction of official narratives
about the rebirth of the second Austrian Republic’, Discourse and Communication 1(3): 337–363.
Wodak, R. and Koller, V. (eds) (2008) Handbook of Communication in the Public Sphere. Berlin: de Gruyter.
Wodak, R. and Krzy anowski, M. (eds) (2008) Qualitative Discourse Analysis in the Social Sciences.
Basingstoke: Palgrave.
Wodak, R. and Meyer, M. (eds) (2001) Methods of Critical Discourse Analysis. London: Sage.
Wodak, R. and Pelinka, A. (2002) ‘From Waldheim to Haider: An introduction’, in R. Wodak and A. Pelinka
(eds), The Haider Phenomenon in Austria. New Brunswick: Transaction Press, pp. vii–xxvii.
Wodak, R. and Schulz, M. (1986) The Language of Love and Guilt. Amsterdam: Benjamins.
Wodak, R. and van Dijk, T. A. (eds) (2000) Racism at the Top. Klagenfurt: Drava.
Wodak, R. and van Leeuwen, T. (2002) ‘Discourses of un/employment in Europe: the Austrian case’, Text 22(3):
345–367.
Wodak, R., de Cillia, R., Reisigl, M. and Liebhart, K. (1999) The Discursive Construction of National Identity.
Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press. (2nd edn 2009.)
Wodak, R., Menz, F., Lutz, B. and Gruber, H. (1985) Die Sprache der ‘Mächtigen’ und ‘Ohnmächtigen’: Der
Fall Hainburg. Vienna: Arbeitsgemeinschaft für staatsbürgerliche Erziehung und politische Bildung.
Wodak, R., Nowak, P., Pelikan, J., Gruber, H., de Cillia, R. and Mitten, R. (1990) ‘Wir sind alle unschuldige
Täter!’: Diskurshistorische Studien zum Nachkriegsantisemitismus. Frankfurt am Main: Suhrkamp.
Wright, W. (1975) Sixguns and Society: A Structural Study of the Western. Berkeley: University of California
Press.
Wuthnow, R. (1989) Communities of Discourse: Ideology and social structure in the Reformation, the
Enlightenment, and European socialism. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Young, L. and Fitzgerald, B. (2006) The Power of Language: How discourse influences society. London:
Equinox.


Index
abductive methodology, 30
ability modality, 153
abstraction, 157
activation of actions and reactions, 156
activity sequences, 147
activity theory, 42–3, 45
annotation process, 132
Anthropological Museum, Vienna, 59–60
argumentation analysis, 17, 26, 96, 102, 110, 114
Aristotle, 172
artefact analysis, 59–60
Austria, 49, 95
Aztec culture, 59–60
Baker, P., 128, 138, 142
Barton, Joe, 92–3, 101
Bell, Allan, 99
Berger, P., 154
Bernstein, B., 147, 163
Bhaskar, R., 167
bias on the part of researchers, 123
Billig, Michael, 4–5
Blair, Tony, 144, 171, 174–5, 178–81
Bourdieu, Pierre, 7, 146–7
bricolage, 45, 60
British National Corpus (BNC), 139, 141
Brown, B. M., 181
Bush, George W., 144
Caborn, J., 59
Castells, M., 175
catachreses, 48
Center for the Moral Defense of Capitalism, 67–72, 76, 83
Chernobyl accident, 48–9
Chilton, Paul, 7, 14–16, 25, 183
Chomsky, Noam, 5
Chouliaraki, L., 12, 166
Clarke, J., 180
climate change, 90–120


Clinton, Bill, 180
Coates, K., 181
cognition, definition of, 64–6
cognitive theory, 13–15, 76
coherence, referential and extensional, 76
collective symbols, 38, 44, 47–8, 53
commemorative events, 18–19
competencies, 145–6
computer games, 16
concordance programs, 122, 125–30, 135, 138–41
context, concept of, 20–1, 25
context models, 65–6, 69, 73–4, 77–9
corpora, types of, 131–3
corpus linguistics, 12, 15, 26–7, 30, 122–42
design issues in, 129–31
limitations of, 142
corpus mark-up, 132, 141
Cortés, Hernán, 59–60
critical analysis (CrA), 62–3, 66–9, 73
critical discourse analysis (CDA), 1–32
aims of, 36
central questions of, 34
characteristics of, 21
and corpus linguistics, 122–6, 129–33, 138–40
definition of, 4, 10
history of, 3–4
principles of, 3, 5, 19
research agenda of, 11–19
and semiosis, 163–5, 182–3
‘school’ for, 5
theoretical influences on, 23–7, 32, 35–9
use of term, 1–2
critical discourse studies (CDS), 2, 62–83
social aspects of, 79–80
‘critical instinct’, 14
critical linguistics, 1, 5, 7
critical social research, 163
critical theory, 6–7, 26
critique, concepts and definitions of, 87–8, 164
data-gathering for research, 27–8, 32


de-agentialization, 156–7
de Beaugrande, R., 122
decontextualization, 150
deductive methodology, 19, 30
democracy deficit, 17
democratic politics, 172–3
descriptivization, 156
dialectical-relational approach to CDA, 27, 30–1, 162–83
methodology of, 167–71


discourse
concepts and definitions of, 2–6, 25, 35, 45, 66–7, 123–4, 144, 147, 162–4
as distinct from text, 89–90, 144–5
macropolitics of, 114
orders of, 27, 164–6
and power, 37–9, 89
and reality, 36–7, 41, 45
and social practice, 148
and social structures, 83
societal and global, 50–1
see also political discourse
discourse analysis, 14, 17, 24, 28, 31, 34–5
comparative, 14
completeness of, 51
foundational assumptions of, 129
multimedia type, 59–60
quantitative, 51
sociocognitive, 64–5
toolbox for, 52–6
discourse fragments, 47
analysis of, 54–6
discourse planes, 48–53
discourse prosody, 129
discourse semantics, 75–8; see also semantic macrostructures
discourse strands, 46–54
entanglements of, 47, 54
history, present and future of, 51
discourse studies, 62
discourse theory, importance of, 169
Discourse, Politics, Identity (DPI) research centre, Vienna, 95
discourse-historical approach (DHA), 6, 18, 21–2, 26–31, 87–120
aims of, 88
strengths of, 119–20
discourse-immanent critique, 88
discursive action, 81
discursive context, 49
discursive events, 48–9
discursive knots, 47
discursive limits, 47
discursive and nondiscursive practices, 43, 58–60
discursive positions, 49–50


discursive strategy, 94
dispositive analysis (DA), 25, 31, 34–5, 39–42, 45, 56–60
distillation, 157–60
Durkheim, Émile, 25–6, 146–7
enactment of discourse, 165
enlightenment philosophy, 8
environmentalism, 49, 92–3, 114–15, 118
epistemology, 24
ERASMUS programme, 4
European Union, 181–2
event models, 76–9
Everson, S., 172
existentialization, 157
fallacies, 110, 114–17, 178
false consciousness, 36–7
fascism, 17, 38
‘fields of action’ (Girnth), 90–1
fine analysis, 28
Foucault, Michel, 9–10, 17, 21–7, 34–45, 51, 56, 60, 144
Fowler, R., 148
Frankfurt School, 6, 87
Gates, Bill, 85
generalization, 157
genres, 13, 15, 27, 90–1, 131, 164–5, 176
Germany, 39, 47–50; see also National Socialism
Gillespie family, 133–4
Gleason, H. A. J., 147
globalization and the global economy, 12, 168–82
Gore, Al, 101
Graham, Phil, 12–13
grand theories, 23–6, 95
Grimes, J., 147
Grootendorst, R., 110
grounded theory, 27
Habermas, Jürgen, 6, 10, 173
Haider, Jörg, 48–9
Halliday, Michael, 5, 21, 148


Hastert, J. Dennis, 92–3, 101
Heer, H., 19
hegemony, concept of, 8
hermeneutics, 22–3, 28
Hitler, Adolf, 144
Hodge, R., 148
Horkheimer, Max, 6
hortatory genres, 12
House of Representatives Perspectives on Climate hearing, 101–11
human rights, 63–4
ideology and ideological analysis, 8, 65, 78–9, 88
image fractures, 48; see also catachreses
immigration, 44, 47–8, 52, 81, 83
inculcation of discourse, 165
inductive theories, 19
interdisciplinary research, 21, 89; see also transdisciplinary research
interdiscursive analysis, 46, 90–2, 95, 166, 170, 180
intertextuality, 90–2, 95, 166
inversion, 158
Jessop, R., 11
journals on critical discourse analysis, 4, 11
Kintsch, Walter, 13
Klaus, Václav, 92, 98–118
Klemperer, Victor, 38, 60, 144
knowledge, concepts of, 58
knowledge-based economy (KBE) concept, 5, 11–12
Koller, V., 15
Kress, Gunther, 3, 15, 148
Krings, H., 7
Krzy anowski, M., 17
Laclau, Ernesto, 25, 42


language
of fascism, 17; see also National Socialism
and power, 10
and society, 21
see also linguistics
leadership, discourses of, 144–5, 152, 155, 159–60
Lemke, Jay, 6, 15–16
Leont’ev, A. N., 25, 42–3, 45
Levi-Strauss, C., 146–7
linguistics, 24, 41, 166; see also language
Link, Jürgen, 25, 35, 45
Lomborg, Bjørn, 101
Lominger-International, 145, 153
Maas, Utz, 17
McEnery, T., 129
Major, John, 176
Malinowski, B., 147
Martin, J. R., 147
Marxist theory, 36–7, 87
materialization of discourse, 59, 165
media influences, 12–13, 17–18, 48, 99
mediation, concept of, 21
mental models, 68–9, 73, 76–8, 82
micro-sociological theories, 24
Microsoft, 67–77, 83–6
middle-range theories, 24
‘moral evaluation’, 151
Moscovici, Serge, 25–6
Mouzelis, N. P., 26
Mulderrig, Jane, 12
myths, 158
National Socialism, 17, 38, 95, 144
naturalization, 157
neoliberalism, 50, 117–18, 170, 176, 181
New Labour, 12, 129, 166, 171, 175–82
new public management, 165
Newman, J., 180
Oberhuber, F., 17


objectivization, 160
operationalization (of discourse), 165
overdetermination, 157–8
Parsons, Talcott, 146–7
participant observation, 59
patterned bonding, 126
personal deixis, 178
Plato, 145
political discourse, 17–19, 44
politicization and depoliticization, 173–83
populism, 18, 48
power, 6, 9–10, 20, 60, 63, 82, 88–9, 183
concept and definition of, 35, 88
and discourse, 37–9, 89
prospective critique, 88
qualitative research, 31
racism, 52, 82, 95
Rancière, J., 172–3


reconstruction
of discourse, 151–2
of knowledge, 57
recontextualization, 90, 95, 119, 145, 148–53, 163–5, 178–80
Richardson, John, 13
Rose, Nikolas, 12
sampling, 27, 130, 141–2
Scollon, Ron, 3
semantic macrostructures, 68–9
semantic preference, 128, 135–8
semiosis and semiotics, 15–16, 27, 163–83
semiotic actions, 156
sexism, 82
Silverman, D., 31
social action and social actor analysis, 21, 26–7, 154–6
social class divisions, 137–8
social cognition, 78
social inclusion and exclusion, 13, 18
social representation theory, 25–6, 78–9
social structures, 13–14, 24, 27, 82–3
‘social wrongs’, 167–71, 174–6, 180–1
sociocognitive approach, 21, 25, 28–31
socio-diagnostic critique, 88
socio-psychological theories, 24
special discourses, 46
stem cell research, 53–4
structural analysis, 28, 53–6
Stubbs, M., 128, 135–6
styles, semiotic, 164–5
the Sun, 133–8
symbolization, 158; see also collective symbols
synchronic analysis, 57
synoptic analysis, 56
systemic functional linguistics, 27
tacit knowledge, 45, 59


text
definition of, 6
discursive differences in, 10
textual analysis, 166
Thatcher, Margaret, 166, 176
Thompson, J. B., 88
Three Mile Island accident, 48–9
The Times, 125, 136–8
Tognini-Bonelli, E., 128
topoi, 46–7, 101, 110, 114–17
transdisciplinary research, 163, 169, 182; see also interdisciplinary research
transmedia, 16
Trew, T., 148
triangulation procedures, 31, 89, 93, 119
unemployment, 123–8
United Nations, 97
van Eeemeren, F., 110
Viehöver, W., 119
Voices questionnaire, 145–6, 149–54, 157–8
Vygotsky, Lev, 42
Waldenfels, Bernhard, 44
Waldheim, Kurt, 18, 95
Weber, Max, 88
Whorf, B. L., 148
Wordbanks Online, 125, 127, 131, 134–6, 139–41
Wordsmith Tools, 129–30
World Bank, 178–80
World Wide Web, 132, 140
Wright, W., 158




An Introduction to Critical 
Discourse Analysis in Education 
Accessible yet theoretically rich, this landmark text introduces key concepts 
and issues in critical discourse analysis and situates these within the field of 
educational research. The book invites readers to consider the theories and 
methods of three major traditions in critical discourse studies—discourse 
analysis, critical discourse analysis, and multimodal discourse analysis—
through the empirical work of leading scholars in the field. Beyond providing a 
useful overview, it contextualizes CDA in a wide range of learning environments 
and identifies how CDA can shed new insights on learning and social change. 
Detailed analytic procedures are included—to demystify the process of 
conducting CDA, to invite conversations about issues of trustworthiness 
of interpretations and their value to educational contexts, and to encourage 
researchers to build on the scholarship in critical discourse studies. 
New in the Second Edition: This edition features a new structure organized 
around three traditions in CDA: Discourse Analysis, Critical Discourse 
Analysis, Multimodal Discourse Analysis; a touchstone chapter in each section 
by a recognized expert in the approach/theory (James Paul Gee, Norman 
Fairclough, Gunther Kress); and a stronger international focus on both theories 
and methods.
Companion Website: Designed to extend inquiry, exploration, and dialogue 
beyond the chapters in the book, the website includes: 
• 
Chapter Extensions 
• 
Interviews with James Gee, Norman Fairclough and Gunther Kress, the 
leading scholars in each of the approaches highlighted in the book 
• 
Four 15-minute Videos featuring many of the leading scholars in critical 
discourse studies 
• 
Bibliographies organized by further reading, subject (research area), and 
object (data source), with links between the bibliographic areas for ease of 
cross-referencing between studies 
• 
Resources for Teaching Critical Discourse Analysis (websites, discussion 
questions, and more) 
Rebecca Rogers is Associate Professor of Literacy Studies in the College of 
Education at the University of Missouri-St. Louis.




An Introduction to 
Critical Discourse 
Analysis in Education 
Second Edition 
Rebecca Rogers 
University of Missouri-St. Louis 



An introduction to critical discourse analysis in education / 
Rebecca Rogers, [editor].— 2nd ed.
p. cm.
1. Interaction analysis in education. 2. Critical discourse analysis. 
3. Learning. I. Title. 
LB1034.R65 2011
370.1'4—dc22
2010032254
ISBN 13: 978–0–415–87428–1 (hbk)
ISBN 13: 978–0–415–87429–8 (pbk)
ISBN 13: 978–0–203–83614–9 (ebk)
This edition published in the Taylor & Francis e-Library, 2011.
To purchase your own copy of this or any of Taylor & Francis or Routledge’s
collection of thousands of eBooks please go to www.eBookstore.tandf.co.uk.
ISBN 0-203-83614-6 Master e-book ISBN


This book is dedicated to my husband, 
Michael Mancini, with all of my love. 




Contents
 
Foreword 
ix
 
JAMES COLLINS
 
Preface 
xv
 
Acknowledgments 
xxviii
1 
Critical Approaches to Discourse Analysis in Educational 
Research 
1
 
REBECCA ROGERS 
PART I 
Discourse Analysis 
21
2 
Discourse Analysis: What Makes it Critical? 
23
 
JAMES PAUL GEE 
3 
Narratives of Exclusion and the Construction of the Self 
46
 
GUADALUPE LÓPEZ-BONILLA
4 
A Critical Discourse Analysis of Neocolonialism in Patricia 
McCormick’s Sold 
68
 
MANIKA SUBI LAKSHMANAN
5 
Figured Worlds and Discourses of Masculinity: Being a Boy in 
a Literacy Classroom 
93
 
JOSEPHINE MARSH AND JAYNE C. LAMMERS
PART II 
Critical Discourse Analysis 
117
6  
Semiotic Aspects of Social Transformation and Learning  
119
 
NORMAN FAIRCLOUGH 


7 
Learning as Social Interaction: Interdiscursivity in a Teacher 
and Researcher Study Group 
128
 
CYNTHIA LEWIS AND JEAN KETTER
8 
Language, Power, and Participation: Using Critical Discourse 
Analysis to Make Sense of Public Policy 
154
 
HALEY WOODSIDE-JIRON
9 
Locating the Role of the Critical Discourse Analyst 
183
 
LISA PATEL STEVENS 
PART III 
Multimodal Discourse Analysis  
203
10 Discourse Analysis and Education: A Multimodal Social 
Semiotic Approach 
205
 
GUNTHER KRESS
11 Discourse in Activity and Activity as Discourse 
227
 
SHAWN ROWE
12 Mapping Modes in Children’s Play and Design: An 
Action-oriented Approach to Critical Multimodal Analysis 
242
 
KAREN E. WOHLWEND
13 The Discourses of Educational Management Organizations: 
A Political Design 
267
 
MÓNICA PINI
 
About the Authors 
292
Index 
296
viii  Contents


Foreword: Introduction to 
Critical Discourse Analysis in 
Education, Second Edition
The first edition of this excellent volume came out in 2004, as the US invested 
further in what would become a protracted war in Iraq, led by then President 
George W. Bush, whose administration is also notable for having early on 
pushed through legislation called No Child Left Behind, which greatly increased 
federal oversight of public education. The second edition comes to us well 
into the Presidency of Barack Obama. Deemed in the media a “reluctant war-
rior,” this president seems to have ended the U.S. military war in Iraq, but his 
administration grapples with an ongoing economic recession, and it continues 
the neoliberal education policies of the Bush administration. Now relabeled 
The Race to the Top, like NCLB, these policies rely heavily on market-driven 
“reform” and standardized assessment for students, teachers, and schools, and 
encourage the further privatization of public education (Nussbaum, 2010; 
Ravitch 2010; Woodside-Jiron, this volume). These political and economic 
developments and policy continuities provide a sharp reminder that we live in 
an era of globalized economic interconnectivity, increasing economic inequali-
ties, and growing cultural and political divisions, within and between nations. 
It is also a time in which debates about education have achieved an unparalleled 
public salience. 
The past decades of political and economic volatility have been a time in 
which questions of learning, identity, and power have become densely inter-
twined (Castells, 1999). In addition, the broader intellectual climate of our 
era—so-called late or postmodernity—is one of ongoing critique and uncer-
tainty about the bases for knowledge and the grounds for effective action. 
One result has been a reconsideration of the relation between knowledge and 
action. As both social analysts and social actors feel the need to grapple with 
greater complexity, under conditions of greater uncertainty, they do so with an 
increasing sense of ethical commitments. What can I/we do both to understand 
and to change the world? How do I “apply” my research? These are insistent 
questions in education research as well as a range of traditional academic disci-
plines (Bauman, 1997). At a time of crises, when the general theories and “reli-
able” methodologies of decades past no longer seem adequate to understanding 
our globalized, diversified circumstances, when optimism about solutions to 
social problems is on the wane (Rorty, 1989), it is easy to understand the search 


for critical perspectives. As presented in this volume, that search is for views, 
concepts, and ways of inquiring that offer some purchase on broad questions 
of power while also permitting study of particulars, the situated activities and 
events in which life and learning occur.
Concern with critique of social injustice, often focused on educational top-
ics, if not educational sites per se, has a reasonable pedigree in sociolinguis-
tics and linguistic anthropology. A founder of quantitative sociolinguistics, 
Labov (1972) wrote a scathing critique in the late 1960s of the then-prevalent 
notion that nonstandard speakers were somehow linguistically deficient; and 
Gumperz and Hymes, founding figures in the “ethnography of communica-
tion” paradigm, were writing from the 1970s onward about how language dif-
ference interacted with social inequalities, in school and non-school settings 
(Cazden, Hymes, & John, 1970; Gumperz, 1986; Gumperz & Hymes, 1986; 
Hymes, 1980). What distinguishes the chapters in this collection, as well as 
other work discussed below, is that groups of researchers are now taking up a 
common set of goals. Most broadly they seek to combine systematic analysis 
of language and other sign modes, ethnographic grounding, and social theory 
engagements in order to develop studies of education which are also inquiries 
into contemporary life: how we engage each other; learn in groups; develop 
identities; oppress and resist oppression.
The papers in this volume variously argue that critical perspectives require 
attention to discourse—language use, sign media, and the social worlds they 
both presuppose and bring into being—with analytical attention informed by 
debates within social theory. They do by engaging the frameworks of analysis 
presented by James Gee, Norman Fairclough and Gunther Kress. James Gee’s 
scholarship represents a very influential strand in education-related critical 
discourse analysis, especially in the US. His framework features an unusual 
synthesis of insights from formal and functional linguistics, cognitive sciences, 
postmodern literary theory and more workaday historical and sociological 
research on society, schooling, and literacy. His work offers a range of creative, 
shrewd analyses of policy documents, stories, video games, and found texts 
(such as aspirin bottle labels). His distinctions between lower-case “discourse” 
and upper-case “Discourse,” arguments about cultural models, and analytic 
proposals regarding “building blocks” of analysis have been widely discussed in 
education research (e.g. Lakshmanan, this volume; Lopéz-Bonilla, this volume; 
Purcell-Gates, 1995; Rogers, 2003).
In capitalized form, Critical Discourse Analysis is a research program asso-
ciated with the work of Norman Fairclough and students and collaborators 
(Chouliaraki & Fairclough, 1999; Fairclough, 1992, 1995, 2006). The CDA 
framework is grounded in readings of social theory and systemic functional 
linguistics; it features a three-part scheme of analysis: text (roughly, words and 
phrasal units), discourse practice (roughly, communicative events and their 
interpretation), social practice (roughly, society-wide processes). CDA has 
been credited with putting questions of power and social injustice squarely on 
the agenda of UK and European sociolinguistics (Slembrouck, 2001). Analysis 
x  Foreword


has tended to focus on the critique of large-scale media and formal bureau-
cratic institutions, and it has also been criticized for regularly neglecting to 
analyze context (Widdowson, 1998), but it has also been taken up by educa-
tion researchers with strong commitments to ethnographic inquiry (Lewis and 
Ketter, this volume; Rogers, 2003; Tusting, 2000). 
Gunther Kress’s social semiotics emerges out of very early work on “criti-
cal linguistics” (Fowler, Hodge, Kress, & Trew, 1979; Kress & Hodge, 1979) 
that tended to over-emphasize the direct influence of linguistic forms (“texts”) 
on social processes. Subsequent work, especially that emphasizing a semiotic 
grounding, has instead given priority to the act of sign-making and the interac-
tive, emergent quality of all meaning (Hodge & Kress, 1988). For more than a 
decade, Kress and collaborators have argued for the importance of visual as well 
as verbal signs and media in literacy as well as learning more generally (Kress, 
2003; Kress & van Leeuwen, 1996; Kress, Jewitt, Ogborn & Tsatsarelis, 2001). 
Perhaps most innovative and valuable in their contribution to this volume are 
the arguments and analyses showing that knowledge and learning are insepa-
rable from (socially situated) communication in multiple sign modalities. In 
this regard they complement influential recent work in linguistic anthropology, 
making similar arguments about knowledge and communication (Silverstein, 
2007) or about the inseparability of academic and social learning (Wortham, 
2005). But while the linguistic anthropological research is also grounded in a 
semiotic theorization and analysis of the social, the cognitive, and the com-
municative, Kress’s work further emphasizes the need to explore multiple sign 
modalities (see also Wohlwend, this volume).
Rebecca Rogers, the editor of this collection, is to be lauded for taking the 
lead in pulling together this timely exchange between younger, critically minded 
education researchers and major discourse theorists. Her editorial Introduction 
clearly presents the relations between Fairclough’s CDA, Gee’s critical discourse 
analysis, and Kress’s multimodal semiotic approach; it also clearly presents the 
case for more attention to questions of learning and more fully developed quali-
tative cases. Among the specific studies contained in this volume, those by Lak-
shmanan, Lopéz-Bonilla, and Woodside-Jiron provide extensive case material. 
They present suggestive analyses and conceptual synthesis, exploring literature, 
sign modalities, and postcolonial theory (Lakshmanan); narrative, identity, and 
more traditional sociolinguistic approaches in relation to Gee’s work on cultural 
models (Lopéz-Bonilla); power relations in state-level education policy and the 
contributions of Bernsteinian sociology to CDA (Woodside-Jiron). Other con-
tributions, such as those by Rowe and Lewis and Ketter, pose issues of long-
standing interest to practitioners of discourse analysis and ethnography: Rowe’s 
chapter addresses the relation between discourse and action, as part of an inquiry 
into situated learning; Lewis and Ketter address the relation between discussions 
in multicultural literature reading and barriers to understanding and dialogue, 
as part of a long-term inquiry into teacher-and-researcher learning.
It is appropriate that a volume arguing that learning often results from con-
flictual, contradictory juxtapositions of differing discourses contains uneven 
Foreword  xi


responses from Gee, Fairclough, and Kress. Gee’s discussion of discourse, con-
text, and learning occurs early in the collection, treats each concept at length 
and argues for a clear distinction between CDA and the wider currents of critical 
discourse analysis. Fairclough, in the middle of the volume, addresses learning 
as part of “a theoretical reflection on semiotic aspects of social transforma-
tion.” In short, he goes “meta,” that is, he translates the question of learning 
into the problem of emergence, itself part of a very general discussion of struc-
tural determinants and social change. Kress, for his part, argues for an expan-
sive view of learning, essentially that all sign-making involves learning, and 
therefore that much learning occurs outside of school settings, and is unrec-
ognized by standard school-assessment techniques. Reading Gee, Fairclough 
and Kress in relation to one another and in relation to the other contributors, 
one is forced to acknowledge what is at times a fertile tension and at times a 
yawning chasm between theoretical frameworks and between frameworks and 
case studies. However, in this at times fluid and at times awkward grappling, 
the contributors of cases and their primary theoretical interlocutors expand 
our sense of where learning occurs and the forms it takes, usefully pushing 
beyond narrow debates about schooling and assessment. In short, they present 
accounts of learning that are sensitive to situation while also cognizant that we 
live in a world of often brutal inequalities. 
The cases, analyses, and arguments in Introduction to Critical Discourse Analy-
sis in Education can themselves be seen as part of a wider (potential) dialogue 
about the need for conceptual debate as well as ethnographic grounding in dis-
course analysis, whether in education research or elsewhere. In presenting a set 
of comparable case studies engaging concepts of C/critical D/discourse A/analy-
sis, contributors in this volume also develop the “extended case method” which 
Burawoy (1991), drawing on anthropological, sociological, and Marxist tradi-
tions, has argued is essential for the production of rational, humane, and emanci-
patory knowledge about society, history, and our place therein. Turning to more 
immediate collective interlocutors, these would include: (1) the US-based con-
versations about the “Linguistic anthropology of education” has a book of the 
same name (Wortham & Rymes, 2003) and is the focus of a lively debate about 
language, media, schools and social processes (AEQ, 2011a); and (2) the decade-
long discussion-and-practice of “Linguistic ethnography in the UK,” occurring 
on the website (http://www.ling-ethnog.org.uk/) and listserve (LING-ETH-
NOG@JISCMAIL.AC.UK) and at regular “Linguistic Ethnography Forums” held 
as part of the annual meetings of the British Association of Applied Linguistics.
In a reflective piece for one Linguistic Ethnography Forum, Ben Rampton 
addressed how being a former teacher influences the ethnographer’s insights 
and anxieties about both description and theory. He challenged his audience to 
grapple with the philosophical, personal, and political issues raised by ethno-
graphic inquiry. In his conclusion, he recalled: 
Twenty five years ago, Hymes outlined the vision of a democratic society 
where there was one pole with people who’d been professionally trained in 
xii  Foreword


ethnography; at the other pole, there was the general population, respected 
for their intricate and subtle knowledge of the worlds they lived in; and in 
between, were people who could “combine some disciplined understand-
ing of ethnographic inquiry with the pursuit of their vocation (Hymes, 
1980, p. 99).” (Rampton, 2003, p. 7)
It seems to me that many contributors to this volume share the Hymesian 
impulse to widen the reach of ethnography and critical social awareness. This 
is especially true of this revised second edition. It is shown in the contributors’ 
concern with reflexive practice, the reports of open exchanges with research 
participants, and the authors’ desire to make the concepts and practices of cri-
tique, discourse analysis, and ethnographic inquiry available to a readership of 
practicing teachers as well as teacher educators. 
James Collins
Albany, NY 
September 3, 2010
References
Bauman, Z. (1997). Postmodernity and its discontents. New York: Routledge.
Burawoy, M. (1991). The extended case method. In M. Burawoy, A. Burton, A. Fergu-
son, K. Fox, J. Gamson, N. Gartrell, L. Hurst, C. Kurzman, L. Salzinger, J. Schiffman, 
& S. Ui (Eds.), Ethnography unbound: Power and resistance in the modern metropolis 
(pp. 271–290). Berkeley: University of California Press.
Castells, M. (1999). Flows, networks, and identities: A critical theory of the information 
society. In M. Castells, R. Flecha, P. Freire, H. Giroux, D. Macedo, & P. Willis (Eds.), 
Critical education in the information age (pp. 37–64). New York: Rowan & Littlefield. 
Cazden, C., Hymes, D., & John, V. (Eds.). (1970). Functions of language in the classroom. 
New York: Teachers College Press.
Chouliaraki, L., & Fairclough, N. (1999). Discourse in late modernity. Edinburgh: Uni-
versity of Edinburgh Press.
Fairclough, N. (1992). Discourse and social change. Cambridge, UK: Polity Press.
Fairclough, N. (1995). Critical discourse analysis. London: Longman.
Fairclough, N. (2006). Language and globalization. New York: Routledge.
Fowler, R., Hodge, R., Kress, G., & Trew, T. (1979). Language and control. London: 
Routledge & Kegan Paul.
Gumperz, J. (1986). Interactional sociolinguistics in the study of schooling. In J. Cook-
Gumperz (Ed.), The social construction of literacy (pp. 45–68). New York: Cambridge 
University Press.
Gumperz, J., & Hymes, D. (Eds.). (1986). Directions in sociolinguistics (2nd ed.). Oxford: 
Blackwell.
Hodge, R., & Kress, G. (1988). Social Semiotics. Cambridge, UK: Polity Press.
Hymes, D. (1980). Language in education: Ethnolinguistic essays. Washington, DC: 
CAL.
Kress, G. (2003). Literacy in the new media age. London: Routledge.
Kress, G., & Hodge, R. (1979) Language and ideology. London: Routledge & Kegan 
Paul.
Foreword  xiii


Kress, G., & van Leeuwen, T. (1996) Reading images. London: Routledge.
Kress, G., Jewitt, C., Ogborn, J., & Tsatsarelis, C. (2001). Multimodal teaching and 
learning.
Labov, W. (1972). The logic of nonstandard English. In Language in the inner city. Phila-
delphia: University of Pennsylvania Press.
Nussbaum, M. (2010). Not for profit: Why democracy needs the humanities. Princeton: 
Princeton University Press.
Purcell-Gates, V. (1995). Other people’s words. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University 
Press.
Rampton, B. (2003). Coming to linguistic ethnography from a background in teach-
ing. Paper presented at the Annual Meeting of the British Association of Applied 
Linguistics.
Ravitch, D. (2010). The death and life of the great American school system. New York: 
Basic Books.
Rogers, R. (2003). A critical discourse analysis of family literacy practices. Mahwah, NJ: 
Lawrence Erlbaum.
Rorty, R. (1989). Contingency, irony, and solidarity. New York: Cambridge University 
Press.
Silverstein, M. (2007). How knowledge begets communication begets knowledge. Inter-
cultural Communication Review, Rikkyo University, May 2007.
Slembrouck, S. (2001). Explanation, Interpretation and critique in the analysis of dis-
course. Critique of Anthropology, 21, 33–57.
Tusting, K. (2000). Written intertextuality and the construction of Catholic identity in 
a parish community: An ethnographic study. Unpublished Ph.D., Lancaster Univer-
sity, Lancaster.
Widdowson, H. (1998). The theory and practice of critical discourse analysis. Applied 
Linguistics, 19, 136–151.
Wortham, S., & Rymes, B. (Eds.). (2003). Linguistic anthropology of education. Westport, 
CT: Praeger.
Wortham, S. (2005) Learning identity. New York: Cambridge University Press.
xiv  Foreword


Preface
The Logic of the New Edition 
I routinely use the first edition of An Introduction to Critical Discourse Analysis 
in a seminar I teach. I often wonder: How does one become a critical discourse 
analyst? What kinds of experiences, readings, discussions and activities aide in 
this process? These questions became the basis of a study I carried out of my 
teaching and my students’ learning within one of the seminars. My intention 
was to make visible the sorts of processes, issues, and complexities that arise as 
people engage with critical discourse analysis, particularly when they are rela-
tively new to the field (Rogers, in press). What I learned along the way is that 
the structure of the first edition of the book did not support my students’ learn-
ing in the way I thought it could. Thus, the logic of the new edition is rooted in 
my observations of how people learn to think about, practice, talk about, and 
represent critical discourse analysis. Here, I share some of these observations 
that provide the justification for the new design of the book. 
My intention as I practice CDA—both in my research and in my teach-
ing—is to pry open spaces to examine taken-for-granted assumptions about 
discourse, education, and society. I begin my seminars with scholarship in the 
ethnography of communication, socio-linguistics, and narrative analysis to 
engage people in theoretical issues and also provide a foundation in the han-
dling and treatment of linguistic data—from segmenting lines, considering 
units of analysis, generating a theory and method of transcription, developing 
stanzas, and exploring narrative structures. James Gee’s scholarship draws on 
each of these traditions and, thus, I have found is an ideal place to begin (Gee, 
2005). As students consider cultural models, social languages, discourses and 
figured worlds in relation to their own data, they begin to move beyond a con-
tent analysis to look at the relationships between the forms and functions of 
language. They realize that people do not say important things in unimportant 
ways. At the same time, there is the recognition that some meanings are more 
privileged than others. 
This exploration generally leads into discussions of representation and 
power that segues nicely into the scholarship in systemic functional linguis-
tics, French theories of discourse, and Norman Fairclough’s approach to CDA. 


xvi  Preface
People also start to grow more comfortable with the language of discourse anal-
ysis, including the proliferation of meanings around the construct of discourse 
itself. At this point, though, there is some predictable uncertainty about their 
linguistic analyses. Students realize that they need to be looking more closely 
at how interactions and practices are constituted linguistically but experience 
angst over what is often times a lack of experience with linguistic analysis. This 
is a perennial dilemma because, in educational studies, I do not expect that 
students will have any background experiences in either linguistics or critical 
social theory. Thus, I provide ample resources on linguistic and social analysis. 
Because a key part of Norman Fairclough’s work has been answering the 
question “What are the mediational tools between the linguistic and the social?” 
turning to his work that draws on systemic functional linguistics and Marxist-
inspired social theories works well for students. In particular, I find that learn-
ers really begin to understand the relationships between discourse and society 
when they see the way in which the linguistic dimensions of genre, discourse 
and style are patterned together (Fairclough, 2003). Of course, throughout all 
of this they are practicing different approaches to discourse analysis with their 
own data that helps enormously. Noticing the connections between social the-
ory and discursive analysis helps people to situate their analysis within a set of 
intellectual debates in the field. 
From this point, we approach discourse studies from a multimodal, social 
semiotic perspective, looking at how meanings are made beyond the linguis-
tic. Students realize that a good amount happens to language users—to use 
Blommaert’s (2005) phrase—“long after they have shut their mouths” (p. 
35). Analyzing discourses multimodally provides insights into the array of 
possible meanings. They may return to some of the hunches they had about 
their data to look more closely at the multimodal aspects of social practices. 
With procedures such as data reduction, transcription and searching for 
patterns in their repertoire, they are able to look at the multimodal aspects of 
their data. 
I think it is worth emphasizing that the process of learning critical discourse 
analysis is not linear. Rather, it involves a cycling through deepened under-
standings of the role of language in social life, the tools that can be brought to 
bear to help make meaning and the associated representational issues. Along 
the way, I’ve heard Teun van Dijk’s voice in my head as he argues, “CDS can-
not be learned, and hence cannot be taught either, no more than that one can 
learn (or teach) to be politically committed or feel emotionally involved when 
learning about social inequality and injustice” (http://www.discourses.org/). 
As someone charged with teaching CDA and surrounded by people who are 
eager to understand CDA, I’ve needed to be able to come to terms with this and 
other dilemmas. As an educator, I think it is important that we offer students 
of education theory, practice, and research an invitation to critically examine 
discourse practices in ways that are engaging and enticing. It is my hope that the 
revised edition of this book helps to fill this role. 


Preface  xvii
Structure of the Book 
The new structure in An Introduction to Critical Discourse Analysis in Education, 
Second Edition mirrors the logic of learning that I have just sketched out. There 
are three sections in the book. An “anchor chapter” written by a leading scholar 
in the field grounds each section, providing a framework for an approach to 
CDA. Part I Discourse Analysis is grounded in James Gee’s approach to dis-
course analysis and draws on narrative analysis, social linguistics, and social and 
cultural cognition. Part II Critical Discourse Analysis is grounded in Norman 
Fairclough’s approach to critical discourse analysis and draws on the traditions 
of systemic functional linguistics and Marxist-inspired theories of discourse. 
Part III Multimodal Discourse Analysis in the book is grounded in Gunther 
Kress’s approach to multimodal social semiotic approach to discourse analysis. 
Each section includes updated or new work by scholars working in the field of 
critical discourse analysis. 
By classifying approaches in this way, I realize that I run the risk of creating 
arbitrary distinctions where there are none. However, I find that moving across 
the approaches provides a number of angles and entry points for analysts to 
examine their data. The ordering is not meant to suggest an increasing level of 
complexity or a linear movement in learning. Depending on one’s interests, 
questions, and data, the decision to begin with multimodal discourse analysis 
instead of the seven building tasks might make sense. In reality, it is quite usual 
to see a “hybrid” approach to critical discourse analysis, where the theories 
and analytic tools brought to bear on the problem cross various traditions and 
approaches. I believe this hybridity is a strength of the field because the creative 
union of theories and methods generates new insights for understanding edu-
cational problems and produces new research questions.
One might argue that you could start with the multimodal, social semi-
otic approach and work into the other approaches. I think that may be true. 
However, arguably there are less well-developed procedures and methods for 
the social semiotic approach. I find that because students are really juggling a 
bunch of stuff as they learn critical discourse studies—theories of language, 
procedures for representing language, methods of analysis, social theories, rep-
resentational choices, ethics and so on—having some concrete ways of work-
ing with language (procedures that are more ironed out in some traditions of 
discourse analysis than in others) is helpful for learners. 
While analysts are learning critical discourse analysis, they yearn for examples 
and models. While part of this is the tendency to think that there is “a method” 
for conducting CDA, I think that many students want to see how other scholars 
have balanced all of the demands—and there are many—of conducting and 
representing CDA. And so while I teach using the three different approaches 
that are represented in the book, my challenge was to find scholarship that was 
sufficiently empirical and theoretical and provided what I thought were good 
explanations of procedures in each approach. I want to offer my students good 
examples of the kinds of research that are representative of each tradition. 


xviii  Preface
I believe that the chapters in this revised edition do just that—they attend 
to multiple kinds of critical social theory—from social and cultural cogni-
tion, neocolonial, critical race theory, neoliberalism, and feminism, to name 
a few. They also take up the construct of discourse in all of its proliferation of 
meanings alongside their theories of the world of education. And each of the 
chapters offers sufficient detail for aiding the reader in “seeing” how they 
carried out their analysis. While there is no lock step method for conduct-
ing CDA, it is important, I would argue, that the procedures are sufficiently 
detailed as to be transparent to readers of the research. Analysts in this book 
differ in their methodological procedures—from close linguistic detail to 
patterns of discourses. And finally, each of the chapters offers a different 
way of thinking about the representation of their research. This is an area 
that is often overlooked in the teaching and learning of CDA. Once analyses 
have been carried out and we have something to say about our project, how 
do we go about representing it—both in writing and in presentations? This 
is a challenge in critical discourse studies because it means finding a balance 
between zooming-in on the fine-grained discourse analysis and zooming-out 
to provide enough context to make the analyses mean something to someone 
else. 
Chapter Overviews
PART I Discourse Analysis
Chapter 2: Discourse Analysis: What Makes it Critical? 
by James Paul Gee
In this chapter, Gee discusses features common to many approaches to dis-
course analysis, at least those with one foot in the field of linguistics, before 
moving on to what is distinctive about CDA. His basic argument is this: All 
discourse analysis that intends to make empirical claims is rooted in specific 
viewpoints about the relationship between form and function in language, 
although these are rarely spelled out in discourse analytic work in education. 
Further, empirically motivated work in discourse is ultimately based, in part, 
on specific analytic techniques for relating form and function in oral and/or 
written texts. Different approaches to discourse analysis differ in their view-
points and techniques in regard to form and function in language, although 
often in ways that do not necessarily make their various analyses incompat-
ible. None of this, however, renders an approach to discourse analysis critical. 
He argues that CDA involves, beyond relating form and function in language, 
specific empirical analyses of how such form–function correlations map onto 
specific social practices in ways that shape the nature of such practices. Because 
social practices inherently involve social relationships, where issues of solidar-
ity, status, and power are at stake, they flow bottom–up from work in CDA 
and are empirical claims. It is in terms of this claim that Gee treats a common 


Preface  xix
and incorrect criticism of work in CDA— namely, that such work imposes its 
(usually leftist) politics top–down on the data from the start. 
Gee introduces his “tools of inquiry”: situated meanings, social languages, 
figured worlds, and Discourses. The tools of inquiry are theoretical devices that 
also express his theory of language. The “seven building tasks” are practices 
designed for analysts to discover what work is being done with language. The 
building tasks include significance, activities, identities, relationships, politics, 
connections, and sign systems. Finally, he argues that work on both CDA and 
sociocultural approaches to language and literacy (the so-called “New Literacy 
Studies”) needs to adopt a particular perspective on learning if such work is 
to make substantive contributions to education and the work of social trans-
formation. Gee argues that learning (especially in the “new capitalism” of our 
“new times”) is best seen not as a mental thing, but as a type of social interaction 
in which knowledge is distributed across people and their tools and technolo-
gies, dispersed at various sites, and stored in links among people, their minds 
and bodies, and specific affinity groups (one type of which is a community 
of practice). Such a view of learning, he argues, allows an integration of work 
in CDA, situated cognition, sociocultural approaches to language and literacy, 
and particular forms of social theory. 
Chapter 3: Narratives of Exclusion and the Construction of the Self 
by Guadalupe López-Bonilla
Taking up Gee’s concept of figured worlds—the taken-for-granted theories, sto-
ries, and explanations we carry—Guadalupe López-Bonilla explores narratives 
of personal experience told by Mexican high school students. An illustration 
of narrative research (e.g., Bruner, 1986; Gee, 1989; Labov & Waletzky, 1967), 
the study demonstrates how youth make sense of their experiences both the-
matically and structurally. The author compares the narratives of those facing 
imminent expulsion with those constructed by their more successful peers who 
have made it to the end of their senior years. She asks: How have figured worlds 
rendered these students’ respective experiences meaningful? How does their 
language, which she (re)presents in bilingual transcripts within the chapter, 
suggest the ways in which figured worlds shape their experience of “not under-
standing” and/or not passing a school subject or, on the other hand, “getting it” 
and being successful in school? 
López-Bonilla argues that, as an analytical tool, figured worlds can be viewed 
as an interface between discourse and Discourse, between linguistic structure 
and social order. In particular, she discusses issues of agency and the construc-
tion of the self, and suggests that the students’ figured worlds articulate the 
experiences of the students, an articulation between language and social order 
that evidences what Bourdieu (1980) calls the “institutionalization of differ-
ence,” that is, the strategies institutions such as schools use to enforce statutory 
and symbolic barriers between people and groups. 


xx  Preface
Chapter 4: A Critical Discourse Analysis of Neocolonialism in 
Patricia McCormick’s Sold 
by Manika Subi Lakshmanan
Lakshmanan uses critical discourse analysis to train attention on the prob-
lematic nature of literature written by North Americans about so-called third 
world countries, examining in particular the young adult novel Sold (2006) by 
Patricia McCormick in order to demonstrate the connections between literary 
discourse, the marketed visuals on the book’s cover, and knowledge practices 
suggested by the publisher’s discussion guide. Taking up as conceptual tools 
Gee’s seven building tasks (this volume), the work that is done by language, she 
argues that critical literary analysis should not be limited to an examination of 
power relations which inhere in race, class, or gender differences in texts alone. 
Rather, a critical lens should also be directed at power relations that emanate 
from texts to their global implications. Only then, Lakshmanan claims, can 
one become aware of the ideological positions being offered to the reader, and 
how this might affect international relations. In homing in on the most fruit-
ful intersections for analysis, Lakshmanan also takes up Fairclough’s notion of 
cruces, the places where textual, visual, and pedagogical implications seem to be 
at odds or problematic; she brings postcolonial theories on power relations to 
bear on her analyses throughout the chapter. 
In parsing these discursive struggles, Lakshmanan elucidates some of the 
hegemonic articulations they inscribe. She concludes that the hegemonic politi-
cal discourse on individual/social change in developing countries is contingent 
on the positive equivalence of a chain of activities. For example, in Sold, con-
nections are drawn between culture, gender, disempowerment, poverty, and 
sexual exploitation, suggesting both a lack of transformative agency within the 
so-called third world on the one hand, and a kind of outsider-Western-savior 
agency on the other.
Chapter 5: Figured Worlds and Discourses of Masculinity: Being a 
Boy in a Literacy Classroom 
by Josephine Marsh and Jayne C. Lammers
This chapter focuses on how CDA facilitated the study of the discourses of mas-
culinity. Marsh adapted Gee’s (2005) guidelines for CDA and used Fairclough’s 
(1995, this volume) work as a lens for her interpretations. CDA made visible 
how a middle-class Hispanic 18-year-old male’s constructions of masculinity 
shaped his participation in school literacy practices and, in turn, the way that 
school literacy practices and classroom contexts shaped his understandings 
of what it meant to be a boy in a literacy classroom. Using the four analytic 
tools (particularly cultural models) suggested by Gee (this volume) for CDA 
as thinking devices, Marsh constructed four stories about Chavo’s adolescent 
literacy experiences. As she constructed stories to represent the cultural models 
of Chavo, his mother, and his teacher, she conducted a micro-analysis on the 


Preface  xxi
form and function of the spoken language to inform her analyses. This chap-
ter demonstrates how an analysis based on the form and function of language 
worked in conjunction with a more macroanalysis of CDA to highlight the 
complexities inherent in discourses of masculinity and school literacy. 
PART II Critical Discourse Analysis
Chapter 6: Semiotic Aspects of Social Transformation and Learning 
by Norman Fairclough 
A common critique of CDA is that it has not often attended to matters of 
learning. Learning, in this chapter, is therefore addressed as a performativity 
of texts—both spoken and written. Fairclough suggests that social practices 
such as teaching and learning are mediated by structures and events and are 
networked in particular ways through orders of discourse. Orders of discourse 
comprise genres, discourses, and styles or “ways of interacting,” “ways of repre-
senting,” and “ways of being.” Here he theoretically reflects on semiotic aspects 
of social transformation and learning, with the objective being to incorporate a 
view of learning into the version of CDA that has been developing in his more 
recent work. In assessing the possibilities for and limitations of critical educa-
tional research motivated by emancipatory (e.g., antiracist) agendas for learn-
ing and social transformation, Fairclough argues, one needs to consider both 
factors of a broadly structural character and factors to do with agency. 
The particular focus in this chapter is on incorporating a theory of learning 
into this framework. What is the relationship between individual and collec-
tive learning and social reproduction and transformation? How does social sci-
ence figure in processes of individual and collective learning in contemporary 
societies? How in particular can critical social scientists (including discourse 
analysts) envisage their contribution to individual and collective learning in 
ways that accord with the objectives of critical social science? How, finally, does 
discourse figure in individual and collective learning in its relation to social 
reproduction and transformation? How might critical discourse analysts envis-
age their particular contribution to projects of individual and collective learn-
ing and progressive social transformation?
Chapter 7: Learning as Social Interaction: Interdiscursivity in a 
Teacher and Researcher Study Group 
by Cynthia Lewis and Jean Ketter 
This chapter analyzes discussions of young adult multicultural literature among 
White middle-school teachers and university researchers gathering as a teacher 
research group over time. The authors ask the following overarching question: 
What is the nature of learning among the participating teachers over a 4-year 
period? Related to this question, how do interaction patterns in the group sus-
tain or disrupt fixed discourses in ways that shape the group’s learning? Using 


xxii  Preface
CDA, the authors examined key transcripts for systematic clusters of themes, 
statements, and ideas, and also of genre and voice, that would reveal how the 
teacher researcher group participants, some of whom were university research-
ers and others classroom teachers, took up aspects of one anothers’ worldviews, 
patterns of talk, and systems of thought as they related to multicultural litera-
ture and, more generally, to the meaning and purposes of multicultural educa-
tion. These interdiscursive moments have implications for a theory of learning 
as social interaction and for the professional development of teachers in long-
term informal settings. 
Chapter 8: Language, Power, and Participation: Using Critical 
Discourse Analysis to Make Sense of Public Policy 
by Haley Woodside-Jiron 
Different from the previous chapters in this book, this chapter looks at the use 
of CDA as a tool in the critical analysis of public policy. Drawing primarily 
from Fairclough’s (1992, 1995) frame, this work emphasizes the analysis of text, 
discourse practices, and social practices in policies related specifically to read-
ing instruction in education. Through the close analysis of changes in reading 
policies in California between 1995 and 1997, and the more recent federal “No 
Child Left Behind” legislation, this research pushes beyond issues of form and 
function in language to deeper understandings of how specific texts, discourse 
practices, and social practices affect social arrangements, the naturalization of 
cultural models, and development of literate identities. 
The chapter opens by situating CDA within the field of critical policy analy-
sis. Kingdon’s (1995) framework for policy analysis is compared with under-
lying tenets of critical theory to point toward overarching constructs that are 
important in the critical analysis of policy. The rest of the chapter is dedicated 
to the analysis of these constructs at a much more detailed analytic and inter-
pretive level through CDA. Specifically, issues of authority, cohesion, inter-
textuality, and hegemony are examined. Through the analysis of intertextual 
consistency and consensus in the development of cohesion, we come to see how 
the naturalization of particular models and perceived consensus contribute to 
learning and social transformation. Here people are positioned in specific ways 
by policy professionals and related policies with respect to knowledge and what 
is thinkable/unthinkable (Bernstein, 2000). Such engineering of social change, 
Woodside-Jiron argues, reduces resistance and places specific, potentially hege-
monic, restraints on our interactions.
Chapter 9: Locating the Role of the Role of the 
Critical Discourse Analyst 
by Lisa Patel Stevens 
This chapter explores the concepts of reflexivity and the role of the public intel-
lectual when using CDA in a field-based setting. Analyzing the metalanguage 


Preface  xxiii
used by Stevens herself (a university researcher), and a teacher-participant,(a 
middle-school science teacher), Stevens asks questions about authority, iden-
tity, and knowledge claims as these concepts are revealed in the themes and 
patterns of their interactive discourse. In discussing with her participant the 
nature of Stevens’ own work as a guest in her classroom, Stevens turns the CDA 
framework suggested by Fairclough back on her own discourse as a field-based 
researcher. Among other questions, Stevens asks how CDA can be used with 
research participants, what its role might be as a communicative and transfor-
mative teaching and learning tool, and what the nature of the responsibility and 
relationship is between the discourse analyst and field-based participants. 
Stevens suggests that metadiscussions about CDA provided openings for dis-
cussion between herself and her research participant, and that applying Fair-
clough’s orders of discourses to conversations shed considerable light on the 
shifting positionalities, subjectivities, and school-based identities negotiated 
between the researcher and participants. Stevens concludes that using CDA in 
field-based settings demands a higher level of willingness for both parties to 
act as interlocutors than would normally occur through the analysis of public 
documents and transcribed texts. This shared sense of responsibility as inter-
locutors has the potential to draw on metalanguages to disclose, explore, and 
contest the interpretive claims of both analyst and participant. 
PART III Multimodal Discourse Analysis
Chapter 10: Discourse Analysis and Education: A Multimodal 
Semiotic Approach 
by Gunther Kress
In this section overall and beginning with this chapter in particular, the concept 
of discourse in general and field of CDA in education in particular is expanded 
to include nonlinguistic modes of meaning-making. Here Gunther Kress shares 
the definitions, descriptions, and theoretical implications of social semiosis 
and multimodality that make possible his approach to discourse analysis. As 
Kress argues, neither discourse nor text is sufficient, semiotically speaking, to 
account for the manifold meanings of the social organization of education. 
A multimodal social semiotic approach provides a richer perspective on the 
many means involved in making meaning and learning; on forms and shapes 
of knowledge; on the many forms of evaluation and assessment; on the social 
relations evident in pedagogy; on the (self-)making of identity and, in that, on 
the means that are central in the recognition of the agency and the many kinds 
of semiotic work of learners in learning. 
The term multimodality, as defined by Kress, draws attention to the many 
material resources beyond speech and writing that societies have shaped and 
that cultures provide as means for making meaning. Modes, he writes, are 
socially made and culturally available material-semiotic resources for rep-
resentation. Multimodality attends to the distinctive affordances of different 


xxiv  Preface
modes. In itself, it is not a theory, even though its explicit challenge to the cen-
tral “place” of language has profound implications for thinking about mean-
ing, representation, communication. Other categories are essential: genre for 
instance, similar to both Fairclough’s and Gee’s use of the term, remains the 
category that points to the organization of social participants in the making of 
texts. Likewise, Kress suggests that discourse is way of representing. Still, Kress 
would add that in a communicative world understood as multimodal, in realiz-
ing the complexity of social/pedagogic environments of learning and teaching, 
discourse is just one, even if a central, category. 
Texts, socially made, with culturally available resources, realize the inter-
ests of their makers. Texts are (made) coherent, through the use of semiotic 
resources for establishing cohesion, internally among the textual elements and 
externally with elements of the environment in which texts occur. Multimodal-
ity, Kress argues, poses a challenge to the long-held and still widely dominant 
notion that “language” is that resource for making meaning that makes pos-
sible the “expression” of all thoughts, experiences, feelings, values, attitudes; in 
short, the pillar that guarantees human rationality. 
Chapter 11: Discourse in Activity and Activity as Discourse 
by Shawn Rowe 
Taking up for analysis the complex, multimodal experience of three partici-
pants interacting with a science museum display, Rowe sets out to accomplish 
two goals in this chapter. The first is to describe a particular learning theory 
that adds significantly to accounts of how discourse works to reproduce or 
transform social relations. The second is to explore through specific examples 
the possibility of using CDA techniques and concepts to analyze the intersec-
tions of linguistic and nonlinguistic semiotic systems in learning activity. Rowe 
begins with a description of learning as the appropriation of mediational means 
as part of participation in distributed, mediated activity. Accounts of learning 
as distributed, mediated activity are well established, but most often deal with 
learning in classrooms or everyday family (or peer) activities. One goal of this 
work is to move such studies into the in-between space of the science museum, 
where families and peer groups attend as natural groups and where learning 
is one goal of activity, but not perhaps the dominant mediated activity. Rowe 
then situates the empirical study of group activity, in a science museum, within 
that framework and suggests how a CDA may add to that account. Finally, 
using a new transcription system that accounts for activity, Rowe discusses 
the possibilities opened up by addressing nonlinguistic semiotic systems in a 
critical study of learning. The chapter concludes with a brief discussion of how 
analyzing both linguistic and nonlinguistic aspects of activity helps us better 
understand how the privileging of particular discourses is reproduced in local 
interaction. 


Preface  xxv
Chapter 12: Mapping Modes in Children’s Play and Design: An 
Action-oriented Approach to Critical Multimodal Analysis 
by Karen E. Wohlwend 
Karen Wohlwend uses Kressian multimodal analysis and theories of social 
semiosis to understand how actions are made meaningful and social in situ 
rather than in representation. Taking up the sounds, words, images, and actions 
of children during a reading lesson in a kindergarten classroom, she examines 
instances of classroom activity to see how modes shape children’s literacy learn-
ing and participation. Wohlwend especially relies upon the mode of gaze as 
a way of revealing which modes were most apparent in a classroom literacy 
event and how the foregrounding of particular modes enforced a set of power 
relations (teacher/student; reader/nonreader) legitimated by prevailing educa-
tional discourses. Mapping the interplay of modes uncovers power relations 
and social effects visible at the level of modes. Wohlwend argues that a clear 
understanding of tensions across multiple perspectives could help teachers to 
see discourses as resources and to act strategically with greater awareness. Criti-
cal multimodal analysis provides a way for early childhood teachers to see how 
the tangible everyday aspects of familiar classroom activity matter. 
Chapter 13: The Discourses of Educational Management 
Organizations: A Political Design 
by Mónica Pini 
In a world in which an ever-increasing amount of teaching and learning is 
happening through the medium of the worldwide web and on the screens of 
computers, multimodal analysis offers an approach that can account for mul-
tiple and moving streams of data across similar, apparently stable institutional 
structures. In this chapter Mónica Pini looks at the websites of educational 
management organizations (EMOs), businesses that administer and manage 
schools for a profit. She uses multimodal analysis to examine the layouts and 
language of these sites and associated texts, as well as the concepts of critical 
textual analysis suggested by Fairclough, which she uses to unpack and describe 
certain ideological features embedded in the companies’ marketing and com-
munication decisions.
Pini argues that these EMOs, like other for-profit companies, shape their 
images as an ideological construct through visual and verbal cues and through 
association between the characteristics of the product and the lifestyle it affords. 
Allusions such as “world-class” education, for example, and “a new kind of 
public school” are closely related to positive values, and they are social 
representations of success and transformation. In Pini’s multimodal analyses, 
linguistic choices such as these are “read” in conjunction with the images that 
lie behind them on the screen: photographs of the students served, the teach-
ers who teach them, the symbols and colors that figure on the websites, and so 
forth. 


xxvi  Preface
The Companion Website 
The companion website (www.routledge.com/textbooks/9780415874298), a new 
feature of this book, is intended to extend inquiry, exploration, and dialogue 
beyond the chapters in the book. The website includes the following elements: 
Chapter Extensions 
This section includes powerpoints for each of the chapters, author biographies 
and photos and a discussion guide for each section of the book. The power-
points are intended to offer a complementary perspective on the chapter and 
also a way of thinking about the representing research in critical discourse stud-
ies. Each powerpoint includes a list of suggested readings to extend the theo-
retical dimensions of each chapter. 
Interviews 
This section includes transcripts of interviews with James Gee, Norman Fair-
clough, and Gunther Kress, the leading scholars in each of the approaches high-
lighted in the book. The interviews are organized by theme and are cross-linked 
to allow for easy scrolling between sections of the interview. 
Videos 
This section features four 15-minute videos featuring many of the leading schol-
ars in critical discourse studies. The videos are organized through the follow-
ing themes: “approaches,” “procedures,” “context,” and “future directions.” 
The videos can be viewed separately or together but are meant to introduce 
the reader/viewer to the key leaders in the field—many of whom people read 
but have not heard speaking. Included in this section of the website is a list of 
resources and readings associated with each scholar featured on the video. 
Resources for Teaching and Learning CDA 
This section offers resources for teaching and learning CDA. Some of the 
resources include:
Bibliographies: 
This section of the website includes an extensive bibliography intended to direct 
readers to the wide range of examples of Critical Discourse Analysis across the 
international educational landscape. The bibliography is organized by educa-
tional domain, object of study (e.g. interviews, classroom discourse, written 
texts), and analytic method. Hyperlinks between sections make it easy to navi-
gate across sections.


Preface  xxvii
Discourse Analysis Journals: 
An extensive list of peer-reviewed journals devoted to language, discourse, and 
interaction across a wide range of disciplines. 
Films: 
An annotated list of films useful for teaching and learning Critical Discourse 
Studies. Films are organized into categories of critical social theory, linguistic 
theory, language and society, and media and representation. 
Syllabi: 
Examples of syllabi from professors who teach courses in Critical Discourse 
Studies are provided to give examples of the range of ways of designing a 
course.
Because the field is growing and changing at such a fast rate, it is likely that 
the resources provided today will quickly be replaced with newer resources. 
Thus I have taken the liberty of selecting a few resources in a number of areas 
in educational research while recognizing that there are many others we could 
have chosen. My intention is that students of CDA will use this as a point of 
departure and will add their own resources to the list. Finally, there are sugges-
tions for teaching and learning CDA. Attending to how people learn discourse 
analysis—a major goal of this project—can provide those of us who teach CDA 
with new routes for supporting our students’ learning. Likewise, documenting 
how people learn discourse analysis holds the promise of keeping the field fresh 
with new insights as our students address new problems (Rogers, in press). It is 
in this spirit of building from what I have learned from my students that I offer 
the second edition of this book and the companion website.
References
Bernstein, B. (2000). Pedagogy symbolic control and identity: Theory, research, critique. 
Bristol, PA: Taylor & Francis. 
Blommaert, J. (2005). Discourse. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press. 
Bourdieu, P. (1980). El sentido práctico (Ariel Danon, Trans.) Buenos Aires: Siglo XXI 
Editores. (Original title in French: Le sens practique) 
Bruner, J. (1986). Actual minds, possible worlds. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University 
Press.
Fairclough, N. (1992). Discourse and social change. Cambridge, UK: Polity. 
Fairclough, N. (1995). Critical discourse analysis: The critical study of language. New 
York: Longman. 
Fairclough, N. (2003). Analyzing discourse: Textual analysis for social research. New York: 
Routledge.
Gee, J. P. (1989). The narrativization of experience in the oral style. Journal of Education, 
171, 75–96. 


xxviii  Preface
Gee, J. P. (2005). An introduction to discourse analysis theory and method. New York: 
Routledge. 
Kingdon, J. W. (1995). Agendas, alternatives, and public policies (2nd ed.). New York: 
Longman. 
Labov, W. & Waletzky, J. (1967). Narrative analysis: Oral versions of personal experi-
ence. In J. Helm (Ed.), Essays on the verbal and visual arts (pp. 12–44). Seattle: Uni-
versity of Washington Press. 
McCormick, P. (2006). Sold. New York: Hyperion.
Rogers, R. (in press). Becoming discourse analysts: constructing meanings and identi-
ties. Critical Inquiry in Language Studies, 8(1). 
Acknowledgments 
Without the wisdom and feedback from students of critical discourse stud-
ies, this book would not have been possible. The inspiration for working on a 
revised edition is rooted in my desire to provide the best possible resources for 
my students. I would like to recognize Naomi Silverman’s vision and inspira-
tion as an editor. She has continued to support my ideas and work, and it was 
her suggestion to work on a second edition of this book. A special thank you to 
Inda Schaenen for helping to prepare this manuscript for production. She and 
I co-edited the materials found on the website. Inda’s background in critical 
discourse studies was an invaluable asset to this project. Thank you to Joe Pol-
man, who as chair of the Division of Teaching and Learning at UMSL continues 
to encourage and support scholarship. An Innovative Technology Grant at the 
University of Missouri-St. Louis provided the finances to work with a video 
editor and graphic designer for the website materials.


1 
Critical Approaches to 
 
Discourse Analysis in 
 
Educational Research
 
Rebecca Rogers
 
University of Missouri-St. Louis
Why Critical Approaches to Discourse 
Analysis in Educational Research? 
Critical discourse analysis is a problem-oriented and transdisciplinary set of 
theories and methods that have been widely used in educational research. 
Perhaps this is so because of the many areas of commensurability that exist 
between educational research and critical discourse analysis. To begin, I will 
consider just three of these areas. 
First, educational practices are considered communicative events; it there-
fore stands to reason that discourse analysis would be useful to analyze the ways 
in which the texts, talk, and other semiotic interactions that learning comprises 
are constructed across time and contexts. Second, discourse studies provide a 
particular way of conceptualizing interactions that is compatible with socio-
cultural perspectives in educational research (Gutiérrez, 2008; Lewis, Enciso, 
& Moje, 2007). A shared assumption is that discourse can be understood as 
a multimodal social practice. That is, discourse reflects and constructs the 
social world through many different sign systems. Because systems of mean-
ing are caught up in political, social, racial, economic, religious, and cultural 
formations which are linked to socially defined practices that carry more or less 
privilege and value in society, they cannot be considered neutral (see Blom-
maert, 2005; Fairclough & Wodak, 1997). A third area of commensurability 
is that discourse studies and educational research are both socially committed 
paradigms that address problems through a range of theoretical perspectives. 
Critical approaches to discourse analysis recognize that inquiry into mean-
ing making is always also an exploration into power. Many of the problems 
that are addressed, particularly in a globalized world system, have to do with 
power and inequality. CDA provides the tools for addressing the complexity 
of movement across educational sites, practices, and systems in a world where 
inequalities are global in scope. Because of the reflexive tendencies of critical 
discourse studies—rooted in the constitutive relationship between discourse 
and the social world—the field continues to grow and change, responding to 
problems with different ways of looking, understanding and, as its practitio-
ners hope, acting. 


2  Rebecca Rogers
A Note About Terminology
There are many approaches to critical discourse analysis. Some scholars refer 
to their approach as Critical Discourse Analysis (CDA, in all capital letters). 
This is the variety that tends to be associated with Norman Fairclough and the 
people who work in that tradition. However, as will be evident in this intro-
duction and throughout the book, there is a variety of theories and methods 
associated with critical inquiry into language practices that can be referred to 
as critical discourse analysis (cda, lower case). This work shares the assumption 
that because language is a social practice and because not all social practices 
are created and treated equally, all analyses of language are inherently criti-
cal. Thus, we might refer to this scholarship as critical approaches to discourse 
analysis (Blommaert, 2005; Gee, 2004). In this introduction, I use the terms 
interchangeably—depending on the context—but I prefer the wider designa-
tion that is more, rather than less, inclusive of theories and methods. In editing 
this book, I take the position that it is less important how one refers to their 
work (as either CDA, cda, or critical approaches to discourse analysis) than it 
is for one to understand that there are differences in what these significations 
may mean. These differences will be become clear as you read across the sec-
tions in the book. 
Taking Stock of Critical Approaches to Discourse Analysis 
More than three decades have passed since the publication of two extremely 
inﬂ
 uential books, Language and Control by Roger Fowler, Robert Hodge, Gun-
ther Kress, and Tony Trew (1979) and Language and Ideology by Gunther Kress 
and Robert Hodge (1979). These two books, perhaps more so than other books, 
have inﬂ
 uenced the way in which scholars approach the problematic intersec-
tions of language and society; they have become cornerstones in what we know 
as critical discourse studies. Of course, the study of discourse has a much longer 
history and can be traced to language philosophers and social theorists such as 
Bakhtin (1981), DuBois (1903/1990), Pecheux (1975), Voloshinov (1973), Said 
(1979), Kristeva (1980), Spender (1980), Foucault (1969, 1977), and Wittgen-
stein (1953). 
Some of the well-known approaches to critical discourse analysis include: 
the discourse-historical method (van Leeuwen & Wodak, 1999; Wodak, 2001; 
Wodak, 2005); systemic functional linguistics (Fairclough, 2003; Kress, 1976; 
van Leeuwen, 2008); sociocognitive studies (van Dijk, 1993); French discourse 
analysis (e.g. Foucault, 1972; Pecheux, 1975); social semiotics (Hodge & Kress, 
1988; Kress, 2009; Lemke, 2002; van Leeuwen, 2008); and critical ethnography 
of communication (Blommaert, 2001; Collins & Blot, 2003). While individuals 
tend to get associated with certain approaches, I would caution against a strict 
categorization because of the points of convergence between approaches.
In educational research, discourse analysis grew out of the work of sociolin-
guistics (Gumperz, 1982; Labov, 1972; Sinclair & Coulthard, 1975); narrative 


Critical Approaches to Discourse Analysis  3
research (Bruner, 1990, 1991; Gee, 1986; Labov & Waletzky, 1967; Ochs & 
Capps, 1996); linguistic anthropology (Hymes, 1964, 1996; Silverstein & 
Urban, 1996); and the ethnography of communication (Gumperz & Hymes, 
1964, Heath, 1983; Scollon & Scollon, 2004; Scribner & Cole, 1981; Shuman, 
1986). Schools, classrooms, and educational practices became sites for studying 
not only the micro-dimensions of classroom talk but also the ways in which 
social structures are reproduced at macro-levels (e.g. Bourdieu & Passeron, 
1977; Collins, 1982; Collins, 2009; Collins & Blot, 2003; Gee, 1996; Heath, 1983; 
Michaels, 1983; Oakes, 1986/2005; Shuman, 1986). 
Critical Discourse Analysis has taken hold in educational research in North 
America (see Seigel & Fernandez, 2000 for an overview of critical approaches). 
Over the past two decades, there have been many empirical studies, edited 
books, essays, and reviews devoted to critical approaches to discourse stud-
ies in education (e.g. Blommaert, 2005; Blommaert & Bulcaen, 2000; Bloome, 
Power Carter, Morton Christian, & Shuart-Faris, 2005; Collins, 1982; Burns, 
& Morrell, 2005; Florio-Ruane, 1987; Luke, 1995/1996; Rex, et al., 2010; Rog-
ers, et al., 2005). Educational researchers used CDA in many different areas 
in educational studies—from studies in higher education, policy studies, adult 
education, and language arts to studies in physical education, math and science 
education, family and community education, and art education and creativity. 
An extensive bibliography of CDA work in education can be found on the web-
site, organized by key words and type of data source. 
As seen from even a brief glimpse at its topical range, CDA is a broad frame-
work that brings critical social theories into dialogue with theories of language 
to answer particular research questions. As such, critical discourse analysts are 
generally concerned with a critical theory of the social world, the relationship 
of discourse in the construction and representation of this social world, and a 
methodology that allows them to describe, interpret, and explain such relation-
ships. In the next section, I consider how the concepts “critical,” “discourse,” 
and “analysis” are embedded in critical approaches to discourse analysis. At 
times, I draw on interviews I conducted with James Gee, Normal Fairclough, 
and Gunther Kress. The complete transcript of their interviews can be found 
on the companion website. 
Considering Critical in Critical Discourse Analysis 
Power is a central concept in critical discourse studies. It tends to be defined 
in terms of negative uses of power, articulated through and within discourses 
and resulting in domination and oppression. Blommeart writes, “the deepest 
impact of power everywhere is inequality, as power differentiates and selects, 
includes and excludes” (p. 2). However, Blommaert (2005) writes, “power is 
not a bad thing—those who are in power will confirm it” (p. 1). Blommaert 
suggests that critical discourse studies should offer an analysis of the effects 
of power, the outcomes of power, of what power does to people/groups/
societies and how this impact comes about. Similarly, Fairclough urges us to 


4  Rebecca Rogers
consider power in the following ways: “the power to,” “power over,” and 
“power behind.” Arguably, more theorization needs to be conducted around 
productive uses of power and what Kress (this volume) refers to as the “design 
of new meanings”. 
As a way to see and describe the nature of power, Critical Social Theory 
(CST) provides a theoretical foundation for critical approaches to discourse 
analysis. CST is a transdiciplinary knowledge base structured by the dual 
agendas of critiquing and resisting domination and creating a society free of 
oppression (Anyon, 1997; Appadurai, 1990; Apple, 1995; Bowles & Gintis, 
1976; Callinicos, 1995; Collins, 2009; Fraser, 1989; Freire, 1970; Giroux, 1988; 
Habermas, McLaren, Martin, Farahmandpur, & Jaramillo, 2004; Shor & Freire, 
1997; Spring, 2009). Critical social theory and research rests on the rejection 
of naturalism (that social practices, labels, and programs represent reality), 
rationality (the assumption that truth is a result of science and logic), neutral-
ity (the assumption that truth does not reflect any particular interests), and 
individualism. CST’s intellectual heritage draws on philosophy, literature, legal 
scholarship, cultural studies, critical race scholarship, political economy stud-
ies, ethnic studies, and feminist studies, and has been influenced by schools 
such as the Frankfurt School and the British Cultural Studies. 
Each critical tradition locates domination in a slightly different place—
racism, capitalist structures, discourse itself, patriarchy—but they all share a 
common set of principles and assumptions. Critical social theory assumes that 
oppression and liberation are twin pillars of concern that include material, his-
torical, and discursive dimensions and are enacted across time, people, and 
contexts. A key area of struggle for those committed to CST is recognizing the 
seeming invincibility of structural conditions and the inevitability of human 
agency. Indeed, oppression is understood as the obstruction of one’s human 
essence and development. In Marxist-inspired CST, capitalism and neoliberal-
ism alienate people from their creative powers by reducing their labor to wages 
from which an elite class profits. In feminist-inspired CST, patriarchy defines 
gender roles and expectations that limit women’s freedom and creative powers. 
In Critical Race Theory-inspired CST, racism defines the material and social 
positions of people of color, thus limiting the full development of people liv-
ing under racism (Bell, 1992). Also acknowledged, within CST is harm to the 
human spirit, not only for those who are oppressed but for the oppressor as 
well. 
Inherent in CST’s stance toward knowledge construction is the assump-
tion that theory and practice are dependent on each other. Reflecting on our 
practice helps us to generate new ways of thinking (to theorize) and, in turn, 
our theory, put into practice, is part of our search for the transformed condi-
tions of existence. At the heart of critical social theory is a commitment to work 
with heart, head, and hands. The work in our heads consists of wrestling with 
the contradictions that are inevitably a part of our daily existence; considering 
problems with an open sociological mind; and dreaming of alternative realities. 
Being open to the realities of injustice with our heart is also an important part 


Critical Approaches to Discourse Analysis  5
of critical social theory. Ideology works most effectively through the strong-
hold of emotions—through anger, fear, sorrow, joy, and love. The work on 
the ground—with our hands—consists of engagement with social struggles, 
recognizing the historical and contemporary nature of contexts, conditions, 
and struggles. 
Engaging in critique and building alternative realities are both central to 
CST. A shared assumption among allied traditions in CST is that confront-
ing inequality means coming to terms with the social arrangements that create 
social disparities and understanding their root sources. The project of critique 
(through our theory, practice, and reflection) provides us with a framework 
or a set of tools which help us penetrate to the core of domination, whether 
it is based in racism, classism, sexism, heterosexism or neocolonialism. This 
includes a language of critique—puncturing “regimes of truth,” noticing and 
naming structures, conditions, and manifestations of domination (however 
small or large). It is important to note that while critique is an important part 
of the “critical project” it is not the end goal. The end goal is to hope, to dream, 
and to create alternative realities that are based in equity, love, peace, and soli-
darity. Thus, a critical project is necessarily based in what Giroux (1983) calls 
the language of hope or Leonardo (2004) calls the “language of transcendence” 
(p. 11). This is the generative side of the critical project. Rather than only resist-
ing, critiquing, and reacting to domination, those inspired by critical social 
theory, seek, in addition, to design and forge alternative ways of representing, 
being, and interacting in the world with the goal of creating a society free of 
oppression and domination. 
Considering Discourse in Critical Discourse Analysis 
People seek to make meaning with every aspect of who they are and what they 
are doing: how they use their bodies; integrate objects, artifacts, and technol-
ogy; use gestures, time, and space; adjust their tone of voice when they speak; 
choose the words they use; and interact in particular ways with others. Thus, 
meanings are made through representational systems—language being just one 
of the sign systems people use to create meanings. Meanings are always embed-
ded within social, historical, political, and ideological contexts. And, meanings 
are motivated. When people call on representational systems—images, ges-
tures, or words—they intend to accomplish something—build relationships, 
knowledge, identities, and worldviews. Some meanings and sign systems (writ-
ten language over oral language in Western societies, for instance) are privi-
leged over other sign systems, and thus the ways in which meanings get chained 
together have consequences for privilege, status, the distribution of resources, 
and solidarity. 
From a linguistic point of view, systemic functional linguistics (Halliday 
& Hasan, 1976; Halliday, 1978) is the representational system—the theory 
of language—that is perhaps the most embedded in critical discourse stud-
ies (although it should be noted that Hallidayian linguistics has had a much 


6  Rebecca Rogers
broader impact in Europe and Australia than in North America). Systemic 
functional linguistics as a theory of language is oriented toward choice and 
privileges meaning makers (language users) as agents making decisions about 
the social functions of their language use. This social semiotic theory operates 
on the understanding that meanings are always being invented (versus being 
inherited); people are actively creating meanings and have choices among rep-
resentational systems from which to make meanings. How do these representa-
tions work? Discourses both construct and represent the social world and thus 
can be referred to as constitutive, dialectical, and dialogic. Discourse is never 
just an artifact but a set of consumptive, productive, distributive, and repro-
ductive processes that exist in relation to the social world. 
Located between the linguistic and the social, discourse has been assigned 
many meanings. Discourses are social practices, processes, and products. Dis-
courses are both the object of study and the theoretical device used for meaning 
making. Given the broadness in parameters of what constitutes discourse, one 
can see many different definitions of discourse—from language use, to state-
ments that assign meanings to an institution, to social identities, relationships, 
practices, and categories. At the most concrete level, Stubbs (1983) defined 
discourse as “language above the sentence or above the clause” (p. 1). Brown 
and Yule (1983) wrote, “the analysis of discourse is necessarily the analysis of 
language in use. As such, it cannot be restricted to the description of linguistic 
forms independent of the purposes or functions that these forms are designed 
to serve in human affairs” (p. 1). To consider the ways in which social gram-
mars and “language bits” (to use Gee’s term) interact and build identities, rela-
tionships, and narratives of the social world, we need an expanded account of 
discourse. 
The approach toward discourse in much of critical discourse studies draws 
from the traditions of critical linguistics, cultural and media studies, neo-Marx-
ist approaches to language, ethnographic approaches to language study, and 
social semiotics. Additionally, Foucault’s conceptualization of discourse as a 
social rather than a linguistic category has had an enormous influence on criti-
cal discourse studies. Consider the understandings of discourse set forth by 
James Gee, Norman Fairclough, and Gunther Kress as representative of three 
traditions in critical discourse studies. 
James Gee (1996) defines discourse in this way: “[a] discourse is an associa-
tion of socially accepted ways of using language, other symbolic expressions 
and artifacts of thinking, feeling, believing, valuing, and acting that can be used 
to identify yourself as a member of a socially meaningful group” (p. 144). Con-
tinuing on, Gee (this volume) writes:
I use the term “Discourse” with a capital “D” (so-called “big ‘D’ Dis-
courses”). I use this term because such groups continue through time—
for the most part, they were here before we arrived on the earth and will 
be here after we leave—and we can see them as communicating (dis-
coursing) with each other through time and history, using us as their 


Critical Approaches to Discourse Analysis  7
temporary mouthpieces. I use the term “discourse,” with a little “d”, to 
mean language in use or stretches of oral or written language in use (“texts”). 
(p. 23, manuscript) 
Undoubtedly, Gee is widely known for this distinction between little “d” and 
“D” discourse; indeed, it was one of the ways through which critical discourse 
analysis gained leverage in educational studies. As the quote suggests, little “d” 
discourse refers to the grammar of what is said or written. “Discourse” with a 
capital D refers to the ways of representing, believing, valuing, and participat-
ing with all of the sign systems that people have at their disposal. This distinc-
tion stresses that the form of language cannot exist independent of the function 
of language and the intention of speakers. Also embedded within this perspec-
tive is that discourses are always historical and intertextual, linked across time, 
place, and speakers. Norman Fairclough (1992), blending Hallidayian linguis-
tics with Marxist-inspired theories of discourse, writes: 
In using the term discourse, I am proposing to regard language use as a 
form of social practice, rather than a purely individual activity or a reflex of 
situational variables. This has various implications. Firstly, it implies that 
discourse is a mode of action, one form in which people may act upon the 
world and especially upon each other, as well as a mode of representation 
. . . Discourse is a practice not just of representing the world, but of signify-
ing the world, constituting and constructing the world in meaning.
Gee and Fairclough both recognize how discourse functions to reproduce soci-
ety (through its social structures, relationships, and value structures) but also 
has a hand in transforming society as people use discourses in creative and 
agentic ways. On this dialectic between individual agency and social structure, 
Fairclough (1992) writes:
It is important that the relationship between discourse and social structure 
should be seen dialectically if we are to avoid the pitfalls of overemphasiz-
ing, on the one hand, the social determination of discourse, and on the 
other hand, the construction of the social in discourse. The former turns 
discourse into a mere reflection of a deeper social reality, the latter idealis-
tically represents discourse as the source of the social. 
It is clear to see how Fairclough’s understanding of the relationship between 
discourse and the social world is cautiously optimistic about the role of indi-
viduals intervening in social, historical, and political discourses. People call 
on the resources they have for making meanings and, in doing so, enter into a 
struggle over representation with political and ideological practices. On this, 
Fairclough (1992) writes, “Discourse as a political practice establishes, sustains 
and changes power relations, and the collective entities between which power 
relations obtain. Discourse as an ideological practice constitutes, naturalizes, 


8  Rebecca Rogers
sustains and changes significations of the world from diverse positions in 
power relations” (p. 67). 
Gunther Kress, from a social semiotic tradition, views meaning making as 
a social process where people use the modes, or resources, at their disposal to 
represent. Language is only one resource or mode for making meaning. Others 
include images, gestures, body language, proxemics, color, movements, space, 
and time. Modes are considered to be the material-semiotic resources that peo-
ple have available for achieving representational work. Texts, both products of 
and part of discourses, are the “result of semiotic work of design, production 
and composition; and as such they can be ‘semiotic entities’; of any kind, result-
ing in ensembles composed of different modes” (p. 207, this volume). Hodge 
and Kress (1988) define discourse as: 
The site where social forms of organization engage with systems of signs in 
the production of texts, thus reproducing or changing the sets of meanings 
and values which make up a culture (p. 6). 
Kress’s work, which had once been part of the “linguistic turn” in the social 
sciences, takes us in yet a different direction, toward the “semiotic” and “mate-
rial,” with semiotics understood as the study of people’s use of sign systems that 
give insight as to how meanings are enabled and also understood. As Kress says 
in his interview, “That which we regard quite easily, and quite confidently as 
language, is actually a collection of different things held together by the socially 
constructed entity called grammar.” And, thus, Kress describes a multimodal 
social semiotic approach as aimed at discovering 
how meanings are embodied and what the difference is between getting 
meanings through the eye as against getting meaning through the ear, or 
getting meaning through the touch of the fingers, or through the taste on 
your tongue and in your mouth, or through smelling in your nose. All of 
these are, for me, equally important routes to meaning. (Interview) 
Kress’s challenge to discourse analysts is to move beyond language as the pre-
ferred mode of meaning making. Touch, smell, gaze, taste are different modali-
ties or routes to meaning making. Perhaps the greatest departure from what 
has been outlined thus far in terms of theories of discourses is Kress’s focus on 
the emergent, creative and agentic uses of modes to create meanings. His focus 
is on the sign-maker, rather than the sign. With that said, it is important to 
attend to the constraints that people face as they call on and fashion discourses. 
Indeed, we might think of all meaning making as a struggle over systems of 
representation. Why are some signs used and not others? Who has the power to 
represent certain meanings? Further, what has been implied but not yet stated 
directly in this discussion is that while discourses are semiotically constituted, 
they cannot be reduced to semiotics. That is, there is a material dimension to 
discourses. 


Critical Approaches to Discourse Analysis  9
Looking across the various articulations of discourse within a critical 
approach to discourse studies, the many points of cross-pollination are most 
likely clear—at the level of both social theory and language. I should note that 
James Gee, Norman Fairclough, and Gunther Kress were part of the New Lon-
don Group that convened in New London, New Hampshire, in 1994. Part of 
the objective of this meeting was to work out a shared vision and associated 
language for use across critical discourse traditions. What resulted was general 
agreement around the concept of design as a way of describing grammar as a 
social entity—something that people actively design for achieving social func-
tions (New London Group, 1996). 
And, of course, dilemmas and weak spots in theories of discourse exist. Here, 
I address one of these areas—the continued privileging of monocultural epis-
temologies—with the hope that it might provide scholars with directions for 
future work. Critical discourse analysis in educational research has been con-
ducted across the globe, drawing on many different theories and models of 
discourse and communication. Despite this diversity, discourse analysis, as a 
field, has historically been influenced and developed by theories and methods 
of the North Atlantic (Blommaert, 2005). This has been exacerbated by the 
predominance of English-based journals, research universities and conferences 
that have shaped and continue to shape the field. Because of the influence of 
the North Atlantic epicenter of scholarship in critical discourse studies, theo-
ries of discourse tend to reflect monocultural values and perspectives. There is 
growing discontent with epistemological commitments of critically oriented 
approaches to discourse analysis, a set of theories and methods rooted in West-
ern epistemologies, and its commensurability with understanding multicultural 
discourses (Dissanayake, 2003; Ladson-Billings, 2003; Shi-xu, 2009). This is a 
particular concern for the field of educational scholarship within critical tradi-
tions given the central concerns with issues of access, equity, and diversity. 
There are two areas in which theories of discourse might be re-imagined in 
order to be inclusive of multiethnic perspectives. First, the well-known Western 
logic of thought “I think therefore I am” stands in opposition to the African-
centered concept of “I am because we are” (Ladson-Billings, 2003). The indi-
vidual-centered concept of “I think therefore I am” is rooted in Western 
epistemologies focused on individualism, the primacy of the speaker’s goals, and 
a separation of mind and body. It has been well documented that Western com-
munication, rooted in Cartesian structures, is constructed around the notion of 
the individual as the final arbiter of meaning. Shi-xu (2008) argues that theo-
retically, critically oriented forms of discourse analysis proceed from a view of 
language that views the individual speaker’s goals and intentions as paramount. 
This view of communication stands in opposition to Eastern theories of com-
munication (Feng, 2009; Shi-xu, 2009; Shunqing, 2008), where the intention is 
to be oriented toward the listener, the intersubjective nature of the exchange, 
and the focus on the collective, with the individual as part of the group. 
The second area that might be taken into consideration in relation to 
multicultural discourse is that of text, contexts, and social practices. This 


10  Rebecca Rogers
is an area that has received much attention in the field of discourse studies 
(Blommaert, 2001; van Dijk, 2008). The problem of context is that it already 
exists and, at the same time, is being (re)constructed through chains of com-
municative events. Therefore, the question is: Where does context reside? In 
the head? Somewhere “out there”? And what does this mean for the discourse 
analyst? van Dijk (2008) has argued that context is always a cultural model 
(reference). Others believe that context includes historical, political, cultural, 
and economic frames as well as the theoretical knowledge an analyst brings to 
the text (Caldas-Couldhardt & Couldhardt, 1995). Still others believe the con-
cept of context creates a false hierarchy between texts and contexts and wonder 
whether we should talk about social events and social actors rather than texts 
and contexts (Fairclough, 2003; van Leeuwen, 2008). Bolivar (in press) argues 
for a change in focus from texts in context to people in events, the latter of 
which positions people acting together to produce texts for particular reasons. 
This, she argues, draws researchers’ attention to how and why texts are pro-
duced and the new meanings created. These are important issues to consider in 
moving toward a multiethnic theory of discourse. 
Considering Analysis in Critical Discourse Analysis 
There are as many different approaches to analyses within critical discourse 
analysis as there are theories and problems to be studied (e.g. Titscher, Meyer, 
Wodak, & Vetter, 2000; van Dijk, 2001). What is important is that analyses 
are connected to a theory of the social world and a theory of language that is 
coherent. Beyond that, procedures and methods vary. In general, the view of 
methods of analysis is that one finds a research topic, applies a set of theoretical 
frames (or allows the frames to emerge from the data) to that research topic, 
and then selects appropriate methods, depending on the questions being asked 
and theories being used. Some analysts draw on extensive fieldwork; others col-
lect large corpuses of texts from archives, websites or news sources. There are 
more and less textually oriented approaches to discourse analysis. Some meth-
ods are less linguistically focused and more focused on the context in which 
the discourse arises. Some foreground micro-level issues, others the impact of 
global issues on local discourses. Other methods are interested in the historical 
emergence and evolution of a concept or narrative. 
Three of the most influential traditions of critical approaches to discourse 
analysis in educational research are those of James Gee (1986; 1991; 1996; 2004), 
Norman Fairclough (1989; 1992; 1995; 2003), and Gunther Kress (1979; 1993; 
1996; 2001; 2003; 2009). As will be clear across the sections and the chapters in 
this book, there is a great deal of synergy across these approaches. We cannot 
and should not assign each scholar to one approach to critical discourse analysis 
because each scholar has developed and drawn on different theories and meth-
ods over time—many of which overlap. I would also note that it is not desirable 
to associate one person with one set of analytic tools as if this were “Gee’s meth-
ods” or “Fairclough’s methods” or “Kress’s methods” for conducting discourse 


Critical Approaches to Discourse Analysis  11
analysis. These researchers would all embrace the concept of methodological 
hybridity; they freely admit that their methods are drawn from a wide range of 
scholarship, and that they adopt and adapt analytic methods according to the 
needs of a particular inquiry. Still, it may be useful to consider the traditions 
that each scholar draws on and has been influenced by, and the set of analytic 
approaches that tend to get associated with their work.
James Gee’s Approach to Discourse Analysis 
James Gee’s approach to discourse analysis draws on three traditions: Ameri-
can anthropological linguistics and narratives (Gumperz, 1982; Hymes, 1974; 
Labov & Waletzky, 1967; Scollon & Scollon, 1981); social discourse theories 
(Foucault, 1972, 1977; Latour, 1987); and cognitive psychology (Holland & 
Quinn, 1987; Lakoff & Johnson, 1980; Strauss & Quinn, 1997). Trained as 
a theoretical linguist who worked on syntactic theory and the philosophy of 
language, he was heavily influenced by Chomskian linguistics. As a result of 
various professional commitments, his scholarship moved into literary stylis-
tics, Hallidayian grammar, and neo-Marxist theory, all of which influenced his 
developing approach to the social and cultural study of language. In the 1990s 
he was part of founding the New Literacy Studies, a movement that situated 
literacy practices in social and cultural contexts, rather than in cognitive con-
texts alone. Here, his influence was bringing theories of situated cognition and 
learning into the scholarship in New Literacy Studies. Over time, his work has 
included narrative research (1985, 1991, 1999), analysis of situated cognition 
(1992), social linguistics (1996), and discourse analysis (1999/2005) of video 
games and learning (2003). 
Starting from his often cited distinction “d”iscourse and “D”iscourse, Gee’s 
more recent work (2011) have brought together his theory of language with 
theoretical devices for inquiry. Situated meanings, social languages, figured 
worlds, and Discourses may be thought of as “tools of inquiry.” These are the 
social and cultural frameworks for understanding how people use language 
to accomplish social goals. “Situated meanings” evokes Bakhtin’s notion of 
genres and dialogues (1981, 1986) and refers to the historical, intertextual and 
social trappings of sign systems. “Social languages” refers to grammar and the 
function of language as a social practice. That is, grammar is not something 
that people inherit, but something they design to create certain identities and 
relationships. “Figured worlds” refers to the narratives and images different 
social and cultural groups of people use to make sense of the world. “Discourse 
models” are the storylines, narratives, and explanatory frameworks that circu-
late in a society. 
Gee reminds us that anytime we are communicating, we are building social 
relationships, identities, and figured worlds. The question for the discourse 
analyst is: What sign systems are being used to accomplish these social goals? 
The “seven building tasks,” the second part of his framework, are the kinds of 
things that are being built or designed as people make and interpret meanings. 


12  Rebecca Rogers
The “seven building tasks” include seven entry points that aid the analyst in 
constructing meaning from a network of discourse patterns. The tasks include 
significance, activities, identities, relationships, politics, connections, sign sys-
tems, and knowledge. Each dimension has a set of associated questions that aids 
the analyst. For example, within “sign systems,” Gee asks the question, “What 
sign systems are relevant (and irrelevant) in the situation?” In “significance,” 
Gee poses the question, “What are the situated meanings of some of the words 
and phrases that seem important in the situation?” All the while, Gee’s approach 
to discourse analysis asks the analyst to attend to learning—how meanings are 
built and transformed over time. 
Norman Fairclough’s Approach to Discourse Analysis 
Norman Fairclough’s approach has drawn from Marxist-inspired linguistics 
(Bahktin, 1981, 1986; Pecheux, 1975), sociolinguistics (Labov, 1972), ethnog-
raphy of communication (Sinclair & Coulthard, 1975), systemic functional 
linguistics (Halliday, 1978), critical linguistics (Fowler, et al., 1979; Kress & 
Hodge, 1979), and social theories of discourse (Foucault, 1972). Fairclough 
has consistently worked on the question of mediation between the textual and 
social world. That is, how does one move between the textual and the social? 
One of his first significant papers, published in 1985 in the Journal of Pragmatics, 
focused on critically descriptive approaches to discourse analysis (Fairclough, 
1985). His book Language and Power (1989) developed a theoretical approach 
to language and power across a range of sources and disciplines. Over time, 
his work has become more intentionally focused on questions of social change 
such as “globalization,” “neoliberalism,” “new capitalism,” and the “knowl-
edge economy.” This concern with social transformation is reflected first in his 
book Discourse and Social Change (1992), and then a concern with transforma-
tion and transition in his more recent scholarship, Language and Globalization 
(2006) and Discourse and Contemporary Social Change (2007). 
The key concepts—and associated analytic tools—that he has consistently 
used as leverage to study social change have been orders of discourse, interdiscur-
sivity, and dialectics. His 2000 book Analyzing Discourse focuses on an analysis 
of social problems through textual analysis that draws on systemic functional 
linguistics. In this project, Fairclough explores the kinds of semiotic resources 
people draw on as they design and interpret social practices through ways of 
interacting (genres), ways of representing (discourse), and ways of being (style). 
Put briefly, ways of interacting (genre) refers to the kinds of texts that people 
design and call on (e.g. traditional I-R-E patterns of classroom discourse or 
historical fiction). Ways of representing (discourse) refers to the clusters of 
meanings that give rise to macro-narratives or cultural models. Ways of being 
refers to the kinds of identity work that people enact as they are using lan-
guage. This heuristic—or order of discourse—provides a means for under-
standing the relationships between the textual and the social. A key element of 
Fairclough’s framework is the interdiscursive relationship between and within 


Critical Approaches to Discourse Analysis  13
domains—that is, between and among genres, discourses and styles, and the 
social world. The analyst attempts to describe, interpret, and explain the rela-
tionships between texts and social practices at local, national, macro-regional, 
and global scales (Fairclough, 2005; Fairclough & Wodak, 2008). This recursive 
movement between linguistic and social analysis, a key feature of Fairclough’s 
approach, is what makes CDA a dialectical approach. 
Gunther Kress’s Approach to Discourse Analysis 
Gunther Kress is one of the people credited with developing the branch of schol-
arship referred to as critical linguistics. He, alongside Roger Fowler (a structural 
linguist), Robert Hodge (a literary scholar), and Tony Trew (a political philoso-
pher), developed an approach for making sense of the social meanings of texts 
through a methodology strongly influenced by systemic functional linguistics. 
This group was inspired by Marxist philosophies that attempted to understand 
the relationships between material relations represented in the socioeconomic 
base and superstructures such as literature, law, religion, politics, and educa-
tion as mediated through ideology (interview). Their articulation of how lan-
guage itself mediated the relationship between the base and superstructure is 
represented in their book Language as Ideology (1979), and in an earlier paper 
called Models and Processes (Kress & Hodge, 1979). This work was concerned 
with how power gets realized in linguistic forms. 
Although Kress’s training (early 1960s) was first in English literature, he 
became dissatisfied with what he saw as an a-theoretical approach to English lit-
erary criticism (interview). He moved on to incorporate Chomskian linguistics 
into his work with the idea that a close analysis of syntactic structures could aid 
his understanding of how literature worked. Eventually, though, he grew rest-
less with the separation of linguistic form (structure) and function (meaning) 
in studies of transformational grammar. He then studied with Michael Hal-
liday, whose approach to language centered on the connection between form 
(structure) and function (social practices), and viewed a speaker as a socially 
located individual who uses semiotic systems to achieve particular functions or 
goals. This orientation toward speakers as social and motivated beings, embed-
ded in contexts and making choices, appealed to Kress. Kress brought this Hal-
lidayian schema into the world of critical linguistics through a book that was a 
collection of Halliday’s papers, called System and Function in Language (1976). 
Kress’s academic appointments in cultural and media studies influenced his 
idea that ideology could be found in many forms of representation, not just 
language. He reports writing in the preface to Learning to Write (1982): “I’m 
really sad that I can’t say anything about the images which accompanies the 
early writings of children” (interview). He became interested in developing a 
theory of motivated signs that rests on the agentive action of sign makers. Thus, 
the challenge was to show how images are ideologically constructed (Kress & 
van Leeuwen, 2001; 2006), how subjectivities are constituted, and through what 
modes (Kress, 2009). 


14  Rebecca Rogers
A social semiotic approach is concerned with how meanings are made—in 
both the outward representation of signs and also the inner interpretation of 
signs. The analytic procedures for understanding and representing learning—
which is always multimodal—are arguably less developed than those for inter-
preting and representing language. Upon looking at a social practice—say, a 
math lesson—the analyst might identify which modes are being used and then 
ask: What are the signs being made through this mode? A key development has 
been the development of a transcription system that does not privilege lan-
guage over other representational systems; or, put another way, a convention 
for representing modally dense meaning making (Norris, 2004). Depending 
on the social practice, this could mean that body kinesthesics or gestures (not 
language) are most salient in meaning making. 
Rather than a focus on critique, as is the case with other forms of critical 
approach to discourse analysis, a social semiotic approach is concerned with 
the concept of design; that is, how meanings get designed and re-designed as 
people interact with representational systems in different times and places. And 
this means, in Kress’s words, that “the notion of design implies for me intensi-
fying awareness of what the resources are and what the potentials are and how 
they might be used and what the conditions of constraint are and how these 
conditions might be overcome” (interview). 
The difference between design and critique has become a subject of explo-
ration by scholars in critical discourse studies and can be read in the papers 
set forth calling for a focus on the relationship between educational practices 
and productive uses of power (Janks, 2005; Luke, 2004; Martin, 2004; Scol-
lon & Scollon, 2004). Allan Luke (2004) points out the potential for what he 
calls “reconstructive” versions of discourse analysis that focus on how libera-
tion, solidarity, and community are (and might be) constructed. Martin (2004) 
refers to this approach as “positive discourse analysis,” which can provide a 
complementary focus on “how people make room for themselves in the world 
in ways that redistribute power” (p. 183). 
The frameworks set forth by James Gee, Norman Fairclough, and Gunther 
Kress offer bountiful resources for the discourse analyst. Each set of frameworks 
suggests a more or less stable set of methodological elements that tend to get 
associated with the approach. The caveat is that depending on one’s research 
problem and theories, there may be methodological constraints that require the 
analyst to draw on other procedures. Each of these approaches provides a set of 
tools and resources for understanding social events and practices that are taken 
up depending on the question. Our work is to apply these tools—and design 
new ones—in a context that is meaningful for our own work.
A Note to the Reader 
Scholarship in critical discourse analysis holds the potential to intervene in 
educational debates by unraveling powerful discourses of education and in edu-
cation. Through critique and design we can provide insight into what learning 


Critical Approaches to Discourse Analysis  15
and transformation look, sound, and feel like over time and across educa-
tional contexts. Our work can help people look differently at routine problems 
and practices. As practitioners of CDA, it is also important to offer students 
of education theory, practice, and research an invitation to critically examine 
discourse practices in ways that are engaging and enticing. This is part of the 
intention of the revised edition of this book. 
The book is divided into three sections that represent the traditions most 
commonly associated with critical discourse analysis in educational research. 
With the growth of scholarship in this area, these approaches provide some 
contour to the landscape of critical discourse analysis. They provide conceptual 
and methodological markers, especially for people new to critical approaches 
to discourse analysis. However, given the spreading and increasingly fruitful 
practice of CDA across disciplinary fields, across kinds of data, and across geo-
graphic regions, it is more common to see hybrids and composites of criti-
cal discourse analysis rather than studies that focus on one approach. It bears 
repeating that the structure of this book is meant as a guide to working between 
and among approaches. As we see in this collection, studies in the section that 
exemplify Gee’s approach, for example, draw on theoretical and methodologi-
cal tools from Fairclough or Kress and so on.
As you read across the sections and chapters in the book, I would ask that you 
consider some of the themes that have been brought out in this introduction: 
• 
How do the authors engage with texts, contexts and practices? 
• 
What kinds of multicultural theories of discourse can you locate? 
• 
How do the researchers position themselves vis-à-vis the subject of inquiry 
and the object of analysis? 
• 
In what ways does each of the authors attend to multimodality? 
• 
How do the authors engage with the terminology around critical approaches 
to discourse analysis (cda/CDA)? 
• 
What points of intersections and tensions do you see across the approaches 
to critical discourse analysis? 
• 
What insights does the research offer for understanding learning? 
I conclude this introduction by saying that critical analysis of discourse is an 
analysis not only of what is said, but of what is left out; not only what is present 
in the text, but what is absent. I would ask readers of this book to read the book 
in the same critical spirit. 
References
Appadurai, A. (1990). Disjuncture and difference in the global cultural economy. In 
M. Featherstone (Ed.), Global culture: Nationalism, globalization, and modernity 
(pp. 295–310). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Anyon, J. (1997). Ghetto schooling: A political economy of urban educational reform. New 
York: Teachers College Press. 


16  Rebecca Rogers
Apple, M. (1995). Education and power (2nd ed). New York: Routledge. 
Bakhtin, M. (1981). The dialogic imagination. Austin: University of Texas Press. 
Bakhtin, M. (1986). Speech genres and other late essays. Austin: University of Texas 
Press. 
Bell, D. (1992). Faces at the bottom of the well: The permanence of racism. New York: 
Basic Books. 
Blommaert, J. (2001). Context is/as critique. Critique of Anthropology, 21(1), 13–32. 
Blommaert, J. (2005). Discourse. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press. 
Blommaert, J., & Bulcaen, C. (2000). Critical Discourse Analysis. Annual Review of 
Anthropology, 29, 447–466. 
Bloome, D., Power Carter, S., Morton Christian, B., Otto, S., & Shuart-Faris, N. (2005). 
Discourse analysis and the study of classroom language and literacy events: A microeth-
nographic perspective. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates. 
Bolivar, A. (2011, in press). A change in focus: From texts in context to people in events. 
Journal of Multicultural Discourses, 5(3). 
Bowles, S., & Gintis, H. (1976). Schooling in capitalist America. New York: Basic Books. 
Bourdieu, P., & Passeron, J. C. (1977). Reproduction in education, society and culture. 
London: Sage. 
Brown, G., & Yule, G. (1983). Discourse analysis. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University 
Press. 
Bruner, J. (1990). Acts of meaning. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. 
Bruner, J. (1991). The narrative construction of reality. Critical Inquiry, 18, 1–21. 
Burns, L., & Morrell, E. (2005). Why critical discourse analysis in literacy research. In 
54th Yearbook of the National Reading Conference, 132–143. Oak Creek, WI: National 
Reading Conference, Inc. 
Caldas-Couldhardt, C., & Couldhardt, M. (1995). (Eds.) Texts and practices: Readings in 
critical discourse analysis. New York: Routledge. 
Callinicos, A. (1995). Race and class. London: Bookmark Publications. 
Cazden, C. (1988/2001). Classroom discourse: The language of teaching and learning (2nd 
ed.). Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. 
Collins, J. (1982). Discourse style, classroom interaction and differential treatment. 
Journal of Reading Behavior, 14(4), 429–437. 
Collins, J., & Blot, R. (2003). Literacy and literacies: Texts, power, and identity. Cam-
bridge, UK: Cambridge University Press. 
Collins, J. (2009). Social reproduction in schools and classrooms. Annual Review of 
Anthropology, 38, 33–48. 
Dissanayake, W. (2003). Asian approaches to human communication: Retrospect and 
prospect. Intercultural Communication Studies, XII(4), 17–37. 
DuBois, W. E. B. (1903/1990). The souls of black folks. New York: Vintage Books. 
Fairclough, N. (1985). Creitical and descriptive goals in discourse analysis. Journal of 
Pragmatics, 9(6), 739–763.
Fairclough, N. (1989). Language and power. London: Longman. 
Fairclough, N. (1992). Discourse and social change. Cambridge, UK: Polity Press. 
Fairclough, N. (1995). Critical discourse analysis: The critical study of language. London: 
Addison Wesley Publishing Company. 
Fairclough, N., & Wodak, R. (1997). Critical discourse analysis. In T. van Dijk (Ed.), 
Discourse as social interaction (pp. 258–284). London: Sage. 
Fairclough, N. (2003). Analyzing discourse: Textual analysis for social research. New York: 
Routledge. 


Critical Approaches to Discourse Analysis  17
Fairclough, N. (2005). Critical discourse analysis in trans-disciplinary research on social 
change: transition, re-scaling, poverty and social inclusion. Lodz Papers in Pragmatics, 
1, 37–58.
Fairclough, N., & Wodak, R. (2008). The Bologna process and the knowledge-based 
economy: A critical discourse analysis approach. In B. Jesson, N. Fairclough, & R. 
Wodak (Eds.), Education and the knowledge-based economy in Europe (pp. 109–125). 
Rotterdam, Netherlands: Sense Publishers. 
Feng, H. (2009). Different languages, different cultures, different language ideologies, 
different linguistic models. Journal of Multicultural Discourses, 4(2), 151–164.
Florio-Ruane, S. (1987). Sociolinguistics for educational researchers. American Educa-
tional Research Journal, 24(2), 185–197. 
Foucault, M. (1972). The archeology of knowledge and the discourse on language. New 
York: Pantheon Books. Originally published as L’Archeologie du Savoir (Paris: Edi-
tions Gallimard, 1969).
Foucault, M. (1977). Discipline and punish: The birth of the prison. New York: Pantheon. 
Fowler, R., Hodge, R., Kress, G., & Trew, T. (1979). Language and control. London: 
Routledge & Kegan Paul. 
Fraser, N. (1989). Unruly practice: Power, discourse and gender in contemporary social 
theory. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press. 
Freire, P. (1970). Pedagogy of the oppressed. New York: Herder and Herder. 
Gee, J. P. (1986). Units in the production of narrative discourse. Discourse Processes, 9, 
391–422. 
Gee, J. P. (1991). A linguistic approach to narrative. Journal of Narrative and Life History, 
1(1), 15–39. 
Gee, J. P. (1996). Social linguistics and literacies: Ideology in discourses (2nd ed.). London: 
Taylor & Francis. 
Gee, J. P. (2004). Situated language and learning: A critique of traditional schooling. Lon-
don: Routledge. 
Gee, J. (2011). How to do discourse analysis: A tool kit. New York: Routledge.
Giroux, H. A. (1983). Theory and resistance: A pedagogy for the opposition. Westport, CT: 
Bergin & Garvey. 
Giroux, H. A. (1988). Schooling and the struggle for public life: Critical pedagogy in the 
modern age. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.
Gumperz, J. (1982). Discourse strategies. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press. 
Gumperz, J., & Hymes, D. (Eds.). (1964). The ethnography of communication. Ameri-
can Anthopologist, 66(6), 1–34.
Gutiérrez, K. (2008). Developing sociocritical literacy in the Third Space. Reading 
Research Quarterly, 43(2), 148–164. 
Halliday, M. A. K. (1978). Language as social semiotic: The social interpretation of 
language and meaning. Baltimore: University Park Press. 
Halliday, M. A. K., & Hasan, R. (1996). Cohesion in English. London: Longman.
Heath, S. B. (1983). Ways with words: Language, life and work in communities and 
classrooms. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press. 
Hodge, R. & G. Kress. (1988). Social semiotics. Cambridge, UK: Polity. 
Holland, D., & Quinn, N. (eds.) (1987). Cultural models in language and thought. Cam-
bridge, UK: Cambridge University Press. 
Hymes, D. (1964). Language in culture and society. New York: Harper & Rowe. 
Hymes, D. (1974). Foundations of sociolinguistics. Philadelphia: University of Pennsyl-
vania Press. 


18  Rebecca Rogers
Hymes, D. (1996). Ethnography, linguistics, narrative inequality: Toward an understand-
ing of voice. New York: Taylor & Francis. 
Janks, H. (2005) Deconstruction and reconstruction: diversity as a productive resource. 
Discourse, 26(1), 31–44. 
Kress, G. (1976). Halliday: System and function in language. London: Oxford University 
Press. 
Kress, G. (1993). Learning to write. London: Routledge.
Kress, G. (2009). Multimodality: A social semiotic approach to contemporary communica-
tion. London: Taylor & Francis. 
Kress, G. (2003). Literacy in the new media age. New York: Routledge.
Kress, G., & Hodge, R. (1979). Language as ideology. London: Routledge & Kegan Paul.
Kress, G., & van Leeuwen, T. (2001). Multimodal discourse: The modes and media of 
contemporary communication. New York: Oxford University Press. 
Kress, G., & van Leeuwen, T. (2006). Reading images. The grammar of visual design. New 
York: Routledge. 
Kristeva, J. (1980). Desire in language: A Semiotic approach to literature and art. New 
York: Columbia University Press.
Labov, W. (1972). Sociolinguistic patterns. Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania 
Press. 
Labov, W., & Waletzky, J. (1967). Narrative analysis: Oral versions of person experi-
ences. In J. Helm (Ed.), Essays on the verbal and visual arts: Proceedings of the 1966 
Annual Spring Meeting of the American Ethnological Society. Seattle: University of 
Washington Press, 12–44. 
Ladson-Billings, G. (2003). Racialized discourses and ethnic epistemologies. In N. K. 
Denzin & Y. S. Lincoln (Eds.), The landscape of qualitative research: Theories and issues 
(pp. 398–432). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications.
Lakoff, G., & Johnson, M. (1980). Metaphors we live by. Chicago: University of Chicago 
Press. 
Latour, B. (1987). Science in action. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. 
Lemke, J. L. (2002). Travels in hypermodality. Visual Communication 1(3), 299–325. 
Leonardo, Z. (2004). Critical social theory and transformative knowledge: The func-
tions of criticism in quality education. Educational Researcher, 33(6), 11–18. 
Lewis, C., Enciso, P., & Moje, E. (Eds.). (2007). Identity, agency, and power: Reframing 
sociocultural research on literacy. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Luke, A. (1995/1996). Text and discourse in education: An introduction to critical dis-
course analysis. Review of Research in Education, 21, 3–48.
Luke, A. (2004). Notes on the future of critical discourse studies. Critical Discourse Stud-
ies, 1(1). 
Martin, J. (2004). Positive discourse analysis: Solidarity and change. Revista Canaria de 
Estudios Ingleses, 49, 179–200.
McLaren, P., Martin, G., Farahmandpur, R., & Jaramillo, N. (2004). Teaching in and 
against the Empire: Critical pedagogy as revolutionary praxis. Teacher Education 
Quarterly, 13(1), 131–153.
Michaels, S. (1983). “Sharing time”: Children’s narrative styles and differential access to 
literacy. Language in Society, 10, 423–443. 
New London Group, (1996). A pedagogy of multiliteracies: Designing social futures. 
Harvard Educational Review, 66(1), 60–92. 
Norris, S. (2004). Analyzing multimodal interaction: A methodological framework. New 
York: Routledge. 


Critical Approaches to Discourse Analysis  19
Oakes, J. (1986/2005). Keeping track: How schools structure inequality (2nd ed.). New 
Haven: Yale University Press. 
Ochs, E., & Capps, L. (1996). Narrating the self. Annual Review of Anthropology, 25, 
19–43. 
Pecheux, M. (1975). Language, semantics and ideology. New York: St. Martin’s Press. 
Rex, L., Bunn, M., Davila, B., Dickinson, H., Carpenter-Ford, A., Gerben, C., McBee-
Orzulak, M., & Thompson, H. (2010). A review of discourse analysis in literacy 
research: Equitable access. Reading Research Quarterly, 45(1), 94–115. 
Rogers, R., Berkes, E., Mosley, M., Hui, D., O-Garro, G. (2005). A critical review of 
Critical Discourse Analysis. Review of Research in Education, 75(3), 365–416. 
Said, E. W. (1979). Orientalism. New York: Vintage Books.
Scollon, R., & Scollon, S. (1981). Narrative, literacy and face in interethnic communica-
tion. Norwood, NJ: Ablex.
Scollon, R., & Wong Scollon, S. (2004). Nexus analysis: discourse and the emerging Inter-
net. New York: Routledge. 
Scribner, S., & Cole, M. (1981). The Psychology of Literacy. Cambridge, MA: Harvard 
University Press. 
Shi-xu. (2009). Reconstructing Eastern paradigms of discourse studies. Journal of Mul-
ticultural Discourses, 4(1), 29–48.
Shor, I., & Freire, P. (1997). When students have power: Negotiating authority in critical 
pedagogy. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. 
Shuman, A. (1986). Storytelling rights: The use of oral and written texts by urban adoles-
cents. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press. 
Shunqing, C. (2008). The discourse of Chinese literary theory and the dialogue between 
Western and Chinese literary theories. Journal of Multicultural Discourses, 3(1), 
1–15.
Silverstein, M., & Urban, G. (Eds.). (1996). Natural histories of discourse. Chicago: 
University of Chicago Press. 
Sinclair, J. and Coulthard, M. (1975). Towards an analysis of discourse. Oxford: Oxford 
University Press.
Spender, D. (1980). Man made language. New York: Routledge & Kegan
Spring, J. (2009). Deculturalization and the struggle for equality: A brief history of the edu-
cation of dominated cultures in the United States. New York: McGraw-Hill. 
Strauss, C., & Quinn, N. (1997). A cognitive theory of cultural meanings. Cambridge, UK: 
Cambridge University Press. 
Stubbs, M. (1983). Discourse analysis: The sociolinguistic analysis of natural language. 
Oxford: Basil Blackwell. 
Titscher, S., Meyer, M., Wodak, R., & Vetter, E. (2000). Methods of text and discourse 
analysis. London: Sage Press.
van Dijk, T. (1993). Principles of critical discourse analysis. Discourse & Society, 4(2), 
249–283. 
van Dijk, T. (2001). Critical Discourse Analysis. In D. Tannen, D. Schiffrin, & H. Hamil-
ton (Eds.), Handbook of Discourse Analysis (pp. 352–371). Oxford: Blackwell. 
van Dijk, T. (2008). Discourse in context: A sociocognitive approach. Cambridge, UK: 
Cambridge University Press. 
van Leeuwen, T. (2008). Discourse and practice: New tools for critical discourse analysis. 
New York: Oxford University Press. 
van Leeuwen, T., & Wodak, R. (1999). Legitimizing immigration control: A discourse-
historical analysis. Discourse Studies, 1(1), 83–118. 


20  Rebecca Rogers
Voloshinov, V. (1973). Marxism and the philosophy of language. Cambridge, MA: Har-
vard University Press. 
Wittgenstein, L. (1953). Philosophical investigations (G. E. M. Anscombe, Trans.). New 
York: Macmillan. 
Wodak, R. (2001). The discourse-historical approach. In R. Wodak & M. Meyers (Eds.), 
Methods of critical discourse analysis (pp. 63–95). London: Sage. 
Wodak, R. (2005). Understanding and explaining social change: “Deja-vu” experiences. 
International Journal of Applied Linguistics, 15(2), 240–243.


Part I 
Discourse Analysis




2 
Discourse Analysis: What 
 
Makes It Critical?
 
James Paul Gee
 
Arizona State University 
Introduction
This paper is about my approach to discourse analysis (Gee, 2005, 2007). It 
is also about the question: What makes discourse analysis “critical discourse 
analysis”? 
At the outset, I want to make a distinction that is important from a linguis-
tic point of view: a distinction between utterance-type meaning and utter-
ance-token meaning (Levinson, 2000). Any word, phrase, or structure has a 
general range of possible meanings, what we might call its meaning range. This 
is its utterance-type meaning. For example, the word “cat” has to do, broadly, 
with the felines, and the (syntactic) structure “subject of a sentence” has to do, 
broadly, with naming a “topic” in the sense of “what is being talked about.” 
However, words and phrases take on much more specific meanings in actual 
contexts of use. These are utterance-token meanings or what I will call “situ-
ated meaning.” Thus, in a situation where we say something like “The world’s 
big cats are all endangered,” “cat” means things like lions and tigers; in a situ-
ation where we are discussing mythology and say something like “The cat was 
a sacred symbol to the ancient Egyptians,” “cat” means real and pictured cats 
as symbols; and in a situation where we are discussing breakable decorative 
objects on our mantel and say something like “The cat broke,” “cat” means a 
statue of cat. 
Subjects of sentences are always “topic-like” (this is their utterance-type 
meaning); in different situations of use, subjects take on a range of more 
specific meanings. In a debate, if I say “The constitution only protects the 
rich,” the subject of the sentence (“the constitution”) is an entity about 
which a claim is being made; if a friend of yours has just arrived and I usher 
her in saying “Mary’s here,” the subject of the sentence (“Mary”) is a center 
of interest or attention; and in a situation where I am commiserating with a 
friend and say something like “You really got cheated by that guy,” the sub-
ject of the sentence (“you”) is a center of empathy (signaled also by the fact 
that the normal subject of the active version of the sentence—“That guy really 
cheated you”—has been “demoted” from subject position through use of the 
“get-passive”).


24  James Paul Gee
The Utterance-Type Meaning Task
Discourse analysis of any type, whether critical or not, can undertake one or 
both of two tasks, one related to utterance-type (general) meaning and one 
related to situated meaning. One task, then, is what we can call the utter-
ance-type meaning task. This task involves the study of correlations between 
form and function in language at the level of utterance-type meanings (gen-
eral meanings). “Form” here means things like morphemes, words, phrases, or 
other syntactic structures (e.g., the subject position of a sentence). “Function” 
means meaning or the communicative purpose a form carries out.
The other task is what we can call the utterance-token meaning or situated 
meaning task. This task involves the study of correlations between form and 
function in language at the level of utterance-token meanings. Essentially, this 
task involves discovering the situation-specific or situated meanings of forms 
used in specific contexts of use.
Failing to distinguish between these two tasks can be dangerous, since very 
different issues of validity for discourse analysis come up with each of these 
tasks, as we will see below. Let me start with an example of the utterance-type 
meaning task. Speciﬁ
 c forms in a language are prototypically used as tools to 
carry out certain communicative functions (that is, to express certain mean-
ings). For example, consider the sentence labeled (1) below (adapted from 
Gagnon, 1987, p. 65):
1. Though the Whig and Tory parties were both narrowly conﬁ
 ned to the 
privileged classes, they represented different factions and tendencies.
This sentence is made up of two clauses, an independent (or main) clause 
(“they represented different factions and tendencies”) and a dependent clause 
(“Though the Whig and Tory parties were both narrowly confined to the privi-
leged classes”). These are statements about form. An independent clause has 
as one of its functions (at the utterance-type level) that it expresses an asser-
tion; that is, it expresses a claim that the speaker/writer is making. A depen-
dent clause has as one of its functions that it expresses information that is not 
asserted, but, rather, assumed or taken-for-granted. These are statements 
about function (meaning).
Normally (that is, technically speaking, in the “unmarked” case), in English, 
dependent clauses follow independent clauses. Thus, the sentence (1) above 
might more normally appear as: “The Whig and Tory parties represented dif-
ferent factions, though they were both narrowly confined to the privileged 
classes.” In (1) the dependent clause has been fronted (placed in front of the 
whole sentence). This is a statement about form. Such fronting has as one of its 
functions that the information in the clause is thematized (Halliday, 1994), that 
is, the information is treated as a launching-off point or thematically important 
context from which to consider the claim in the following dependent clause. 
This is a statement about function. 


Discourse Analysis: What Makes It Critical?  25
To sum up, in respect to form-functioning mapping at the utterance-type 
level, we can say that sentence (1) renders its dependent clause (“Though the 
Whig and Tory parties were both narrowly confined to the privileged classes”) a 
taken-for-granted, assumed, unargued for (i.e., unasserted), though important 
(thematized) context from which to consider the main claim in the indepen-
dent clause (“they represented different factions and tendencies”). The depen-
dent clause is, we might say, a concession. Other historians might prefer to 
make this concession the main asserted point and, thus, would use a different 
grammar, perhaps saying something like: “Though they represented different 
factions and tendencies, the Whig and Tory parties were both narrowly con-
fined to the privileged classes.”
At a fundamental level, all types of discourse analysis involve claims (how-
ever tacitly they may be acknowledged) about form-function matching at the 
utterance-type level. This is so because, if one is making claims about a piece 
of language, even at a much more situated and contextualized level (which we 
will see in a moment), but these claims violate what we know about how form 
and function are related to each other in language at the utterance-type level, 
then these claims are quite suspect, unless there is evidence that the speaker or 
writer is trying to violate these sorts of basic grammatical relationships in the 
language (e.g., in poetry).
As I have already said, the meanings with which forms are correlated at the 
utterance-type level are rather general (meanings like “assertion,” “taken-
for-granted information,” “contrast,” etc.). In reality, they represent only the 
meaning potential or meaning range of a form or structure, as we have said. The 
more speciﬁ
 c or situated meanings that a form carries in a given context of use 
must be ﬁ
 gured out by an engagement with our next task, the utterance-token 
or situated meaning task.
The Situated Meaning Task 
A second task that any form of discourse analysis, critical or otherwise, can 
undertake is what I called above the utterance-token or situated meaning 
task. For simplicity’s sake, I will now just call this “the situated meaning task.” 
When we actually utter or write a sentence it has a situated meaning (Gee, 
2004, 2005). Situated meanings arise because particular language forms take on 
speciﬁ
 c or situated meanings in speciﬁ
 c different contexts of use.
Consider the word “coffee” as a very simple example of how situated mean-
ing differs from utterance-type meaning. “Coffee” is an arbitrary form (other 
languages use different sounding words for coffee) that correlates with mean-
ings having to do with the substance coffee (this is its meaning potential). At 
a more speciﬁ
 c level, however, we have to use context to determine what the 
word means in any situated way. In one context, “coffee” may mean a brown 
liquid (“The coffee spilled, go get a mop”); in another one it may mean grains 
of a certain sort (“The coffee spilled, go get a broom”); in another it may mean 
containers (“The coffee spilled, stack it again”); and it can mean other things in 


26  James Paul Gee
other contexts, such as berries of a certain sort, a certain ﬂ
 avor, or a skin color. 
We can even use the word with a novel situated meaning, as in “You give me a 
coffee high” or “Big Coffee is as bad as Big Oil as corporate actors.”
To see a further example of situated meanings at work, consider sentence (1) 
again (“Though the Whig and Tory parties were both narrowly conﬁ
 ned to the 
privileged classes, they represented different factions”). We said above that an 
independent clause represents an assertion (a claim that something is true). But 
this general form-function correlation can mean different speciﬁ
 c things in actual 
contexts of use, and can, indeed, even be mitigated or undercut altogether. 
For example, in one context, say between two like-minded historians, the 
claim that the Whig and Tory parties represented different factions may just be 
taken as a reminder of a “fact” they both agree on. On the other hand, between 
two quite diverse historians, the same claim may be taken as a challenge (despite 
YOUR claim that shared class interests mean no real difference in political par-
ties, the Whig and Tory parties in 17th-century England were really different). 
And, of course, on stage as part of a drama, the claim about the Whig and Tory 
parties is not even a “real” assertion, but a “pretend” one.
Furthermore, the words “privileged,” “contending,” and “factions” will take 
on different speciﬁ
 c meanings in different contexts. For example, in one con-
text, “privileged” might mean “rich,” while in another context it might mean 
“educated” or “cultured” or “politically connected” or “born into a family with 
high status” or some combination of the above or something else altogether.
To analyze Gagnon’s sentence or his whole text, or any part of it, at the level 
of situated meanings—that is, in order to carry out the situated meaning task—
would require a close study of some of the relevant contexts within which that 
text is placed and which it, in turn, helps to create. This might mean inspect-
ing the parts of Gagnon’s text that precede or follow a part of the text we want 
to analyze. It might mean inspecting other texts related to Gagnon’s. It might 
mean studying debates among different types of historians and debates about 
educational standards and policy (since Gagnon’s text was meant to argue for 
a view about what history ought to be taught in schools). It might mean study-
ing these debates historically across time and in terms of the actual situations 
Gagnon and his text were caught up in (e.g., debates about new school history 
standards in Massachusetts, a state where Gagnon once helped write a version 
of the standards). It might mean many other things, as well. Obviously, there is 
no space in a chapter of this scope to develop such an analysis.
The issue of validity for analyses of situated meaning is quite different than 
the issue of validity for analyses of utterance-type meanings. We saw above that 
the issue of validity for analyses of utterance-type meanings basically comes 
down to choosing and defending a particular grammatical theory of how form 
and function relate in language at the level of utterance-type meanings, as well 
as, of course, offering correct grammatical and semantic descriptions of one’s 
data. On the other hand, the issue of validity for analyses of situated meaning 
is much harder. In fact, it involves a very deep problem known as “the frame 
problem” (Gee, 2005).


Discourse Analysis: What Makes It Critical?  27
The Frame Problem
The frame problem is this: Any aspect of context can affect the meaning of 
an (oral or written) utterance. Context, however, is indeﬁ
 nitely large, ranging 
from local matters like the positioning of bodies and eye gaze, through people’s 
beliefs, to historical, institutional, and cultural settings. No matter how much 
of the context we have considered in offering an interpretation of an utterance, 
there is always the possibility of considering other and additional aspects of the 
context, and these new considerations may change how we interpret the utter-
ance. Where do we cut off consideration of context? How can we be sure any 
interpretation is “right,” if considering further aspects of the context might well 
change that interpretation?
Let me give an example of a case where changing how much of the context 
of an utterance we consider changes signiﬁ
 cantly the interpretation we give to 
that utterance. Take a claim like “Many children die in Africa before they are 
ﬁ
 ve years old because they get infectious diseases like malaria.” What is the 
appropriate amount of context within which to assess this claim? We could 
consider just medical facts, a narrow context. And in the context the claim 
seems unexceptional.
But widen the context and consider the wider context described below:
Malaria, an infectious disease, is one of the most severe public health 
problems worldwide. It is a leading cause of death and disease in many 
developing countries, where young children and pregnant women are the 
groups most affected. Worldwide, one death in three is from an infectious 
or communicable disease. However, almost all these deaths occur in the 
non-industrialized world. Health inequality effects not just how people 
live, but often dictates how and at what age they die. [see http://www.cdc.
gov/malaria/impact/index.htm and http://ucatlas.ucsc.edu/cause.php] 
This context would seem to say that so many children in Africa die early not 
because of infectious diseases but because of poverty and economic underde-
velopment. While this widening of the context does not necessarily render the 
claim “Many children die in Africa before they are ﬁ
 ve years old because they 
get infectious diseases like malaria” false, it, at least, suggests that a narrow con-
strual of “because” here (limiting it to physical and medical causes) effaces the 
workings of poverty and economics.
The frame problem is both a problem and a tool. It is a problem because our 
discourse analytic interpretations (just like people’s everyday interpretations 
of language) are always vulnerable to changing as we widen the context within 
which we interpret a piece of language. It is a tool because we can use it—wid-
ening the context—to see what information and values are being left unsaid or 
effaced in a piece of language.
The frame problem, of course, raises problems about validity for discourse 
analysis. We cannot really argue an analysis is valid unless we keep widening the 
context in which we consider a piece of language until the widening appears to 


28  James Paul Gee
make no difference to our interpretation. At that point, we can stop and make 
our claims (open, of course, to later falsiﬁ
 cation as in all empirical inquiry).
Critical Discourse Analysis
Some forms of discourse analysis add a third task to the two (the utterance-
type meaning task and the situated meaning task) discussed so far. They study, 
as well, the ways in which either or both of language-form correlations at the 
utterance-type level (task 1) and situated meanings (task 2) are associated with 
social practices (task 3). While non-critical approaches can and do, indeed, 
study social practices, critical approaches and non-critical ones take a different 
approach to social practices and how to study them. Non-critical approaches 
(e.g., see Pomerantz & Fehr, 1997) tend to treat social practices solely in terms 
of patterns of social interaction (e.g., how people use language to “pull off” a 
job interview). Thus, consider again the sentence from Gagnon we discussed 
above:
1. Though the Whig and Tory parties were both narrowly conﬁ
 ned to the 
privileged classes, they represented different factions and tendencies.
A non-critical form of discourse analysis could well point out the fact that using 
“Though the Whig and Tory parties were both narrowly conﬁ
 ned to the privi-
leged classes” as a dependent (and, thus, assumed and unasserted) clause sets 
up a social relationship with the reader in terms of which the reader should 
accept, as given and assumed, that distinctions of wealth in a society are less 
central to the development of democracy than political differences within elites 
in the society (which the main asserted clause is about). 
Critical approaches, however, go further and treat social practices, not just in 
terms of social relationships, but also in terms of their implications for things 
like status, solidarity, the distribution of social goods, and power (e.g., how lan-
guage in a job interview functions as a gate-keeping device, allowing some sorts 
of people access and denying it to others). In fact, critical discourse analysis 
argues that language-in-use is always part and parcel of, and partially constitu-
tive of, speciﬁ
 c social practices, and that social practices always have implica-
tions for inherently political things like status, solidarity, the distribution of 
social goods, and power.
So the issue becomes this: Is it enough to leave the analysis of the social at 
the level of how talk and texts function in social interactions or do we need to 
go further and consider, as well, how talk and text function politically in social 
interactions? Does the latter task render discourse analysis—and thus, perforce, 
critical discourse analysis—“unscientiﬁ
 c” or “unacademic,” a mere matter of 
“advocacy”?
Consider sentence (1) again. There are historians who think that class con-
ﬂ
 ict—conﬂ
 ict between haves and have nots—drives history. They would say 
that that the fact that the Whig and Tory parties were narrowly conﬁ
 ned to the 


Discourse Analysis: What Makes It Critical?  29
privileged classes is a key fact about the political situation of 17th-century Eng-
land (though Gagnon places it in a subordinate clause). This fact, they will say, 
drove change because it led to the non-elites ﬁ
 ghting for representation. 
What Gagnon has done is put what these historians see as the key point in 
a subordinate clause and treated it as assumed and backgrounded informa-
tion that, while important, does not challenge his main claim that the Whig 
and Tory parties represented different factions (and, thus, for Gagnon were 
in the forefront of the development of democracy in Western society). His 
formulation is a move not only in an academic argument with such histori-
ans but in political debates about what and how history ought to be taught in 
school. 
This is an essential aspect to understanding not just what Gagnon is saying, 
but what he is trying to do. It moves us beyond social interactions between 
writer and reader and to value-laden positions that are “political.” Claims like 
Gagnon’s do not come out of nowhere. They are part of ongoing dialogue or 
debate (as Bakhtin, 1986) and are understood within that dialogue or debate. 
Thus, a full discourse analysis must discuss such matters and must, in that 
sense, be critical. When I discuss the “building tasks” in the next section, I will 
offer yet another, more general, reason why all language use is “political” and, 
thus, why discourse analysis ought to be critical. I will also deﬁ
 ne what I mean 
by “politics” and “political.” 
Building Task
I mentioned in the last section that in sentence (1) Gagnon was not just saying 
something, but doing something: that is, engaging in a debate and making a 
move in that debate, as well as trying to influence how and what history is taught 
in the schools. But language in use always performs actions in the world. 
Some of these actions are verbal actions in the sense that they require lan-
guage to carry them out. This includes actions like promising, asking a ques-
tion, giving an order, or making a request. Some of the actions that we use 
language to carry out are not verbal. They could be done without language, 
though it most cases it is easier to do them with language than without. This 
includes actions like encouraging people, insulting them, manipulating them, 
and making them believe certain things.
The actions we accomplish using language allow us to build (or destroy) 
things in the world, things like state history standards, marriages, or committee 
meetings. We do not usually just engage in a single isolated action and leave it 
at that. Rather, we have plans and goals and engage in series of related actions in 
related contexts over long periods of time. These longer-term chains of action 
are usually done in order to build something in the world (like an institution or 
a marriage) or to sustain it across time. 
We continually and actively build and rebuild our worlds, not just through 
language, but through language used in tandem with actions, interactions, non-
linguistic symbol systems, objects, tools, technologies, and distinctive ways 


30  James Paul Gee
of thinking, valuing, feeling, and believing. Sometimes what we build is quite 
similar to what we have built before (e.g., sustaining a good marriage); some-
times it is not (e.g., starting a new career). 
So language-in-use is a tool, not just for saying and doing things, but also, 
used alongside other non-verbal tools, to build things in the world. Whenever 
we speak or write, we always and simultaneously build one of seven things or 
seven areas of “reality.” We often build more than one of these simultaneously 
through the same words and deeds. Let’s call these seven things the “seven 
building tasks” of language (Gee, 2011). In turn, since we use language to build 
these seven things, a discourse analyst can ask seven different questions about 
any piece of language-in-use. This gives us, in turn, seven tools for discourse 
analysis. Below, I list the seven building tasks.
1. Significance: 
We use language to make things significant in certain ways. As the saying goes, 
we make “mountains out of mole hills.” Things are not trivial or important all 
by themselves. We humans make them trivial or important or something in 
between. Gagnon made “The Whig and Tory parties were narrowly confined 
to the privileged classes” less significant than the supposed fact that “they rep-
resented different factions and tendencies.” Other historians would have made 
the fact that the Whig and Tory parties narrowly represented elites in society 
more significant.
2. Activities (Practices): 
We use language to carry out actions like promising and encouraging and a 
great many others. However, we humans also enact what I will call larger activi-
ties, using the word in a special and restricted way. By an “activity” I mean a 
socially recognized and institutionally or culturally supported endeavor that 
usually involves sequencing or combining actions in certain specified ways. 
Encouraging a student is an action; mentoring the student is an activity. Tell-
ing someone something about linguistics is an action (informing); lecturing on 
linguistics is an activity. Often the term “practice” is used for what I am calling 
an activity.
We use language to get recognized as engaging in a certain sort of activity. A 
graduate student who has lost her advisor after some time in a graduate pro-
gram and asks a professor “Will you be my advisor?” is making a request (an 
action we do with language). But she is also engaged in the activity of seeking 
a new graduate advisor in graduate school. This requires more than just the 
request. There is more that needs to be said and done. For instance, the student 
has to be able to talk about her background in the program, her knowledge 
and skills, and her accomplishments in ways that impress the advisor without 
seeming too arrogant or exaggerated.


Discourse Analysis: What Makes It Critical?  31
3. Identities: 
We use language to get recognized as taking on a certain identity or role: that is, 
to build an identity here and now. For example, I talk and act in one way and 
I am speaking and acting as the chair of the committee; at the next moment 
I speak and talk in a different way and I am speaking and acting as just one 
peer/colleague speaking to another. Even if I have an official appointment 
as chair of the committee, I am not always taken as acting as the chair, even 
during meetings. 
Doctors talk and act to their patients differently when they are being doctors 
and when they are talking as acquaintances or friends, even in their offices. In 
fact, traditional authoritarian doctors and new humanistic doctors talk and act 
to the patients differently, are different types of doctors. Humanistic doctors 
try to talk less technically and more inclusively to their patients. One and the 
same doctor can even switch between the two identities at different points or in 
different activities in his or her treatment of a patient. 
4. Relationships:
We use language to build and sustain relationships of all different kinds. We use 
language to build relationships with other people and with groups and institu-
tions. For example, in a committee meeting, as chair of the committee, if I say 
“Prof. Smith, I’m very sorry to have to move us on to the next agenda item,” 
I am constructing a relatively formal and deferential relationship with Prof. 
Smith. On the other hand, suppose I say, “Ed, it’s time to move on.” Now I 
am constructing a relatively informal and less deferential relationship with the 
same person. Speaking and acting a certain way across time with Prof. Smith or 
Ed will build a certain sort of relationship with him or multiple relationships 
with him for different contexts.
5. Politics (the distribution of social goods): 
I use the term “politics” in a special way. By “politics” I do not mean govern-
ment and political parties. I mean any situation where the distribution of social 
goods is at stake. By “social goods” I mean anything a social group or soci-
ety takes as a good worth having. We use language to build and destroy social 
goods. For example, for most groups, treating people with respect in certain 
circumstances is a social good and treating them with disrespect is not. Speak-
ing and acting respectfully and deferentially in these circumstances is to create 
and distribute a social good.
There are other circumstances where people want to be treated not deferen-
tially, but with solidarity and bonding. Speaking and acting toward someone 
who wants my friendship with solidarity and bonding is in that circumstance 
to create and distribute a social good.
Why do I refer to this as “politics”? Because the distribution of social goods 
and claims about them—goods like a person being taken as acceptable, normal, 


32  James Paul Gee
important, respected, an “insider” or an “outsider,” or as being connected to 
acceptable, normal, or important things (in the right circumstances)—are ulti-
mately what give people power and status in a society (or not).
People obviously disagree about what are social goods in various circum-
stances. They obviously sometimes fight over the distribution of social goods 
and demand their share of them. Let me give an example that shows that how 
we construct our sentences has implications for building or destroying social 
goods. If I say “Microsoft loaded its new operating system with bugs,” I treat 
Microsoft as purposeful and responsible, perhaps even culpable. I am with-
holding a social good from them as an institution, namely respect and a good 
reputation. 
If I say, on the other hand, “Microsoft’s new operating system is loaded with 
bugs,” I treat Microsoft as less purposeful and responsible, less culpable. I am 
still withholding social goods, but not as much as before. 
If I say, “Like any highly innovative piece of new software, Microsoft’s 
new operating system is loaded with bugs,” I have mitigated my withholding 
of social goods further and even offered Microsoft social goods, namely 
treating them as innovative and as not really responsible for the bugs. How I 
phrase the matter has implications for social goods like guilt and blame, legal 
responsibility or lack of it, or Microsoft’s bad or good motives, and Microsoft’s 
reputation.
6. Connections 
Things in the world can be seen as connected and relevant to each other (or 
not) in a great many different ways. For example, people argued over the con-
nection Iraq had to 9/11. That Iraq had no direct connection was eventually 
conceded by almost everyone, but some people continued to argue that as a 
“sponsor of state terrorism” they had an indirect connection. Others disputed 
this connection.
If I say “Malaria kills many people in poor countries,” I have connected 
malaria and poverty. If I say “Malaria kills many people across the globe,” I 
have not connected them. Some connections exist in the world regardless of 
what we say and do (like malaria and poverty). Nonetheless, we can still render 
these connections visible or not in our language. 
Other connections do not exist so clearly in the world until we have worked—
partly through how we use language—to make them real in some sense, at least 
in terms of having real effects in the world. For example, in debates over health 
care reform in the United States, one regularly hears that government-spon-
sored health care is a form of socialism. It is debatable whether government 
subsidies for health care and socialism go together in reality (for example, 
nearly no one now—though they used to—says Medicare, a government-run 
program for the elderly, is a form of socialism or wants to get rid of it), but they 
are so often connected in some of the media in the United States that many 
people do see them as connected.


Discourse Analysis: What Makes It Critical?  33
7. Sign Systems and Knowledge
We use language to build up or tear down various sign systems (communica-
tional systems) and ways of knowing the world. There are many different lan-
guages (e.g., Spanish, Russian, and English). There are many different varieties 
of any one language (e.g., different dialects, as well as language varieties like the 
language of lawyers, the language of biologists, and the language of hip-hop art-
ists). There are communicative systems that are not language (e.g., equations, 
graphs, images) or at least not just language (e.g., hip-hop, poetry, ads with 
pictures and words). These are all different sign systems. 
All these different sign systems are important to the people who participate 
in them. People are often deeply connected to and committed to their dialect. 
Lawyers are committed to talking like lawyers. Hip-hop fans are passionate. 
There are even violent arguments over where and when Spanish should be spo-
ken in the United States. Physicists believe the language of mathematics is supe-
rior to languages like English for explicit communication.
Furthermore, different sign systems represent different views of knowledge 
and belief. As we said, physicists believe the language of mathematics is supe-
rior to English for producing and communicating knowledge about the physi-
cal world. Poets believe poetry is a higher form of knowing and insight, as do, in 
another sense, people who use religious varieties of language. Speakers of Black 
Vernacular English believe there are some things that can be expressed or felt 
in that dialect better than they can in Standard English. So, too, Spanish-Eng-
lish bilinguals favor one language or the other for different topics or emotions. 
Statisticians believe statistics is a deep way of understanding reality, while some 
qualitative researchers do not, or, at least, believe the language of statistics has 
spread too far in our understanding of the social world.
We can use language to make certain sign systems and certain forms of 
knowledge and belief better or worse, relevant or privileged, “real” or not in 
given situations; that is, we can build privilege or prestige for one sign system 
or way of claiming knowledge over another. For example, I can talk and act so 
as to make the knowledge and language of lawyers relevant (privileged) or not 
over “everyday language” or over “non-lawyerly academic language” in our 
committee discussion of facilitating the admission of more minority students.
I can talk and act as if Spanish is an inferior language, or not. I can talk 
and act so as to make the language and actions of “controlled studies” (e.g., 
“controlled studies of classroom”) what constitutes “real evidence” or “real sci-
ence,” or not. I can talk and act so as to constitute the language of creationism 
as “scientific” and as a competitor with the language of evolution, or not.
The Sign System and Knowledge Building task is clearly related to the Politics 
task, since constructing privilege for a sign system or way of knowing the world 
is to create and offer a social good. But the domain of sign systems (including 
the world’s languages) and ways of knowing are especially important domains. 
Consider the effort people have spent trying to build or destroy “design sci-
ence” (creationism) as an “acceptable” and “true” way of talking and acting. 


34  James Paul Gee
Example
To see the seven building tasks at work, consider the data below. This is a 
teacher being interviewed. She was asked if she ever discusses social issues in her 
classroom, issues to do with power, race, or class. [A comma means a non-
final intonation contour; a period means a final falling intonation con-
tour; a question mark means a final rising intonation contour; “I” stands for 
“interviewer”]:
Uh I talk about housing,
We talk about the [????] we talk about a lot of the low income things,
I said “Hey wait a minute,”
I said, “Do you think the city’s gonna take care of an area that you don’t 
 take care of yourself”? [I: uh huh] 
I said, “How [many of] you [have] been up [NAME] Street”?
They raise their hands, 
I say “How about [NAME] Ave.?”
That’s where those gigantic houses are.
I said, “How many pieces of furniture are sitting in the front yard”? 
 [I: mm hm] 
“Well, none.” 
I said “How much trash is lying around”?
“None.”
I said, “How many houses are spray painted”? 
“How many of them have kicked in, you know have broken down cars.” 
I do not have space here for a full analysis of this data. I will just comment 
shortly on each task. A full analysis would require tying each point I make 
below to specific uses of language in the data.
The Significance Building Task: The teacher makes the neighborhood condi-
tions significant in demarcating richer and poorer people. She does not make 
the social and economic conditions in which they live significant (e.g., there are 
more broken-down cars in poor neighborhoods, because poor people cannot 
afford to put them in expensive repair shops).
The Activities Building Task: The teacher enacts a dialogue she has with her 
class. This dialogue enacts the activity of a certain form of advice giving (what 
to do and not do for success in society). Indeed, this data was preceded by the 
teacher talking about an Ann Landers advice column on how to dress for a job 
interview that she reads to her students.
The Identities Building Task: The teacher creates through her language an 
identity for her kids as people who are associated with “low income things” 
and who contrast with people in richer neighborhoods. She holds a view, which 
she makes clear elsewhere, that class is behavior, and if people change how they 
behave and dress, they become “middle class” people and not ones associated 
with “low income things.”


Discourse Analysis: What Makes It Critical?  35
The Relationships Building Task: In her enacted dialogue the teacher sets up a 
relationship to her students where she is a world-wise middle-class advice giver 
that can change their lives through her advice. Elsewhere she makes clear that 
poor children cannot get proper nurturing and advice from their parents and 
so it becomes the role of the teacher to give this to them.
The Politics Building Task: The teacher is engaged in a form of “blaming the 
victim” (i.e., you and your “low income” behaviors are the cause of your own 
failure, not larger social and economic conditions). She is, thus, denying the 
children in her class the social good of not being associated with “low income 
things,” as well as the social good associated with those “gigantic houses” in 
the rich neighborhood. The teacher develops in her language a specific politics 
of poverty and wealth that has to do with behavior and not the possession, 
say, of wealth and wealthy houses. [By the way, I am not saying the teacher is 
“wrong” or “right.” Saying people are just victims of large social forces over 
which they have no control is also not highly motivating for people.]
The Connections Building Task: The teacher connects “low income things” 
and a list of neighborhood behaviors (e.g., trash lying around). At a deeper 
level she connects the appearance of a neighborhood with both its wealth 
and the “nature” of its people (because it is the people who make the appear-
ances, not the social conditions—e.g., no regular trash pickup—because they 
are associated with “low income things” and behaviors and can change those 
behaviors).
The Sign Systems and Knowledge Building Task: The teacher’s language privi-
leges one way to know the world, namely by observing behavior and appear-
ances. This can be contrasted with some sociological ways of knowing the world 
that argue that behavior and appearances are the outcome of larger social, eco-
nomic, and political forces. For the teacher, poverty is not first and foremost a 
socio-economic category. It is first and foremost a behavioral category under 
the control of the people themselves.
I want to stress that I have not offered a discourse analysis of the data. I 
have offered some conclusions that I believe could be drawn from the data if 
an analyst asked what grammatical and discourse features of the language are 
carrying out which of our seven building tasks and in what ways. We have to tie 
grammatical and discourse features (linguistic features) to the sorts of mean-
ings each task entails.
Theoretical Tools of Inquiry
We turn now to four tools that are centered in theories from different academic 
areas about how language ties to the world and to culture (Gee, 2005). First, we 
will draw on theories from a variety of areas (cultural anthropology, cultural 
psychology, sociolinguistics, and philosophy) about how meaning goes well 
beyond human minds and language to involve objects, tools, technologies, and 
networks of people collaborating with each other. Here we will introduce the 
notion of “Discourses” with a capital “D” (so-called “big ‘D’ Discourses”). 


36  James Paul Gee
Second, we will draw on a theory from sociolinguistics about how different 
styles or varieties of using language work to allow humans to carry out differ-
ent types of social work and enact different socially situated identities. We will 
introduce the notion of “social languages” and argue that any language (like 
English or Russian) is composed of a great many different social languages.
Third, we will draw on a theory from cognitive psychology about how mean-
ing works. We will use the notion of “situated meanings” and argue that we 
humans actively build meanings “on line” when we use language in specific 
situations.
Fourth, we will draw on a theory from psychological anthropology about 
how humans form and use theories to give language meaning and understand 
each other and the world. Here we will introduce the notion of “figured worlds.” 
Figured worlds are narratives and images different social and cultural groups of 
people use to make sense of the world. They function as simplified models of 
how things work when they are “normal” and “natural” from the perspective of 
a particular social and cultural group. 
Discourses
People talk and act not just as individuals, but as members of various sorts of 
social and cultural groups. The social groups with which we share conventions 
about how to use and interpret language are many and varied. These groups 
include cultures; ethnic groups; professions like doctors, lawyers, teachers, 
and carpenters; academic disciplines; interest-driven groups like bird watchers 
and video gamers; and organizations like street gangs, the military, and sports 
teams. There are yet many other sorts of social groups. All of them has distinc-
tive ways with words associated with distinctive identities and activities.
There is no one word for all these sorts of groups within which we humans 
act out distinctive identities and activities. People have tried various names for 
them: “cultures” (Street, 1995, broadening the term), “communities of prac-
tice” (Lave & Wenger, 1991), “speech communities,” (Labov, 1972a, 1972b), 
“discourse communities” (Bizzell, 1992), “activity systems” (Engeström, Miet-
tinen & Punamäki, 1999), “actor-actant networks” (Latour, 2005), “collectives” 
(Latour, 2004), “affinity spaces” or “affinity groups” (Gee, 2004), and others. 
Each label is meant to capture just some such groups or just some aspects of 
such groups. 
I use the term “Discourse” with a capital “D” (so-called “big ‘D’ Discourses”). 
I use this term because such groups continue through time—for the most part, 
they were here before we arrived on earth and will be here after we leave—and 
we can see them as communicating (discoursing) with each other through 
time and history, using us as their temporary mouthpieces. I use the term “dis-
course,” with a little “d,” to mean language in use or stretches of oral or written 
language in use (“texts”).
When we enact an identity in the world, we do not just use language all by 
itself to do this. We use language, but we also use distinctive ways of acting, 


Discourse Analysis: What Makes It Critical?  37
interacting with others, believing, valuing, dressing, and using various sorts of 
objects and tools in various sorts of distinctive environments. 
If you want to show me you are a basketball player, you cannot just talk the 
talk; you have to walk the walk and do that with a basketball on a basketball 
court in front of other people. If you want to get recognized as a devout Catho-
lic, you cannot just talk the “right” way about the “right” things; you also have 
to engage in certain actions (like going to Mass) with the “right” people (e.g., 
priests) in the “right” places (e.g., church) and you have to display the “right” 
sorts of beliefs (e.g., the virgin birth of Christ from his mother Mary) and values 
(e.g., deference to the Pope). The same is true of trying to get recognized as a 
“Native American,” a “good student,” a “tough policeman,” or a “competent 
doctor.” You need to talk the talk and walk the walk.
A Discourse with a capital “D” is composed of distinctive ways of speak-
ing/listening and often, too, writing/reading coupled with distinctive ways of 
acting, interacting, valuing, feeling, dressing, thinking, believing, with other 
people and with various objects, tools, and technologies, so as to enact specific 
socially recognizable identities.
Discourses are about being “kinds of people” (Hacking, 1986). There are dif-
ferent ways to be an African American or Latino of a certain sort or kind. Thus, 
there are different kinds of African Americans or any other cultural group. 
Being a policeman is to act out a kind of person. So is being a “tough cop,” 
which is to talk and act as sub-kind of person within the kind of being a police-
man. Being a SPED student (“Special Ed”) is one way to be a kind of student; it 
is one kind of student. There are kinds within kinds. 
Kinds of people (Hacking, 1986) appear in history and some disappear. At 
one time in history in England and the United States you could be recognized 
as a witch if you talked the talked and walked the walk (and you might in some 
cases do so unintentionally). Now it is much harder to get recognized as a witch 
in many of the places where it was once much easier, though there are still 
places in the world where you can get recognized as a witch. That “kind of per-
son” has pretty much disappeared in England and the United States.
The whole point of taking about Discourses is to focus on the fact that when 
people mean things to each other, there is always more than language at stake. 
To mean anything to someone else (or even to myself) I have to communicate 
who I am (in the sense of what socially situated identity am I taking on here and 
now). I also have to communicate what I am doing in terms of what socially 
situated activity I am seeking to carry out (Wieder & Pratt, 1990), since Dis-
courses (being and doing kinds of people) exist in part to allow people to carry 
out certain distinctive activities (e.g., arresting people for a policeman, taking 
communion for a Catholic, getting an “A” for a good student).
Language is not enough for this. We have to get our minds and deeds “right,” 
as well. We also have to get ourselves appropriately in synch with various 
objects, tools, places, technologies, and other people. Being in a Discourse is 
being able to engage in a particular sort of “dance” with words, deeds, values, 
feelings, other people, objects, tools, technologies, places, and times so as to get 


38  James Paul Gee
recognized as a distinctive sort of who doing a distinctive sort of what. Being 
able to understand a Discourse is being able to recognize such “dances.”
Discourses are not units or tight boxes with neat boundaries. Rather they 
are ways of recognizing and getting recognized as certain sorts of whos doing 
certain sorts of whats. One and the same “dance” can get recognized in multiple 
ways, in partial ways, in contradictory ways, in disputed ways, in negotiable 
ways, and so on and so forth through all the multiplicities and problematics 
that work on postmodernism has made so popular. Discourses are matters of 
enactment and recognition, then. 
All recognition processes involve satisfying a variety of constraints in proba-
bilistic and sometimes partial ways. For example, something recognized as a 
“weapon” (e.g., a baseball bat or a fireplace poker) may share some features 
with prototypical weapons (like a gun, sword, or club) and not share other fea-
tures. And there may be debate about the matter. Furthermore, the very same 
thing might be recognized as a weapon in one context and not in another. So, 
too, with being in and out of Discourses, for example enacting and recogniz-
ing being-doing a certain type of street gang member, Special Ed student, or 
particle physicist. 
While there are an endless array of Discourses in the world, nearly all human 
beings, except under extraordinary conditions, acquire an initial Discourse 
within whatever constitutes their primary socializing unit early in life. Early in 
life, we all learn a culturally distinctive way of being an “everyday person” as 
a member of our family and community. We can call this our “primary Dis-
course.” Our primary Discourse gives us our initial and often enduring sense of 
self and sets the foundations of our culturally specific vernacular language (our 
“everyday language”), the language in which we speak and act as “everyday” 
(nonspecialized) people. 
As a person grows up, lots of interesting things can happen to his or her 
primary Discourse. Primary Discourses can change, hybridize with other Dis-
courses, and they can even die. In any case, for the vast majority of us, our 
primary Discourse, through all its transformations, serves us throughout life 
as what I will call our “lifeworld Discourse” (Habermas, 1984). Our lifeworld 
Discourse is the way that we use language, feel and think, act and interact, and 
so forth, in order to be an “everyday” (nonspecialized) person. In our plural-
istic world there is much adjustment and negotiation as people seek to meet 
in the terrain of the lifeworld, given that lifeworlds are culturally distinctive 
(that is, different groups of people have different ways of being-doing “every-
day people”). 
All the Discourses we acquire later in life, beyond our primary Discourse, 
we acquire within a more “public sphere” than our initial socializing group. 
We can call these “secondary Discourses.” They are acquired within institu-
tions that are part and parcel of wider communities, whether these be religious 
groups, community organizations, schools, businesses, or governments. 
The notion of Discourses tells us discourse analysts that language—what 
we are specialists in—is only part of the picture. If we want to explicate the 


Discourse Analysis: What Makes It Critical?  39
workings of identity and social practices in society (which is the point of dis-
course analysis for me), we have to put the language we analyze back into the 
context of Discourses at work (play?) in society across time and space.
Social Languages
People do not speak any language “in general.” They always speak a specific 
variety of a language (which might actually mix together more than one lan-
guage like English or Spanish) and they use different varieties in different 
contexts. There are social and regional varieties of language that are called 
“dialects.” However, we are going to concentrate here on what I will call “social 
languages” (many linguists use the term “register” in a somewhat similar way, 
e.g., Halliday & Hasan, 1989). Social languages are a important aspect of the 
language part of Discourses (remember that Discourses involve more than just 
language).
To understand what a speaker says, a listener needs to know who is speaking. 
But it is not enough to know, for example, that Mary Smith is the speaker. I 
need to know what identity Mary is speaking out of. Is she speaking to me as a 
teacher, a feminist, a friend, a colleague, an avid bird watcher, a political liberal, 
or one of a great many other possible identities or roles? 
Listeners need to know who speakers are. Is my doctor saying I look “stressed” 
just as a friend or is he speaking as a doctor? When the police officer says “I think 
you should move your car,” is she speaking as a police officer and ordering me 
to move the car or speaking as a helpful fellow citizen giving me advice?
I will define social languages as styles or varieties of a language (or a mixture 
of languages) that enact and are associated with a particular social identity. All 
languages, like English or French, are composed of many (a great many) dif-
ferent social languages. Social languages are what we learn and what we speak. 
Here are some examples of social languages: the language of medicine, liter-
ature, street gangs, sociology, law, rap, or informal dinner-time talk among 
friends. 
Even within these large categories there are subvarieties. Not all types of 
gangs or sociologists speak the same when they are speaking as gang mem-
bers or sociologists. To know any specific social language is to know how its 
characteristic lexical and grammatical resources are combined to enact specific 
socially situated identities (that is, being, at a given time and place, a lawyer, 
a gang member, a politician, a literary humanist, a “bench chemist,” a radical 
feminist, an “everyday person,” or whatever). To know a particular social lan-
guage is either to be able to “do” a particular identity or to be able to recognize 
such an identity, when we do not want to or cannot actively participate.
Dialects like Southern English, Black Vernacular English, and working-class 
English (all of which come in different subvarieties) can be seen as social lan-
guages as well. Southern English is a way to mark oneself as a southerner. Black 
Vernacular English is a way to mark oneself as an African American of a certain 
sort.


40  James Paul Gee
Let me give an example. A young woman, telling the same story to her par-
ents and to her boyfriend, says to her parents at dinner: “Well, when I thought 
about it, I don’t know, it seemed to me that Gregory should be considered the 
most offensive character,” but later to her boyfriend she says: “What an ass that 
guy was, you know, her boyfriend.” In the first case, she uses distinctive lexical 
and grammatical resources to enact “a dutiful and intelligent daughter hav-
ing dinner with her proud parents” and in the other case to enact “a girlfriend 
being intimate with her boyfriend.” 
Note, by the way, that the particular labels I use here are not important. 
Many social languages have no names and names need not be used by people 
overtly. People who use a given social language may differ on what they call it. 
The point just is that people must have some, however tentative, unspoken, 
and problematic, idea of who is speaking in the sense of what social identity is 
at play.
Situated Meanings
We have already talked about this tool above when we talked about the situ-
ated meaning task. In actual situations of use, words and structures take spe-
ciﬁ
 c meanings, meanings we will call “situated meaning.” We gave examples of 
situated meanings above. But there is one important aspect to add here. When 
speakers speak they assume that listeners share enough knowledge, beliefs, 
values, and experiences with them to be able to situate the meanings of their 
words. Listeners situate the meanings of words by consulting what the speaker 
has said, the context in which it has been said, and (if they actually have it) the 
wealth of shared background the speaker assumes they have. So take the fol-
lowing remark: 
. . . yet I believe [Milton] Friedman is right that thoroughgoing restrictions 
on economic freedom would turn out to be inconsistent with democracy. 
(http://www.becker-posner-blog.com/archives/2006/11/on_milton_fried.
html)
If you do not know neoliberal theories of economics (which Milton Friedman 
helped innovate and implement in countries across the world), you have no 
idea what to make of how “democracy” is being used here. You do not know 
how to situate its meaning. Given only the utterance-type (general) meaning 
of “democracy” as representative government with elections, the remark, on its 
face, would seem to be senseless: surely an elected government could pass laws 
that restricted economic freedoms and this would seem to be an example of 
democracy at work. The remark is only consistent if you know how to situate the 
meaning of “democracy” in it, and you only how to do this if you share with the 
author (which he assumes you do) knowledge about neoliberal economics.
Neoliberal economics is a Discourse. Many people know how to recog-
nize and get recognized as “neoliberals.” So speakers assume that in situating 


Discourse Analysis: What Makes It Critical?  41
meaning we share knowledge about Discourses in society with them. They also 
assume that we share knowledge of “cultural models” or “ﬁ
 gured worlds” with 
them. And to this we now turn.
Figured Worlds
Is the Pope a bachelor (Fillmore, 1975)? Though the Pope is an unmarried 
man—and “bachelor” as a word is defined as “an unmarried man”—we are 
reluctant to call the Pope a bachelor. Why? The reason is that we do not use 
words just based on their definitions or what we called earlier their “utterance-
type (general) meanings.” We use words based, as well, on stories, theories, or 
models in our minds about what is “normal” or “typical” or “the way the world 
should be or is.” 
It is typical in our world that men marry women. A man who is somewhat 
past the typical age when people marry, we call a “bachelor,” assuming he is 
open to marriage but has either chosen to wait or has not found the “right” 
person. The Pope is both well past the normal age for marriage and has vowed 
never to marry. He just does not fit the typical story in our heads.
We use words based on such typical stories unless something in the con-
text makes us think the situation is not typical. If the issue of gay marriage 
or the chauvinism of calling men “bachelors” and women “spinsters” comes 
up, then we have to think more overtly about matters and abandon, if only 
for the time, our typical picture. Indeed, things can change in society enough 
that what counts as a typical story changes or becomes contested. People may 
even stop using words like “bachelor” based on the typical story and form a 
new typical story—and, thus, start calling marriage-eligible women “bachelors” 
as well.
We use such typical pictures so that we can go on about the business of 
communicating, acting, and living without having to consciously think about 
everything—all the possible details and exceptions—all the time. This is good 
for getting things done, but sometimes bad in the ways in which such typical 
stories can marginalize people and things that are not taken as “normal” or 
“typical” in the story.
What counts as a typical story for people differs by their sociocultural 
affiliations. For example, some parents confronted by a demanding 2-year-old 
who angrily refuses to go to bed when his or her parents say to take the child’s 
behavior as sign of growth towards autonomy because they accept a typical 
story like this: Children are born dependent on their parents and then grow 
towards individual autonomy or independence. On their way to autonomy, 
they act out demanding independence when they may not yet be ready for it, 
but this is still a sign of development and growth (Harkness, Super, & Keefer, 
1992).
Other parents confronted by the same behavior take the behavior as a sign 
of the child’s willfulness because they accept a typical story like this: Children 
are born selfish and need to be taught to think of others and collaborate with 


42  James Paul Gee
the family rather than demand their own way (Harkness et al. 1992; Philipsen, 
1975). 
It is, perhaps, not surprising that this latter typical story is more common 
among working-class parents and families where mutual support among family 
and friends is important. The former story is more common among middle- 
and upper-middle-class families with many more financial resources where 
people are expected to grow into adults who have the resources to go it more 
on their own.
Such typical stories are not “right” or “wrong.” (for example, children are, 
of course, born dependent on their parents, but are children primarily inher-
ently selfish and in need of being taught how to cooperate with others or are 
they inherently reliant on caregivers and in need of learning to be independent? 
These are different viewpoints that are probably both true in some sense, but 
one or the other can be stressed and form the main parenting style in the home). 
They are simplified theories of the world that are meant to help people go on 
about the business of life when one is not allowed the time to think through and 
research everything before acting. Even theories in science are simplified views 
of the world meant to help scientists cope without having to deal with the full 
complexity of the world all at once.
These typical stories have been given many different names. They have been 
called “folk theories,” “frames,” “scenarios,” “scripts,” “mental models,” “cul-
tural models,” “Discourse models,” and “figured worlds” (and each of these 
terms has its own nuances; see Gee, 2004, 2005, for discussion and citations). 
Such typical stories are stored in our heads (and we will see in a moment that 
they are not always only in our heads) in the form of images, metaphors, and 
narratives.
We will use the term “figured world” here for these typical stories. The term 
figured world” has been defined as follows:
A socially and culturally constructed realm of interpretation in which par-
ticular characters and actors are recognized, significance is assigned to certain 
acts, and particular outcomes are valued over others. Each is a simplified world 
populated by a set of agents who engage in a limited range of meaningful acts 
or changes of state as moved by a specific set of forces. (Holland, Lachicotte, 
Skinner, & Cain, 1998, p. 52).
A figured world is a picture of a simplified world that captures what is taken 
to be typical or normal. What is taken to be typical or normal, of course, varies 
by context and by people’s sociocultural affiliations (as we saw in the example 
of acting out 2-year-olds above). 
To give another example, consider the figured world (or typical story) that 
might arise in someone’s mind if they think about an elementary school class-
room: Typical participants include one teacher (a female) and a group of kids 
of roughly the same age, and some support staff including teachers who help 
kids with special problems (e.g., learning disabilities, reading problems, or who 
are learning English as a second language), sometimes by pulling them out of 
the classroom. The kids are sitting in desks in rows facing the teacher, who is 


Discourse Analysis: What Makes It Critical?  43
doing most of the talking and sometimes asks the kids questions to which she 
knows the answers. There are activities like filling out sheets of paper with math 
problems on them. There are regular tests, some of them state standardized 
tests. There is an institution surrounding the teacher that includes a principal 
and other teachers as well as curriculum directors and mandates from officials. 
Parents are quasi “outsiders” to this institution. There are labels for individual 
kids, labels such as “SPED” (special education), “LD” (learning disabled), and 
“ESL” (English as a Second Language).
This figured world—with its typical participants, activities, forms of lan-
guage, and object and environments—is, of course, realized in many actual 
classrooms. However, there are many exceptions, as well, but they do not nor-
mally come to mind when we think and talk about schools. In fact, every aspect 
of this figured world is heavily contested in some current school reforms (e.g., 
age grading, lots of testing, skill sheets, too much teacher talk, children in rows). 
The taken-for-granted nature of the figured world, however, often stands in 
the way of change. Reforms just do not seem “normal” or “right” or “the ways 
things should be.” For example, today it is not uncommon that young children 
can teach adults things about digital technology, but the child teaching and the 
teacher learning violates our typical story. It also violates the values and struc-
tures of authority this typical story incorporates.
I have said that these typical stories—what we are calling figured worlds—are 
in our heads. But that is not strictly true. Often they are partly in our heads and 
partly out in the world in books and other media and in other people’s heads, 
people we can talk to. The figured world in which children are born dependent 
and development is progress towards individual autonomy and independence 
for adults who can manage their own lives based on their own resources is a 
model that is found in lots of child-raising self-help books and in the talk and 
actions of many parents who are professionals (e.g., doctors, lawyers, profes-
sors, executives, and so forth) with whom we can interact if we live in the right 
neighborhood. 
When people “figure” a world, that is, imagine what the world looks like 
from a certain perspective of what is “normal” or “typical” (as in the class-
room example above), they are imaging pictures of Discourses or aspects of 
Discourses at work in the world. They are imaging typical identities and activi-
ties within typical environments. 
Situated meanings, social languages, figured worlds, and Discourses move 
us from the ground of specific uses of language in specific contexts (situated 
meanings) up to the world of identities and institutions in time and space (Dis-
courses) through varieties of language (social languages) and people’s taken-
for-granted theories of the world (figured worlds). This progression is, in my 
view, the point of discourse (or, better d/Discourse) analysis. Since Discourses 
and their interactions in time and space are inherently about the distribution of 
social goods (i.e., kinds of people and their places in society), discourse analysis 
is or should be inherently “critical” and even “political.”


44  James Paul Gee
References
Bakhtin, M. M. (1986). Speech genres and other late essays. Austin: University of Texas 
Press.
Bizzell, P. (1992). Academic discourse and critical consciousness. Pittsburgh: University 
of Pittsburgh Press.
Engeström, Y., Miettinen, R., & Punamäki, R.-L. (Eds.). (1999). Perspectives on activity 
theory. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Fillmore, C. (1975). An alternative to checklist theories of meaning. In C. Cogen, H. 
Thompson, G. Thurgood, K. Whistler, & J. Wright (Eds.), Proceedings of the First 
Annual Meeting of the Berkeley Linguistics Society (pp. 123–131). Berkeley, CA: Uni-
versity of California at Berkeley.
Gagnon, P. (1987). Democracy’s untold story: What world history textbooks neglect. Wash-
ington, DC: American Federation of Teachers.
Gee, J. P. (2004). Situated language and learning: A critique of traditional schooling. Lon-
don: Routledge.
Gee, J. P. (2005). An introduction to discourse analysis: Theory and method (2nd ed.). 
London: Routledge.
Gee, J. P. (2007). Social linguistics and literacies: Ideology in Discourses (3rd ed.). London: 
Taylor & Francis.
Gee, J. (2011). How to do discourse analysis: A tool kit. New York: Routledge.
Habermas, J. (1984). Theory of communicative action, Vol. 1 (T. McCarthy, Trans.). 
London: Heinemann.
Hacking, I. (1986). Making up people. In T. C. Heller, M. Sosna, & D. E. Wellbery (Eds.), 
Reconstructing individualism: Autonomy, individuality, and the self in Western thought 
(pp. 222–236). Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press.
Halliday, M. A. K. (1994). An introduction to functional grammar (2nd ed). London: 
Edward Arnold.
Halliday, M. A. K., & Hasan, R. (1989). Language, context, and text: Aspects of language 
as a social-semiotic perspective. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Harkness, S., Super, C., & Keefer, C. H. (1992). Learning to be an American parent: How 
cultural models gain directive force. In R. D’Andrade & C. Strauss (Eds.), Human motives 
and cultural models (pp. 163–178). Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Holland, D., Lachicotte, W., Skinner, D., & Cain, C. (1998). Identity and agency in 
cultural worlds. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Labov, W. (1972a). Language in the inner city: Studies in Black English vernacular. 
Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press.
Labov, W. (1972b). Sociolinguistic patterns. Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania 
Press.
Latour, B. (2004). Politics of nature: How to bring the sciences into democracy. Cambridge, 
MA: Harvard University Press.
Latour, B. (2005). Reassembling the social: An introduction to actor-network-theory. 
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Lave, J., & E. Wenger. 1991. Situated learning: Legitimate peripheral participation. New 
York: Cambridge University Press.
Levinson, S. C. (2000). Presumptive meanings: The theory of generalized conversational 
implicature. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Philipsen, G. (1975). Speaking “like a man” in Teamsterville: Culture patterns of role 
enactment in an urban neighborhood, Quarterly Journal of Speech, 61, 26–39.


Discourse Analysis: What Makes It Critical?  45
Pomerantz, A., & Fehr, B. J. (1997). Conversation analysis: An approach to the study 
of social action as sense making practices. In T. A. van Dijk (Ed.), Discourse as social 
interaction: Discourse studies 2: A multidisciplinary introduction (pp. 64–91). London: 
Sage.
Street, B. (1995). Social literacies: Critical approaches to literacy in development, 
ethnography, and education. London: Longman.
Wieder, D. L., & Pratt, S. (1990). On being a recognizable Indian among Indians. In D. 
Carbaugh (Ed.), Cultural communication and intercultural contact (pp. 45–64). Hills-
dale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.


3 
Narratives of Exclusion and 
 
the Construction of the Self
 
Guadalupe López-Bonilla
 
Instituto de Investigación y Desarrollo Educativo, 
 
Universidad Autónoma de Baja California
Introduction
Schooling prior to higher education in Mexico comprises four levels: preschool 
(3 years), elementary or primaria (6 years), secundaria (3 years), and bachille-
rato (3 years, equivalent to grades 10 to 12 in U.S. schools). Bachillerato is not 
compulsory. Students who have access to this level are expected to pass every 
subject if they want to remain in school. Although schools provide a second 
opportunity through make-up exams to students who do not obtain a pass-
ing grade, if they fail to pass these exams they are automatically expelled from 
school, a process described in school records as “baja académica” or “academic 
dropout.” Studies show that this phenomenon occurs predominantly during 
the first year of bachillerato (Álvarez, 2009; Miramontes, 2003; Romo & Fresán, 
2002); however, little is known about the way teachers and students experience 
this process and the school cultures and positions that enable the identity of 
“academic failure” and expulsion.
In this chapter I focus on narratives of personal experience by Mexican high 
school students facing imminent expulsion, and compare them to the narra-
tives of their more successful peers at the end of their senior years. The data 
for this study is a subset of data gathered during a 3-year longitudinal study in 
which I and a team of researchers and research assistants collected information 
regarding the literacy practices of one peri-urban and four urban high schools 
in selected school subjects. The study encompassed classroom observations in 
all five sites over the course of one class generation (2004–2007), as well as 
interviews with teachers, school administrators, and selected students from the 
groups observed. Student interviews took place at two distinct times: I inter-
viewed students who were failing one or more school subjects at the end of 
their first year of bachillerato (equivalent to 10th grade, first year of the study), 
and successful students, identified by a high GPA, at the end of their senior year 
(third year of the study). 
Overall, I interviewed 27 first-year students, 28 third-year students, and 7 
third-year students enrolled in the International Baccalaureate, a curricular 
program offered as a separate track in one of the school sites. I chose the nar-
ratives for the analysis that follows because they all share two very revealing 


Narratives of Exclusion  47
aspects about the construction of students’ selves and their school personae: 
thematically, they depict episodes of positioning involving teachers and school 
authorities; and structurally, they evolve around a school conflict and its reso-
lution. In particular, I identify and comment on the figured worlds that render 
these students’ experiences meaningful and the role they play in the experience 
of “not understanding” and/or not passing a school subject, and the concomi-
tant school identities of academic failure, in the case of first-year students, and 
academic success, in the case of third-year students. I contend that, as an ana-
lytical tool, figured worlds can be viewed as an interface between discourse and 
Discourse, between linguistic structure and social order. To frame my analysis 
I provide some figures and information about Mexico’s education system and 
extrapolate to education in general.
Background
In 2005 only 41% of 14- to 17-year-olds in Mexico were enrolled in bachille-
ratos (Instituto Nacional de Evaluación Educativa, 2006); of these, 60% were 
able to graduate on time (INEGI, 2005). The low enrollment and graduation 
rate at this level are symptomatic of Mexico’s educational system, where youth 
face difficult entrance exams, dropout rates are attributable to social, finan-
cial, academic, and institutional reasons, and the educational programs vary 
enormously across regions and student populations. In spite of these stagger-
ing numbers, there is a pervasive Discourse on the part of institutions about 
school achievement that attributes student failure to students’ actions and 
“incompetence.” This Discourse is sustained under a meritocratic premise of 
equal access and opportunities to succeed regardless of students’ background, 
social class, or gender. However, studies show that the uneven distribution 
of economic, social, and cultural capital among Mexican youth correlates 
directly to their success at this school level (Villa, 2007; Zorrilla, 2008). Thus, 
students with different trajectories and resources occupy different positions 
within the Discourse upon entering secondary and higher education: whereas 
those who have had access to the necessary resources to “present” themselves 
as rightful members may indeed be perceived as more “competent,” many 
students who gain institutional entrance are systematically excluded (espe-
cially students from working-class families) from the benefits of a good edu-
cation, and positioned as incompetent or undeserving. 
Gentili (2009) explains this phenomenon as a result of the power struggles 
that have characterized the expansion of education in most Latin American 
countries. For underprivileged students, argues Gentili, this has translated into 
educational programs that “invite” these students to abandon school, or that 
actively expel them while putting the blame on them for not succeeding. It is 
not sufficient to stay in school, concludes Gentili, if a person doesn’t feel that 
she/he belongs there. 
“Not belonging” may arise as a consequence of lacking the necessary 
resources (social languages, skills and knowledge) and the identities (Discourses, 


48  Guadalupe López-Bonilla
positions) to fully participate within the specialized domains of school. This 
situation is not limited to Latin America. As Bourdieu and Passeron (1994) 
and many others have argued, academic language is “no one’s mother tongue” 
(p. 8), and for working-class children in particular, “the divorce between the 
language of the family and the language of school only serves to reinforce the 
feeling that the education system belongs to another world” (p. 9). 
While Bourdieu and Passeron refer specifically to the inevitable “semantic fog” 
(p. 10) that students have to deal with when they don’t have access to the linguis-
tic code of the teachers, I would like to elaborate on this metaphor and suggest 
that, in addition to the lack of linguistic and cultural resources, students are also 
deprived of ways of seeing the world from particular standpoints such as those 
of specialized domains. For instance, Kress (2001) describes the process in which 
students of particular subjects are expected to learn to see the world of nature 
through the “world of culture and its conventions” (p. 402). For Kress, teaching 
students to learn new ways of seeing requires more than linguistic communica-
tion (more than discourse, in Gee’s parlance), which in the case he describes is 
used as an “ancillary mode of communication” (p. 402). Similarly, Boaler’s (2000) 
research about students learning math in English schools shows that, for the stu-
dents interviewed, secondary mathematics was something “of another world,” a 
world that held no meaning or appeal to them (emphasis in original, p. 392). 
It is worth mentioning that, in a previous study about academic failure in 
one of the schools where I carried out my research, Miramontes (2003) found 
that students who had failed chemistry described this subject as “from another 
planet” (p. 76), a feeling that was exacerbated by a discourse that was “foreign” 
and inaccessible to them. Furthermore, Miramontes found that these students’ 
chemistry teachers assumed their students were not “qualified” to understand 
their class (p. 93), but felt no responsibility for the situation, thereby reveal-
ing a school culture that tacitly accepted a “tolerable” number of flunked (and 
expelled) students per class. 
Describing school subjects as “otherworldly” and with particular ways of 
speaking and perceiving is one way to convey the figured worlds evoked by 
different disciplines, each with its own specialized (social) language and “dis-
tinctive ways of speaking/listening, writing/reading coupled with distinctive 
ways of acting, interacting, valuing, feeling, thinking, believing,” that is, with 
the different Discourses that allow the enactment of “specific socially recogniz-
able identities” (Gee, this volume, p. xx). As part of the “shared repertoire” 
(Wenger, 1998) that students would need in order to fully participate in the 
specialized domains of school subjects, figured worlds are probably one of the 
most potent reifications for making sense of one’s position and creating mean-
ing within the domain.
Narratives, Figured Worlds and Positioning
For the (critical) discourse analyst, narratives of personal experience provide 
powerful insights into the figured worlds that render experience meaningful. 


Narratives of Exclusion  49
Furthermore, they encode the different voices (Bakhtin, 1981) that make up 
a person’s “space of authoring” (Holland, Lachiotte, Skinner, & Cain, 1998), 
and thus leave traces of Discourses, positioning, and identities. When someone 
narrates a personal experience, that person makes herself “an object for another 
and for oneself . . . But it is also possible to reflect our attitude toward ourselves 
as objects . . . In this case, our own discourse becomes an object and acquires a 
second—its own—voice” (Bakhtin, 1986, p. 110).
According to Bruner (1986), narrative thinking is one mode of human cogni-
tion; in fact, narratives play a crucial role in the way people make sense of their 
worlds (Bruner, 1986; Gee, 1989, 1999). As Casey (1995) points out, narrative 
research is “distinctly interdisciplinary” (p. 22). In using narratives of personal 
experience as the material for my analysis I want to locate this chapter, follow-
ing Casey (1995), under the overarching work of narrative research; but I want 
to distinguish it from other forms of narrative inquiry such as what has been 
lately described as “narrative analysis” (Coulter & Smith, 2009). Whereas the 
former includes the analysis of narratives to explore the relationship between 
form and function, the latter produces narratives as a way of knowing. 
Perhaps one of the best analyses that explores the relationship between form 
and function in narratives is the seminal work of Labov and Waletzky (1967). 
In it, the authors identified five structural elements of narratives: orientation, 
complication, evaluation, resolution, and coda, to which Labov later (1972) 
added a sixth initial element: the abstract. Labov and Waletyzky also established 
two main functions of narratives: referential and evaluative. Similarly, Wertsch 
(2002) distinguishes between the referential and the dialogic functions of nar-
rative. Wertsch alludes to both “empirical” and “fictional” narratives (p. 57), 
while Labov and Waletzky (1967) concentrate on narratives of events that “did 
in fact occur” (p. 30) and that are told in the sequence in which they actually 
happened. 
For Labov and Waletzky narratives constitute a method of recapitulating past 
experience that matches “a verbal sequence of clauses to the sequence of events 
that actually occurred” (p. 20). The referential function refers to the sequence 
of events in the narrative, but a narrative that only carries this function may 
seem pointless and difficult to follow. It is the evaluative function that gives 
meaning to narratives; Labov and Waletzky explain it by showing how in most 
narratives of personal experience the narrator suspends the action before the 
resolution in order to infuse the narrative with evaluative elements that reveal 
the attitude of the narrator towards the experience narrated in the text. Gee 
(1999) sums it up by defining the evaluation in narratives as “the material that 
makes clear why the story is interesting and tellable” (p. 112). Because most 
narratives respond to a particular stimulus, it is important to consider “the 
social context in which the narrative occurs” (Labov & Waletzky, 1967, p. 13) 
and the particular stimulus the narrative responds to. The identification of 
the evaluative elements of narratives (evaluative function) is one of the most 
important contributions of Labov and Waletzky’s analysis, because these ele-
ments encapsulate the point of any narrative. 


50  Guadalupe López-Bonilla
For Wertsch, the dialogical function refers to “the relationship between 
one narrative and another . . . [and recognizes] that narratives do not exist in 
isolation and do not serve as neutral cognitive instruments” (p. 59). Skinner, 
Valsiner, & Holland (2001) take this argument a little further and, in direct 
reference to Bakhtin’s notion of dialogism, point out the role of others people’s 
voices in the construction of narratives, to which the author takes “a position 
from which meaning is made—a position that enters a dialogue and takes a 
particular stance in addressing and answering others and the world” (para. 10, 
p. 5). Considering the referential, evaluative, and dialogical functions in the 
narratives of the students interviewed for this study can help shed light on the 
school cultures and d/Discourses that construct students as “incompetent” or 
“competent,” positions that may lead to either expulsion and academic failure, 
or permanence and academic success. 
Several authors agree that narratives, as cultural artifacts, fall under some kind 
of distinctive genre, underlying structure, or unconscious realm of interpreta-
tion: a “charter narrative” for Amsterdam and Bruner (2000), a “narrative tem-
plate” for Wertsch (2002), a “master narrative” according to Jameson (1981), or 
a “master myth” for Gee (1996). For Amsterdam and Bruner (2000) narrative 
genres “are mental models representing possible ways in which events in the human 
world can go” (p. 133, emphasis in original). Correspondingly, Gee (1996) 
argues that “cultural models” or “simplified worlds in which prototypical events 
unfold” (p. 78) are paramount in rendering discourse meaningful. This descrip-
tion is akin to Holland et al.’s (1998) conceptualization of figured worlds.
Figured worlds are historical phenomena that recruit, distribute, divide, and 
relate participants; they are social encounters in “which participants’ positions 
matter” (. . . and relate participants to landscapes) “giving the landscape human 
voice and tone” (Holland et al., 1998, p. 41). Most importantly, figured worlds 
take shape within and grant shape to the coproduction of activities, dis-
courses, performances, and artifacts. A figured world is peopled by the 
figures, characters, and types who carry out its tasks and who also have 
styles of interacting within, distinguishable perspectives on, and orienta-
tions toward it. (p. 51)
Through figured worlds, narratives of personal experience reveal important 
aspects about the “discourses and practices that describe” the self (Holland et 
al., 1998, p. 27). In fact, Gergen describes these texts not as “personal impulses 
made social but social processes realized on the site of the personal” (in Holland 
et al., 1998, p. 292). As a tool of inquiry, figured worlds can help us to under-
stand the interface between discourse (language in use) and Discourse (a socially 
enacted identity). That is, figured worlds, as “socially and culturally constructed 
realm(s) of interpretation” (Holland et al., 1998, p. 52), provide the basis for 
making choices when assigning meaning to language and social practices (Gee, 
1996). For the purposes of this study, this may be grasped through experiences 
in which social positions and identities are “offered” to particular persons, or 
what Holland and Leander (2004) refer to as “episodes of positioning.”


Narratives of Exclusion  51
Methods and analysis
Data
After carefully reviewing school records, I contacted first-year students who 
had failed one or more school subjects and explained to them the purpose 
of the study. All the students voluntarily agreed to be interviewed. The same 
procedure was followed 2 years later when I approached third-year students, 
the selection criteria for these students being that they have a high GPA. Most 
students were interviewed on the school grounds.1 All of the interviews were 
tape-recorded and fully transcribed with the students’ authorization. One of 
the questions I asked students was to relate a particular experience they felt they 
could talk about concerning problems they had faced at school, and I asked 
them to elaborate on how they had coped. This was a question that I purpose-
fully included to elicit narratives and explore issues of agency and the construc-
tion of the self. In most cases this elicited narratives that captured episodes of 
positioning involving their teachers and other school authorities. 
Procedures and Analysis
After several readings of the data, I chose 11 narratives for analysis, 6 by first-
year students and 5 by third-year students (3 from the general program and 2 
from the International Baccalaureate). I chose these narratives because they fit 
two criteria according to Labov and Waletzky’s (1967) definition of a narra-
tive of personal experience: the sequence of the narrative clauses matched the 
temporal sequence of the experience, and they were fully formed narratives in 
terms of evaluative elements. I will comment on the overall themes and struc-
tures of the interviews with samples from several of them, but will provide a 
more detailed analysis based on two narratives, one from a first-year student 
and one from a third-year student. 
It is important to mention the obvious but complex issue of the language in 
which the narratives were produced. Since all of the students interviewed are 
native speakers of Spanish and the study took place in Mexico, all the interviews 
were conducted in Spanish. For the purposes of this chapter this posed a prob-
lem: Sequence and grammar are very important when analyzing discourse; fur-
thermore, certain idioms and linguistic expressions may not lend themselves 
to translation. Fairclough (1995) contends that “to include textual analysis of 
translated data as part of the analysis of a discursive event . . . [is] a procedure 
which is open to serious objections.” (p. 190). He further recommends that 
“discourse analysis papers should reproduce and analyse textual samples in the 
original language, despite the added difficulty for readers” (p. 191). Mindful of 
these shortcomings, I decided to work with the Spanish originals and translate 
them into English once I had coded and analyzed every original transcript. This 
gave me a greater insight into the cultural meanings and the different voices 
in the narrative. Because a purpose in the analysis was to identify the figured 
worlds encoded in the narratives, in the English versions I tried to remain 


52  Guadalupe López-Bonilla
faithful to the registers of the participants and the cultural and linguistic gist of 
the originals, an objective that I believe I accomplished to a certain degree, but 
not entirely. For instance, the Spanish expression no sé qué is strikingly consis-
tent in all the interviews: It is used at particular times in the interviews when 
students revoice the speech of others, mainly teachers and administrators. In 
Spanish this phrase expresses a cognitive activity: knowing (a literal translation 
would be “I don’t know what”). This became a central aspect in the analysis and 
informed my repeated readings of the transcripts, thereby allowing me to iden-
tify the different ways students captured the alien voice of authority. It is a clear 
example of the relationship between linguistic form (cognitive statement) and 
social function (disavowal of authoritarian voice). However, since I wanted to 
translate the particular gist every time it was used, the expression took different 
forms in the English text such as “or something” in Narrative 1, and “stuff like 
that” in Narratives 1 and 2. In spite of these limitations, I tried to convey the 
force of these utterances through the analysis. All the interviews were double 
checked for accuracy by a bilingual linguist whose first language is English. In 
all cases I provide the Spanish original with the English translation. 
The length of each transcript was an average of 15 doubled-spaced pages, 
but in all cases narratives were clearly identifiable in the transcripts because 
they were responses to a particular question or “stimulus”: a problem each 
student had faced while at school. Following Labov and Waletzky (1967), 
I divided each narrative into clauses and, after several readings, identified the 
overall structure and color-coded the referential function (sequence of events) 
and evaluative function (evaluative clauses). The referential function provided 
the basis for identifying the underlying genre of the narrative, while the evalua-
tive function shed light on the figured worlds that gave meaning to the experi-
ence narrated in the text. Because narratives are thick with other people’s voices 
I looked for traces of figured worlds at two levels: dialogical and structural. I 
considered as dialogical the figured worlds in which the text was clearly double-
voiced in Bakhtin’s sense. For instance, I coded the following statement as a 
dialogical figured world: “If the teachers don’t arrive during the first 30 minutes 
then everyone can leave” (lines 6–7, Narrative 1). In this case, the student echoes 
the words of others (school authorities) and captures a figured world of rules 
and rights for teachers and students. Once I had identified the figured worlds at 
the dialogical level in the narratives I went back to the full transcripts of all the 
interviews to search for new textual evidence that would help me get a clearer 
picture of those figured worlds and the voices echoed through the narrative. 
This helped me corroborate what figured worlds were shared by the students, 
and to understand the different ways students faced the episodes of positioning 
involving the school authorities. In the analysis I provide two types of textual 
data: two narratives (Narratives 1–2) and five excerpts that illustrate particular 
figured worlds, d/Discourses, and episodes of positioning (Texts 1–5).
I considered the figured world at the structural level the “charter narrative” or 
narrative genre of the text; that is, the overall structure of the events narrated in 
the text. Since all the narratives concern problems faced by the students and how 


Narratives of Exclusion  53
they resolved them, at this level the figured world expresses the storylines that 
modeled their sense of self and reveals issues of agency and self-objectification.
Interpretations
No Matter How Much I Study, I Don’t Understand
One of the most striking findings was that, in all five schools, not understanding 
a school subject was described by both first- and third-year students as the inabil-
ity to grasp a world that had no meaning for the students, a situation that was 
aggravated by the teachers’ authoritarian Discourse and concomitant position-
ings. Jaime,2 a first-year struggling student, expressed his frustration as follows: 
Text 1: Not Understanding
Jaime’s words exemplify an instance in which the world of nature is seen 
“through the world of culture and its conventions,” a culture, or rather a world, 
Jaime is unable to figure and understand. Expressing frustration with the same 
subject in a different school, another student, Ana, commented on her teacher’s 
inability to communicate with the students:
Text 2: Monologic Discourse
 
Spanish original 
English translation
1 J: Química, a eso no le entiendo J: Chemistry, that I don’t 
 
 
understand
2 GLB: ¿Qué es lo que no le  
GLB: What is it that you don’t
 
entiendes? 
understand?
3 J: A.. unir moléculas y todo ese  
J. To . . . combine molecules and
 
rollo, ni 
all that stuff, I
4 sé ni.. cómo es.. 
don’t even know what it looks like
5 GLB: ¿ni qué? 
GLB: You don’t know what?
6 J: No sé cómo es 
J: What it looks like
 
Spanish original 
English translation
1 A: Se pone a hablar como si 
A: He [the teacher] begins to talk
 
hablara  
as if he was
2 solo. No, no se pone a decirle 
talking to himself. He doesn’t, 
 
a los  
doesn’t tell the
3 alumnos cosas, o sea, se pone 
students anything, like, he just talks
 
a hablar  
and he
4 y no habla con nadie, con nadie, doesn’t talk to anyone, not to anyone, 
5 parece que está hablando con él it seems that he’s talking to himself
6 mismo


54  Guadalupe López-Bonilla
These two instances capture a figured world that is alien to the students and a 
teacher whose voice is lost in his own monologue. In the first instance, Jaime 
is unable to grasp the meaning of a linguistic code that describes objects and 
processes he can’t perceive; in the second, Ana refers to a context in which the 
communicative function of language is lost. These examples are consistent with 
Miramontes’ (2003) findings about the alien world of chemistry for students 
and the utter indifference of teachers. The following text by a different student 
(Luisa) further delineates the school culture and the roles assumed by teachers 
and students in this type of school environment:
Text 3: Authoritarian Discourse
In this text the student’s voice captures two episodes of positioning: In the first, 
the teacher covers a prescribed content in the curriculum regardless of students’ 
comprehension of those topics; in the second, the teacher arbitrarily assigns a 
 
Spanish original 
English translation
 1 
L: Te ponen un ejemplo y te L: They [the teachers] give you an
  
dan otro  
example and
 2 
tema y otra vez, ¿no? pues  
give you another topic, and then
  
ya lo 
again, right? 
 3 
miramos el tema y te 
Well we see the topic and they
  
explican, te  
explain it, and
 4 
ponen un ejemplo y te dan  
then they give you another example
  
otro tema y  
and another
 5 
otra vez, ¿no? y te dan otro 
topic, and then once again, right? 
  
ejemplo y  
And they give
 6 
otro tema. Te dan como 
you another example and another
  
cinco temas en 
topic. And they
 7 
la misma clase y al siguiente give like five topics in one class, and
  
día, la  
the next
 8 
siguiente clase que te toca 
day, the next class, they give you five
  
otra vez te  
more
 9 
dan cinco temas. . . .  
topics. 
10 Y en química cuenta 90 %  
And in chemistry he calculates 90% 
 
de examen,  
of the grade
11 y yo creo que eso es  
based on the final, and I think that’s
 
imposible. Pero  
impossible.
12 pues el maestro así lo hace 
But he’s the teacher and that’s how
 
y, y pues 
he does it 
13 nadie le puede decir nada 
and, and well, there’s nobody that
 
porque pues  
can tell him
14 él tiene la autoridad ahí.  
anything because he has the
 
 
authority there.


Narratives of Exclusion  55
final grade without taking into consideration the curriculum. In both instances, 
students are the objects of the authoritarian Discourse of the teachers. This text 
also revoices an institutional figured world of school positions (the authority of 
the teacher, the powerlessness of the students) that is in clear contraposition to 
an internal figured world of rights and obligations (“he calculates 90% of the 
grade based on the final, and I think that’s impossible”). This contradiction is 
expressed formally through evaluative clauses that are linked by the adversa-
tive conjunction “but,” a form that in evaluative clauses can signal contrasting 
figured worlds. In the first evaluative clause, the cognitive I-statement (“I think 
that’s impossible”) captures an agentic voice that questions the teachers actions, 
while the second (“but he’s the teacher and . . . nobody can tell him anything”) 
expresses the frustration of being silenced by the authority embodied in the 
teacher. These examples of students’ d/Discourse speak of a school culture of 
indifference towards students’ alienation, which thereby fosters the institutional 
construction of academic failure. Further, they exemplify the lack of meaning of 
a specialized discourse when students are denied access to particular ways of see-
ing the cultural objects and processes that render the discourse meaningful.
He Told Us: “You All Failed”
Not understanding, not having access to figured worlds that have been consis-
tently denied, and not having a voice at school leads to failure, which in turn, 
leads to expulsion. The following narrative by Brenda, a 16-year-old who had 
been recently expelled at the time the interview took place, will show the differ-
ent figured worlds, Discourses and identities this student had to navigate while 
at school. 
Spanish Original 
English Translation
 1 Y todos, pues sí reprobamos un  
And everyone well, yeah, a lot of us
  chorro,  
didn’t pass, 
 2 pues, porque no.. porque no, no 
because he didn’t, he didn’t grade
  calificaba tareas, ni trabajos. 
our assignments or homework.
 3 Sí nos dejaba tareas,  
He did give us homework
 4 pero no las revisaba nunca. 
but he never checked it.
 5 Nunca las revisó. 
Never checked it. 
 6 Tengo los . . . tengo los  
I have my . . . I have my notebooks
  cuadernos, este . . . y 
and well,
 7 no, no tengo nada revisado, una 
I don’t have anything checked, just
  hojita, nada más tengo así. 
one little piece of paper.
 8 G: ¿Nunca le dijeron al maestro? GLB: Did you ever tell the teacher?
 9 B: ¡Sí!, y nos decía: “No” que 
B: Yes! And he would say: “No” or
  “no sé qué,  
something,


56  Guadalupe López-Bonilla
10 sí los voy a calificar.” 
“I will grade them.”
11 Porque una vez, pues, todos se 
Because once, well, they all
 
le pusieron al profe. 
confronted him. 
12 Porque nos quiso poner 
Because he wanted to give us a lot
 
muchas faltas . . .  
of absences.. 
13 es que un día el llegó . . . llegó 
because once he got to . . . he got . . .
 
al . . .  
14 nos tocaba clase de once a una,  
we had a class from 11:00 to 1:00,
15 creo, de . . . sí, de once a una,  
I think, and yeah, 11:00 to 1:00.
16 entonces, has de cuenta que,  
So like, if the teachers don’t arrive
 
según cuando, sí no llegan los 
during the first 30 minutes
 
profesores en media hora
17 todos se pueden ir. 
then everyone can leave.
18 Y todos nos esperamos ahí 
And we all waited there
19 y no llegaba 
and he didn’t come, 
20 y pasó una hora 
and an hour passed
21 y no llegaba,  
and he didn’t come,
22 y todos nos fuimos, 
and everyone left, 
23 se quedaron nada más como  
only about five stayed
 
cinco, 
24 se me hace,  
I think,
25 no me acuerdo cuántos, 
I don’t remember how many,
26 y todos se fueron 
and everyone else left
27 y el profesor llegó a las doce.  
and at 12:00 the teacher arrived.
28 Y llegó 
And he arrived
29 y dio la clase, 
and he taught his class,
30 dio la clase y les puso falta 
and he gave an absence
31 a los que se habían ido. 
to everyone who had left.
32 Y al siguiente día, pues, todos le 
And the next day well, we all asked
 
dijimos 
him why
33 que por qué nos había puesto 
he gave us an absence.
 
falta. 
34 Dice:  
And he said
35 “No, es que ustedes se fueron,” 
“it’s because you left.”
36 pero le dijimos, pues, “que en  
But we said well, if half an hour
 
media hora  
(passes)
37 se supone que no . . .” 
we’re supposed to..” 
38 y este, y dijo:  
and he said
39 “No, pero que me tienen que  
“no, you have to wait for me”
 
esperar”, 
40 dijo.  
he said. 
41 Y es culpa de él,  
And it’s his fault
42 porque ni siquiera había dicho  
because he didn’t even tell us


Narratives of Exclusion  57
43 que iba a alguna parte,  
that he was going somewhere,
44 y entonces nos dijo  
and then he said
45 que no se acordaba  
he didn’t remember
46 que tenía clase, 
that he had a class,
47 que pensó  
that he thought
48 que empezaba a las doce.  
it was at 12:00.
49 Y nos puso falta a todos.  
And he gave an absence to everyone.
50 Y pues nos afectaba en ese  
And that would affect our grade for
 
momento para el examen,  
the exam,
51 o nos bajaba puntos. 
or he would lower our grade. 
52 Y según él decía que el examen  
And according to him the final was
 
contaba el ochenta,  
worth 80% of the grade, 
53 creo, 
I think, 
54 y no es cierto,  
but that’s not true,
55 ¡contaba el cien! 
it was 100%!
56 Aparte de que nada más nos  
On top of basing our final grade
 
contaba el examen,  
only on the exam
57 nos bajaba puntos. 
he would lower our score (because
 
 
of the absences).
58 GLB: ¿Y cómo distribuyó la  
GLB: And how did he calculate
 
calificación final?  
your final grade?
59 ¿Eran los tres parciales más el  
Did you have three midterms and a
 
final? 
final?
60 B: Más el final. Sí porque no, ya  
B: Plus the final. Right because no, 
 
después no nos, es que nunca  
later he would not, cause he never
 
nos, a veces . . . ese  
. . . sometimes . . .
61 examen no nos los entregó.  
that test he never gave it back to us. 
62 Ni los (tipo A) no los entregaba. 
He didn’t return our final either . . .
63 Nada más decía  
He would only say
64 que todos estábamos  
that we had all flunked the class, 
 
reprobados,
65 pero no nos los entregaba.  
but he didn’t give us back our exams.
66 GLB: ¿Y les dijo que estaban  
GLB: And he told you that you had
 
reprobados? 
all failed?
67 B: Ajá, de por ejemplo, “profe,  
B: Yeah for instance “teacher, who
 
¿quiénes pasaron el examen?” 
passed the exam?”
68 yo dije  
I said (to myself), 
69 “tan siquiera lo voy a pasar con  
“at least I’m going to get a B,”
 
ocho,” 
70 y le dije yo a mi mamá . . . 
and I told my mom
71 y me dijo:  
and she said:
72 “Bueno, ojalá y pues lo pases”.  
“Well, I hope that you pass.”
73 Y no, que nos va diciendo:  
But no, then he told us:


58  Guadalupe López-Bonilla
Narrative 1: Not Passing a Class
This interview took place at Brenda’s home at the end of the school year, when 
she had just been informed she would no longer be able to attend school. The 
daughter of a single mother, Brenda’s lived in a working-class neighborhood. In 
her narrative, Brenda recalls a particular incident in which the majority of the 
students in her class confronted their chemistry teacher for not respecting the 
schools norms and rules and for his lack of accountability. The narrative con-
veys the teacher’s unfair grading practices and the consequences for students.
The narrative begins with an “abstract” of the experience in Labov’s (1972) 
sense (“a lot of us didn’t pass”). Lines 2 to 7 are all evaluative clauses and encode 
the figured worlds of obligations for students (doing assignments) and teachers’ 
prerogatives (grading at will or not grading at all). In line 10 Brenda uses direct 
speech to revoice the teacher’s commitment to grade their work. But this line is 
preceded by a quote that reveals Brenda’s attitude toward her teacher’s discourse 
(line 9: And he would say: “No” or something). She marks the teacher’s words 
with a phrase showing that some of the original language is lost and further 
marks those words as suspect or unreliable. Line 11 recapitulates what the nar-
rative will be about (confronting the teacher), and it’s followed by an evaluative 
clause. Lines 13 and 14 are complicating action, a sequence that is suspended by 
the evaluative clauses that follow. These encode a figured world of a school that 
sets rules and rights for both teachers and students: it evokes the way things are 
supposed to be. Lines 18 to 37 continue the sequence of events, including the 
confrontation between students and the teacher. In this confrontation students 
appeal to the dialogical figured world expressed in line 16, that is, the voice of 
school authorities regarding teacher’s and students’ punctuality and absences.
74 “No, todos están reprobados.” 
“No, you all failed.”
75 G: ¿Y qué sucedió? 
GLB: And what happened then?
76 B: Éramos como diez, yo creo,  
B: There were about ten of us, I
 
más o menos. 
think, more or less.
77 G: ¿Y no le pidieron el examen? 
GLB: And did you ask him for the
 
 
exam?
78 B: Después . . . no, nadie se lo  
B: Later . . . no, nobody asked him.
 
pidió. 
79 Después yo le dije a mi amá,  
Afterwards I told my mom,
80 y cuando fue . . .  
and when she went [to school]
81 y nos dijo la orientadora:  
and the student counselor told us
82 “No, es que ya es demasiado  
“No, it’s too late to ask for it” and
 
tarde para pedirlo”, que no sé  
stuff like that
 
qué. 
83 G: ¿Y si hubieras pasado esa  
GLB: And if you had passed that class
 
materia sí te hubieras quedado? 
would you have stayed in school?
 
B: Sí. 
B: Yeah.


Narratives of Exclusion  59
In describing these events, it is interesting that Brenda’s use of the third per-
son plural at the beginning of the narrative (line 11: “Because once, well, they 
all confronted him”) switches to the first person plural in line 32: “and the next 
day, we all asked him why”). It is as though at the beginning Brenda is speak-
ing with the assumed voice of an outsider, a person who no longer belongs to 
the world she relives through the narrative; but in recalling this experience she 
regains her school persona and the collective voice of the group. 
Lines 35 through 39 are all in direct speech and show the confrontation 
between the students and the teacher, each echoing two opposing figured worlds: 
the institutional world of what ought to be for the students and the figured world 
of authority for the teacher. This is a clear episode of positioning, an instance 
in which the students are “invited” to comply with the rules of the teacher or 
else suffer the consequences. The evaluative clauses that follow (“and it’s his fault 
because he didn’t even tell us that he was going somewhere”) suspend once more 
the sequence and capture the authorial voice of Brenda. Lines 44 to 49 continue the 
sequence of events and we hear more evaluative elements through line 57. Again, 
lines 60 to 65 are evaluative clauses emphasized by several repetitions. These ele-
ments provide a clearer picture of the figured world encoded in Text 3, a figured 
world enacted through the teacher’s actions and authoritarian Discourse. 
Line 69 captures the inner speech of Brenda, an important point in the narra-
tive since it reveals her expectations to enact the identity of academic competence 
so far denied to her. In line 72 Brenda uses direct speech to revoice the wishes of 
her mother (a direct echo of her own wishes and expectations), and lines 73 and 
74 express the outcome and one of the most dramatic episodes of positioning 
in the narrative: the teacher telling the students that they had all failed his class. 
Perhaps more dramatic is the lack of agency the concluding elements of the narra-
tive reveal: Constantly being cast in a position with no voice or say in school mat-
ters, the students learn that the teacher (and school) is not accountable for their 
actions and the students unwillingly accept it without even asking for the exam 
(lines 77 and 78). In a final twist, even the mother is unable to find an answer 
from the school authorities, and Brenda and her family suffer the consequences. 
The figured worlds described so far are clearly double-voiced, dialogical mod-
els that are set in motion by distinct actions (or inactions) by the participants. 
Brenda is thus caught up between the figured world of “what ought to be for the 
students” and the figured world of what “must be” for the teachers. Although 
Brenda unwillingly complies with this authoritarian Discourse (with its posi-
tions and identities), it is clear that she learns to distrust the discourse (the 
means of communication) and disavow this language with its representational 
quality. This is expressed when she revoices her teacher’s discourse through 
direct speech (line 9: “And he would say: ‘No’ or something”) or indirect speech 
(line 58: “according to him the final was worth 80%”), and even when she quotes 
the school authorities at the end of the narrative: “the student counselor told us 
‘no, it’s too late’ and stuff like that” (lines 81–82). As I mentioned earlier, this is 
expressed in the Spanish original (no sé qué) through a cognitive statement (not 
knowing) that disavows the representational function of an alien d/Discourse. 


60  Guadalupe López-Bonilla
It is a language that is lost and becomes suspect or unreliable. This is something 
that was common in all the narratives of first-year and some narratives of third-
year students. The following extract (Text 4) by a first-year student exemplifies 
best the attitude of these students toward the representational function of this 
institutional d/Discourse, an alien discourse imbued with authority but that 
clearly is not internally persuasive or authoritative for the students:
Text 4: Representational Function of Language
Maybe That’s Why I Was Able to Remember
Extending Bakhtin’s notion of authoritative discourse, Morson (2004) dis-
tinguishes between authoritarian and authoritative discourse and reflects on 
how each affects students’ learning, including learning “our sense of ourselves” 
(p. 318). For Morson, authoritarian discourse is distinctively monologic, such 
as the discourse authoritarian regimes impose on their own publicly sanctioned 
interpretation of history. Authoritative discourse, on the other hand, may or 
may not be authoritarian. Morson argues that authoritative discourse 
may try to insulate itself from dialogue with reverential tones, a special 
script, and all the other signs of the authority fused to it, but at the margins 
dialogue waits with a challenge: you may be right, but you have to convince 
me. Once the authoritative word responds to that challenge, it ceases to be 
fully authoritative. . . . Every educator crosses this line when she or he gives 
reasons for a truth. (p. 319) 
In the two narratives discussed above we see instances of the authoritarian Dis-
course of the teachers in which there are no signs or attempt to engage students 
in dialogue. This is reinforced by a school culture that treats certain students as 
“expendable,” especially those students who have been denied access to particu-
lar discourses (specialized languages), figured worlds (ways to perceive objects, 
people, and activities) and Discourses (ways to enact a particular identity) of 
“academic competence.” 
The following sample by Carlos, a middle-class, third-year student, provides 
a different scenario. In this case the student explains his frustration at not being 
able to learn how to do fractions, in spite of receiving help and support from 
his father, whom he depicts as very knowledgeable. The episode describes the 
moment when he finally “understood”:
 
Spanish original 
English translation
1 Pues yo creo que, la verdad sí me Well I think that, actually, I do
 
gusta 
like
2 Química. Esa materia sí es muy 
chemistry. This subject is very
 
bonita, 
attractive
3 porque es todo lo que nos rodea 
because it’s everything that
 
y bla, bla, bla, bla,  
surrounds us and blah, blah, blah,


Narratives of Exclusion  61
 1 C: entonces cuando llegué a  
C: so, when I was in eighth
  segundo de  
grade, I think, 
 2 secundaria, creo, un maestro muy 
[I had] very good teacher and
  bueno y  
with him, 
 3 este, y con la primera vez que me  
the first time that he explained
  explicó lo  
it to me I
 4 entendí bien rápido, y se me hacía understood right away and I
  así como  
would think,
 5 que a veces, ay qué tonto, porque,  how stupid, they had
  tú, tal vez,  
explained that same
 6 me explicaron pues ese mismo  
procedure before but I didn’t
  procedi- 
get it until
 7 miento pero no lo comprendía  
that teacher taught me, and so
  hasta que ese  
[before] it
 8 profesor no me lo enseñó,  
was a problem because as time
  entonces fue un  
went by I
 9 problema porque conforme iba  
would think, it’s like, I’ll know
  pasando el  
everything
 
10 tiempo yo decía es que sí como  
else but I won’t be able to do
  no, voy a  
fractions, I
 
11 saber todo lo demás y no voy a  
thought, kind of illogical.
  poder hacer 
 
12 fracciones, se me hacía como que  
GLB: And do you remember
  ilógico. 
something in
13 
GLB: ¿Y te acuerdas de algo en  
particular about the way that
 
particular de  
teacher helped
14 
la forma como te explicó ese  
you to understand?
 
maestro que 
15 
haya contribuido a que 
 
comprendieras?
16 
C: Tal vez porque estaba en el  
C: Maybe because when he
 
pizarrón y  
was at the
17 
este, y ponía y te preguntaba,  
blackboard, and he would
 
¿sabes hacer  
write and he
18 
esto? y no pues que sí, ah, pues, y 
would ask you, do you know
 
te lo  
how to do
19 
explicaba, no sé, tan  
this? And well yes or no, and
 
detalladamente así, te  
then ok he
20 
marcaba súper bien, te encerraba  
would explain it to you, I
 
los números  
don’t know, with
21 
que, te encerraba por ejemplo, te  
a lot of detail, he would
 
encerraba  
highlight really


62  Guadalupe López-Bonilla
Text 5: Learning To Do fractions
What this student describes is the authoritative discourse of the teacher becom-
ing internally persuasive for the student through the teacher’s engagement with 
him and the resources he uses to make an alien figured world accessible for the 
student, best captured with the expression “he would make you see.” It is a case 
of what Lave and Wenger (1991) define as legitimate peripheral participation. 
This type of experience is completely absent in the narratives by first-year stu-
dents, as the previous examples showed.
I Was Not Going to Let That Happen 
The second narrative I want to discuss is by Gabriela, a middle-class student 
enrolled in the International Baccalaureate. In it she describes an episode of 
positioning by a teacher whom she confronted: 
22 
donde iba a empezar a hacer el  
well, he would circle the
 
 
numbers and like, 
23 
procedimiento a desglosarlo  
he would circle where he was
 
como para que  
going to
24 
vieras de por qué salió, te lo ponía 
begin the procedure and then
 
aparte, te  
he would
25 
lo explicaba y luego te preguntaba, break it up so that you could
 
y te decía  
understand
26 
te hacía ver y se regresaba, como  
why he would come up with
 
se iba y se  
a result, he
27 
regresaba, se iba y se regresaba  
would highlight that and he
 
cada paso,  
would explain
28 
como que a lo mejor eso hizo que 
it and then he would ask you, 
 
se me  
and he would
29 
grabara más. 
tell you, he would make you
 
 
see and he
30 
 
would go back and forth, back
 
 
and forth, 
31 
 
step by step and, maybe that’s
 
 
why I was
32 
 
able to remember.
 
Spanish original 
English translation
 1 
GLB: ¿Puedes contar algún 
GLB: Can you tell a particular
  
problema que hayas tenido  
problem you had in your classes
  
en tus clases?


Narratives of Exclusion  63
Narrative 2
For the analysis of this narrative I want to concentrate in the evaluative clauses 
expressed in lines 6, 7, 11, 12, 17, and 24, because these lines capture the 
 2 
G: Por ejemplo sistemas de  
G: Yes, for instance in information
  
información, tuvimos un  
systems we had a problem,
  
problema 
 3 
de que nos dejó un proyecto,  
we had to do a project,
 4 
de hacer un video como si  
we had to produce a video like a
  
fuera un comercial,  
commercial,
 5 
entonces lo hicimos,  
so we did it,
 6 
pero mm, yo siempre soy,  
but mm I’m always, I’m a
  
soy perfeccionista  
perfectionist
 7 
o sea trato de hacer las cosas  
or I try to do things as best as I
  
lo mejor que se pueda,  
can, 
 8 
entonces yo lo edité, el video  
so I edited it, the video
  
y . . .
 9 
la profesora dijo  
and the teacher said
10 “sí que me editen,” no sé qué, “yes, edit it” and stuff like that.
11 pero al final de cuentas todos 
But at the end all my classmates
 
mis compañeros lo trajeron  
brought it in without any editing,
 
sin editar, 
12 o sea nada más tomaron el  
like, they just took the video
 
video, 
13 lo entregaron  
and turned it in,
14 y yo por querer editarlo lo  
and I, by trying to edit it turned it
 
traje tarde  
in late
15 y la profesora no me lo  
and the teacher wouldn’t take it,
 
quiso recibir, 
16 me quería reprobar, 
she wanted to fail me
17 y pues no,o sea yo no me iba  
and well no, I mean I was not
 
a dejar reprobar así nada más  going to let that happen just like
 
porque sí,  
that, 
18 fui y hablé con la profesora  
so I went and spoke with [a teacher]
 
Magda y con el subdirector  
and with the vice-principal,
19 y ya le dijeron que no fuera  
and they told her not to be so
 
tan drástica,  
drastic, 
20 que me calificara mi práctica, 
to grade my assignment,
21 y le di el trabajo,  
and I gave it to her, 
22 valía 5 puntos  
it was worth 5 points
23 y me quedé en 7,  
and she gave me a C,
24 pero pues 7 es aprobatoria,  
but well, C is a passing grade, big
 
gran diferencia entre el 5.  
difference than an F.


64  Guadalupe López-Bonilla
figured worlds that give meaning to the student’s experience and text. In lines 
6 and 7 she uses an “I-statement” (Gee, 1999) that positions her as a thoughtful 
and responsible student, a figured world about herself in relation to the rest of 
her classmates; it is a figured world that is taken up and elaborated again in lines 
12 and 14 where she evaluates her classmates actions (“just took the video”) as 
opposed to her own (“by trying to edit it”). In line 17 she expresses a figured 
world about teachers not unlike those of her less successful peers: a world of 
authoritarian teachers who arbitrarily “fail” students. Similarly, she disavows 
this language when she revoices the teacher’s speech (line 10: “The teacher said 
‘yes, edit it’ and stuff like that”). Consistent with her figured world about herself, 
line 17 captures her own agentic school persona, a positional identity quite dif-
ferent from first-year, working-class students who, in spite of evident signs of 
solidarity among themselves and their collective actions, in their agentic selves 
were severely curtailed by the school teachers and authorities. Gabriela seeks 
support not only from another teacher but from the vice-principal as well, a 
support that is granted and allows her to reverse the teacher’s arbitrary deci-
sion. In this episode Gabriela uses a narrative strategy identified by Labov and 
Waletzky (1967) as an effective method for evaluating the whole experience: 
the judgment of a third person absent from the experience (line 19: “they told 
her not to be so drastic”). The sequence of events being evaluated describes the 
experience of a middle-class student enrolled in the most prestigious program 
in the school (the International Baccalaureate), and because the person evalu-
ating Gabriela’s experience is the school’s vice-principal, we see how schools 
construct and position students in very different and opposing ways. In this 
case, school authorities side with Gabriela against the arbitrary decisions of 
their own personnel. 
Narrative Structure and the Construction of the Self
So far I’ve commented on how the polyphony expressed in narratives of per-
sonal experience capture different figured worlds, voices, and d/Discourses the 
authors have to “orchestrate” in their own voice (Bakhtin, 1981; Holland et al., 
1998). There is another way we can look at figured worlds in narratives, what 
I previously described as the “charter narrative” or structural figured world. 
A good way to look at the structural figured world is to focus on the refer-
ential function of narratives: In Narrative 1 the sequence of events portrays 
collective human agency being curtailed by institutional forces, a model that 
may very well be a variation of fatalism. In Narrative 2 the sequence of events 
appears to be the result of individual human action, in particular the agency of 
the narrator.
Because these are narratives of personal experience, the “charter narrative” 
provides a good insight into self-objectification, since “self is a popular fiction, 
a ‘figurative reification,’ by means of which we account for our and others’ 
actions” (Holland et al., 1998, p. 293). In a similar vein, Amsterdam and Bruner 
(2000) explain how narrative genres “model” (p. 117) characteristic plights of 


Narratives of Exclusion  65
groups of people that share the same culture. This happens because “cultures 
convert their plights and aspirations in narrative forms that represent both the 
culture’s ordinary legitimacies and possible threats to them” (p. 117). In this 
sense, these authors argue that 
narratives function not simply to make experience communicable and 
thereby increase cultural solidarity, but also to give a certain practical pre-
dictability to the plights of communal life and a certain direction to the 
efforts needed to resolve them. (p. 117)
In Narrative 1 we see a student who constructs herself through her relationships 
with others and through the eyes of others who imprint on her their own gaze 
and positioning. It is a “sociocentric” self (Holland & Kipnis, 1994), a self that 
seeks the collaboration of others like her and expresses her solidarity through 
collective action. However, the figured world encoded in the narrative plot is of 
a self with limited possibilities for agency and action. It is a self that, regardless 
of her collective or individual action, is rendered powerless by the enforcement 
of an authoritarian school Discourse. This is quite the opposite of the second 
narrative. Here we find an “egocentric” and agentive self, expressed through a 
charter narrative that echoes the autonomous subject of modernity, a subject 
in charge of her own destiny and a byproduct of school cultures that construct 
students differently. 
Final Remarks 
I want to conclude this chapter with a reflection on method. As Gee (this vol-
ume) convincingly argues, for the critical discourse analyst the issue of frame is 
crucial. The narratives discussed in this chapter were chosen after careful read-
ings of hundreds of pages. The analysis was always done in a two-way direction: 
the selected texts illuminated the overall picture afforded by the interviews and 
vice versa. Having two distinct groups of participants provided many contras-
tive elements, which were consistent throughout the data: the collective voice 
of first-year students versus the “autonomous” subjects of third-year students; 
the authoritarian Discourse imposed on first-year students versus the enabling 
authoritative Discourse described by third-year students. The figured worlds 
that articulate these experiences, an articulation between language and social 
order, provide clear evidence of what Bourdieu (1980) calls the “institutional-
ization of difference,” that is, the strategies institutions such as schools use to 
enforce statutory and symbolic barriers between people and groups. 
References
Álvarez, A. (2009). Comportamiento de la deserción y reprobación en el Colegio de 
Bachilleres del Estado de Baja California: Caso plantel Ensenada. Memoria del X Con-
greso Mexicano de Investigación Educativa. México: COMIE.


66  Guadalupe López-Bonilla
Amsterdam, A., & Bruner, J. (2000). Minding the law. Cambridge, MA: Harvard Uni-
versity Press.
Bakhtin, M. (1981). The dialogic imagination: Four essays by M. M. Bakhtin (M. E. 
Holquist, Ed.). Austin: University of Texas Press.
Bakhtin, M. (1986). Speech genres and other late essays. Austin: University of Texas 
Press.
Boaler, J. (2000). Mathematics from another world: Traditional communities and the 
alienation of learners. Journal of Mathematical Behavior, 18(4), 379–397.
Bourdieu, P. (1980). El sentido práctico (Ariel Danon, Trans.). Buenos Aires: Siglo XXI 
Editores. (Original title in French: Le sens practique) 
Bourdieu, P., & Passeron, J. C. (1994). Introduction: Language and relationship to lan-
guage in the teaching situation. In P. Bourdieu, J. C. Passeron, & M. de Saint Martin, 
Academic Discourse (pp. 1–34). Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press. 
Bruner, J. (1986). Actual minds, possible worlds. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University 
Press.
Casey, K. (1995). The new narrative research in education. Review of Research in Educa-
tion, 21, 211–253.
Coulter, C. A., & Smith, M. L. (2009). Discourse on narrative research. The construc-
tion zone: Literary elements in narrative research. Educational Researcher, 38(8), 
577–590.
Fairclough, N. (1995). Critical discourse analysis: The critical study of language. London 
& New York: Longman. 
Gee, J. P. (1989). The narrativization of experience in the oral style. Journal of Education, 
171, 75–96.
Gee, J. P. (1996). Social linguistics and literacies. Ideology in discourses (2nd ed.). London: 
Taylor and Francis.
Gee, J. P. (1999). An introduction to discourse analysis. Theory and method. New York: 
Routledge.
Gentili, P. (2009). Marchas y contramarchas. El derecho a la educación y las dinámicas 
de exclusión incluyente en América Latina (a sesenta años de la declaración universal 
de los derechos humanos). Revista Iberoamericana de Educación, 49, 19–57.
Holland, D., & Kipnis, A. (1994). Metaphors for embarrassment and stories of exposure: 
The not-so-egocentric self in American Culture. Ethos, 22(3), 316–342.
Holland, D., & Leander, K. (2004). Ethnographic studies of positioning and subjectivity: 
An introduction. Ethos, 32(2), 127–139.
Holland, D., Lachiotte, W., Skinner, D., & Cain, C. (1998). Identity and agency in cul-
tural worlds. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
INEGI (2005). Anuario estadístico de los Estados Unidos Mexicanos. Edición 2005. Mex-
ico: Author
Instituto Nacional de Evaluación Educativa (INEE) (2006). Panorama educativo de 
México 2005. Indicadores del Sistema Educativo Nacional. México: Author.
Jameson, F. (1981). The political unconscious. Narrative as a socially symbolic act. Ithaca, 
NY: Cornell University Press.
Kress, G. (2001). “You’ve just got to learn how to see”: Curriculum subjects, young 
people and schooled engagement with the world. Linguistics and Education, 11(4), 
401–415.
Labov, W. (1972). Language in the inner city. Philadelphia: University of Philadelphia 
Press.


Narratives of Exclusion  67
Labov, W., & Waletzky, J. (1967). Narrative analysis: Oral versions of personal experi-
ence. In J. Helm (Ed.), Essays on the verbal and visual arts (pp. 12–44). Seattle: Uni-
versity of Washington Press. 
Lave, J., & Wenger, E. (1991). Situated learning: Legitimate peripheral participation. 
Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Miramontes, A. (2003). Conociendo el bachillerato: un estudio cualitativo sobre la prác-
tica docente y fracaso escolar. Unpublished Master’s Thesis. Universidad Autónoma 
de Baja California, Ensenada, Mexico.
Morson, G. S. (2004). The process of ideological becoming. In A. Ball & S. W. Freed-
man (Eds.), Bakhtinian Perspectives on language, literacy, and learning (pp. 317–331). 
Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press. 
Romo, A., & Fresán, M. (2002). Los factores curriculares y académicos relacionados con el 
abandono y el rezago. México: ANUIES.
Skinner, D., Valsiner, J., & Holland, D. (2001). Discerning the dialogical self: A theo-
retical and methodological examination of a Nepali adolescent’s narrative [34 para-
graphs]. Forum Qualitative Sozialforschung / Forum: Qualitative SocialResearch, 2(3), 
Art. 18, http://nbnresolving.de/urn:nbn:de:0114-fqs0103187.
Villa, L. (2007). La educación media superior ¿Igualdad de oportunidades? Revista de 
Educación Superior, 26(141), 93–110.
Wenger, E. (1998). Communities of practice: Learning, meaning and identity. Cambridge, 
UK: Cambridge University Press. 
Wertsch, J. (2002). Voices of collective remembering. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge Uni-
versity Press. 
Zorrilla, J. F. (2008). El bachillerato mexicano: Un sistema académicamente precario.Cau-
sas y consecuencias. México: ISSUE.


4 
A Critical Discourse 
 
Analysis of Neocolonialism 
 
in Patricia McCormick’s 
 
Sold
 
Manika Subi Lakshmanan
 
University of Missouri-St. Louis
I hurt
I am torn and bleeding where men have been.
I pray to the gods to make the hurting go away.
To make the burning and the aching and the bleeding stop.
Music and laughter come from the room next door.
Horns and shouting come from the street below.
No one can hear me.
Not even the gods.
 
(Patricia McCormick, Sold)
These are the lacerating words of Lakshmi, the 13-year-old protagonist in Patri-
cia McCormick’s Sold, a 2006 National Book Award Finalist in young people’s 
literature. Sold into prostitution by a drunken, greedy, and destitute stepfather, 
Lakshmi travels from a pastoral Nepali village to the infamous red-light district 
of Kolkata, India. These are also the opening words of a speech on human traf-
ficking, delivered by Mr. Gary Lewis, Representative, United Nations Office of 
Drugs and Crime at the 53rd Commonwealth Parliamentary Conference held 
in New Delhi, 2007 (Lewis, 2007). One might say that literature is one of the 
many “storylines” or Discourse models which people use “to make sense of the 
world and their experiences in it” (Gee, 2006, p. 61).
In this chapter I take on the problematic nature of literature that is written by 
North Americans about “third world”1 countries. Literature about the world is 
typically envisioned as a bridge that spans the differences between cultures and 
nations, as a window that opens minds to the world’s diversity and global chal-
lenges, and as a mirror that encourages reflection (Bishop, 1990; Botelho and 
Rudman, 2009; Hadaway, 2007; Lepman, 1969; Stan, 2002). My intention is to 
dismantle the window’s frame, survey the pillars of these connecting bridges, 
and hold up a critical mirror that examines our assumptions about these 
The ﬁ
 rst version of this chapter was written for Dr. Rebecca Rogers’ seminar on Critical Discourse 
Analysis at The University of Missouri-St. Louis. Since then, discourse analysis has guided my dis-
sertation research and publications.


Neocolonialism in Patricia McCormick’s Sold  69
structures and the concepts they entail (Lakshmanan, 2009). Literature’s global 
reach is further enhanced by technology. Today, authors’ and publishers’ web-
sites offer links to international organizations such as Amnesty International or 
the International Labor Organization. In teaching guides and scholarly articles, 
literature is also presented as a springboard for engaging students’ participation 
in social activism abroad (McKenna, 2007; Yokota & Kolar, 2008). Referring 
to “transformative models” of reading, Marian J. McKenna (2007) writes that 
literature about the world should not only “teach students about the world 
in which they live but also . . . transform them into engaged, active citizens” 
(p. 166). Emerging from a framework of critical multiculturalism, reading 
becomes a means to engage with concerns about the subjugation of race, class, 
and gender (Botelho & Rudman, 2009). This is particularly true of literature on 
contemporary South Asia, which is often written with a view to informing read-
ers about existing social injustices. I argue that critical literary analysis should 
not be limited to an examination of power relations that inhere in race, class, or 
gender differences in the text. Rather, a critical lens should also be directed at 
power relations that emanate from the text to its global implications. Only then 
can one become aware of the ideological positions being offered to the reader, 
and how these could affect international relations (Lakshmanan, 2009).
I propose that before literature about the world is used to activate social jus-
tice in the world, readers need to delve below the surface content of a text, and 
discern how the form of language, narration, and visuals constructs knowledge 
practices, mediates relationships, and directs a certain ideological discourse 
on how individual/social transformation happens or should happen. In this 
chapter I will examine Sold (2006) by Patricia McCormick, in order to dem-
onstrate the connection between literary discourse (as ways of representing, 
being, and participating in the world), the marketed visuals on a book’s cover, 
and knowledge practices. Patricia McCormick is well known for her previous 
novels, Cut (2000) on self-inflicted “cutting,” and My Brother’s Keeper (2005) 
on drug addiction. Both of these novels are based in the United States. Sold, 
instead, is set in Nepal and India. Here, McCormick captures the searing reality 
of child trafficking in the sex trade. It is the result of several interviews during 
the author’s month-long stay in these countries. Written in free verse, and the 
first-person voice of a diary, Lakshmi’s story unfolds in a series of crisply edited 
poetic vignettes. In an interview posted on her website (www.patriciamccor-
mick.com), McCormick states her “inspiration” to tell this story: 
I believe that young adults want to know what’s happening to their peers 
on the other side of the world, but that media accounts, by their very 
nature, cannot usually go beyond the surface. To me there is nothing 
more powerful—or permanent—than the impact of a book. (McCormick, 
para. 2)
Literature as a privileged mode of knowing the “other” side of the world begs 
a deeper study of how its knowledge practices are embedded in a discursive 


70  Manika Subi Lakshmanan
formation that extends beyond the text. Keeping in mind the institutionaliza-
tion of literature, by way of marketing and education, my analysis relates the 
text to the author’s intention, the cover image, and the publisher’s (Hyper-
ion) discussion guide (Zimmer, n.d.), which is freely available on the internet. 
By way of method, I take up James Paul Gee’s (2006) idea that we collabora-
tively use language and other semiotic systems to “build” seven interrelated 
and intertextual tasks to construe situations and the world around us (p. 104). 
Based on Gee’s model, I am guided by the question: How does the enactment of 
significance, activities, identities, relationships, connections, and knowledge prac-
tices condition the political discourse on individual/social change in literature 
written by North Americans about “third world” developing countries? In this 
respect, I am guided by Norman Fairclough’s (1995) comment that “no proper 
understanding of contemporary discursive practices is possible that does not 
attend to the matrix of change” (p. 19). 
The Text and Context
The novel opens with the line, “One more rainy season and our roof will be 
gone, says Ama.” We soon realize that in spite of the idyllic surrounding of 
a verdant Himalayan slope, where the “yellow pumpkin blossoms will close, 
drunk on the sunshine” (p. 9), poverty is endemic. Every season is marked by 
“women’s work and women’s woes”: 
This is the season when the women bury the children who die of fever. . . .
This is the season when they bury the children who die from the coughing 
disease. (pp. 10–11)
Lakshmi’s story is set against this predetermined rhythm of poverty, death, and 
womanhood. Beset by debts and alcoholism, her stepfather sells her to a pros-
titution ring. Lakshmi, who is convinced that she is going to work in the big 
city as a maid, dreams that thanks to her efforts, her mother will ﬁ
 nally have a 
tin roof when the rains come, and money for “rice and curds, milk and sugar. 
Enough for a coat for the baby and a sweater.” But the reader knows that her 
stepfather will gamble away the money at the tea-shop, or buy another con-
traption, like the defunct motorcycle he bought when her mother pawned her 
earrings. Sold for 800 rupees, Lakshmi is accompanied by “aunts” and “uncle-
husbands” across the Indo-Nepali border, and into the teeming heartland of 
India “where the lying-down people look like the dead. And the standing-up 
ones, like the walking dead.” She is ﬁ
 nally re-sold, at a tremendous proﬁ
 t, to 
“Happiness House,” a brothel in the Calcutta (known as Kolkata since 2001) 
red-light district. Lakshmi is locked in a room, beaten and starved, but she will 
not give in. A vignette titled “After ﬁ
 ve days” has only one line: “After ﬁ
 ve days 
of no food and water I don’t even dream.” The blank page beneath says it all. 
Finally, a drugged glass of buttermilk does what hunger and conﬁ
 nement could 
not, and her ﬁ
 rst customer “rolls off” her. Drugged for several days, imprisoned 


Neocolonialism in Patricia McCormick’s Sold  71
in the room, men come and go: “They crush my bones with their weight. They 
split me open. Then they disappear.” Yet Lakshmi’s spirit is not entirely bro-
ken. In “Happiness House” she also discovers friendship, the awe of watching 
The Bold and the Beautiful, the sparkle of Coca-Cola, and the liberating joy of a 
yellow pencil. Ultimately, she is rescued, by an American.
I chose Sold for three reasons, each addressing the overlapping public and 
private contexts in which literature operates. Context is understood as the “the 
mentally represented structure of those properties of the social situation that 
are relevant for the production and comprehension of discourse” (van Dijk, 
1998, p. 356). First, the book’s themes are directly related to the global Dis-
course on poverty, sexual exploitation, gender, and the tension between cul-
ture and modernity. Second, the Discourse models associated with the text gain 
institutional privilege because of the marketing, circulation, and consumption 
associated with “award-winning” books.2 Third, as a woman of South Asian 
origin, I am driven by the need to unravel the archive of texts and images which 
have come to inscribe my own identity. As Seyla Benhabib puts it, “To be and 
to become a self is to insert oneself into webs of interlocution” and “our agency 
consists in our capacity to weave out of these narratives our individual life sto-
ries”(2002, p. 15). Yet, I am more than aware that this personal impetus can also 
obfuscate my vision. While there can be no shying away from my suspicion of 
any relic of a colonial civilizing mission, the theoretical framework and meth-
odology of critical discourse analysis (CDA) afford me some distance between 
the text and myself. But most importantly, CDA allows me to examine how 
semiotic signs (language and visuals) and narrative patterns represent and con-
struct our relationship to “the other side of the world.” 
It bears repetition that my purpose is not to undermine the factual, moral, 
and humanitarian validity of a book that seeks to broaden the reader’s aware-
ness of the relationship between human trafficking, poverty, and culturally 
fostered gender inequities. Rather, I would argue that in spite of the indisput-
able commitment to human rights and the pedagogical need to foster empathy 
and further social justice, a critical stance needs to be alert to the morphing of 
hegemonic processes in the “third worlding” of social action.
Literature, Critical Discourse Analysis, Social Semiotics, 
and Post/Neocolonialism
Literature as discourse has been studied by numerous scholars (Eagleton, 1991; 
Fowler, 1977, 1981; Hodge, 1990; Hodge & Kress, 1993; Said, 1979; Stephens, 
1992; van Dijk, 1985). As Terry Eagleton (1991) puts it, literature is about “who 
is saying what to whom for what purposes” (p 9). As a discourse, or a certain 
way of relating to the world, literature is a social practice that resounds with 
the implied reader precisely because it is enmeshed in a society’s way of repre-
senting, being, and participating in the world. This, however, does not exclude 
the possibility that literature can be a vector for a transformative counter-
discourse. Indeed, in the international arena, the pen has sometimes proved an 


72  Manika Subi Lakshmanan
active player in international relations. Alan Paton’s Cry, The Beloved Coun-
try (1948) brought apartheid to world consciousness just as Salman Rushdie’s 
The Satanic Verses (1989) plunged the literary narrative into the maelstrom of 
global conflict. If anything, recent events validate that language, the narrative, 
and semiotic signs such as visuals, cartoons, and clothing cannot be extricated 
from identity and the enactment of a certain political relationship to the con-
temporary world. 
Viewed in this light, one can surmise that literature about other nations and 
cultures is embedded with a multimodal compass, directing a new generation 
on how to participate in the world. This nexus between text, semiotic signs, 
and being in the world is best captured in Gee’s (2006) theorizing of discourse 
in Discourse, or D/discourse. The former (discourse) refers to how language is 
used to “enact activities and identities” (p. 7). But, social or ontological mean-
ing is not made through language (or image) alone. The author’s intention, the 
awards conferred, how a book is cited and researched, how it is taught, and the 
blogs it generates, are all instances of the macro Discourses (with a capital “D”) 
that coalesce to make the production, marketing, and consumption of the book 
a social practice. Hence, analyzing literature as D/discourse does not distinguish 
between the literary text, the non-literary, and social practice. 
The writing, production, reading, and interpretation of the text are also 
political acts. By political, I mean, in Gee’s words, how “power, status, value 
or worth” are distributed (2006, p. 2). Any critical analysis and interpretation 
of a text written about a “third world” situation would be incomplete with-
out the perspectives of postcolonial theories on power relations. Postcolonial 
theory, which emerged in the 1980s, addresses the dominant Discourses used to 
view non-Western people. It is essentially about the problematic relationship 
between social and historical conditions, representation, knowledge construc-
tion, the constitution of the subject, and effective practices. Edward Said, Homi 
Bhabha, and Gayatri Chakravorty Spivak are considered central to the field of 
colonial discourse analysis (Childs & Williams, 1997), which was heralded by 
Said’s seminal book, Orientalism (1979). Said melds the Gramscian notion of 
hegemony with a Foucaldian understanding of discourse to examine the dis-
cursive practices of the European construction of the “oriental,” and its hege-
monic complicity with Western imperialism. He describes Orientalism as “an 
accepted grid for filtering through the Orient into Western consciousness” (p. 
6). In Culture and Imperialism (1994), he further develops his argument, main-
taining that the novel articulates a prevailing “structure of attitude and refer-
ences,” thereby indicating both the limitations and possibilities of these struc-
tures. With respect to Orientalism (1979), Said has been widely critiqued for 
his essentialist binary opposition between East and West. Homi Bhabha (1994), 
instead, introduces terms like cultural hybridity, liminality, colonial mimicry, 
and ambivalence, to argue for a more fluid notion of cultural production in the 
colonial encounter. 
Though postcolonialism is a response to a history of colonial rule, it cannot 
be dislocated from the present actuation of neocolonial political and economic 


Neocolonialism in Patricia McCormick’s Sold  73
hegemony. In fact, as Spivak famously remarked, “We live in a post-colonial 
neo-colonized world” (1990, p. 166). In this sense, postcolonialism “names a 
politics and philosophy of activism that contests that disparity [of inequality 
and dependence], and so continues in a new way the anti-colonial struggles 
of the past” (Young, 2003, p. 4). In addition, rather than an obscure theory 
advanced by ivory-tower intellectuals, the Subaltern Study group, (Ranajit 
Guha, Gayatri Chakravorty Spivak and Gyan Prakash) have elaborated a poli-
tics of the subaltern, or a “postcolonialism from below” (Young, 2003, p. 6). This 
perspective urges me to remain alert to any effacement of the autonomy and 
agency of the subaltern woman. 
Method 
The frame of this analysis is limited to the book’s text, the visual on its cover, the 
author’s interview on her website, her mode of observing and recording, and 
the publisher’s discussion guide (available at http://www.hyperionbooksfor-
children.com). James Paul Gee’s (2006) seven building tasks provided a com-
mon lens that directed my analysis of how the form and patterning of semi-
otic signs construct identities, relationships, and power relations. Gee proposes 
that when we use language, actions, interactions, and non-linguistic semiotic 
systems, we build seven “areas of reality” (2006, pp. 10–11). These interrelated 
tasks are significance, activities, identities, relationships, politics, connections, sign 
systems, and knowledge (henceforth italicized). My analysis is derived from the 
questions Gee proposes for each task.3 Applying Gee’s seven building tasks to 
correlate an ensemble of signifying vectors permitted me to chart the regu-
larity of a recognizable dominant Discourse on relationships with the develop-
ing world. For example, if the cover engendered a certain kind of relationship 
between the image and the viewer, then it was legitimate to ask what kind of 
relationship is furthered in the author’s interview, the text’s linguistic markers, 
and the publisher’s discussion guide. My premise is that ideology is patterned in 
the orchestration of different domains of activity that are related to a text. 
My analysis began with decoding how the book cover produces social rela-
tionships and construes the identity of the “third world” woman. It would be 
remiss not to mention that it was the disturbing image on the book’s cover that 
ﬁ
 rst beckoned me to read the book. Speciﬁ
 cally, I applied Gunther Kress and 
Theo van Leeuwen’s (1996, 2001) social semiotic methodology. Kress and van 
Leeuwen bring to CDA an examination of how the elements of design articulate 
a discourse through the representations made available, the social interaction 
enacted, and the way in which the representational and interactive elements 
relate to each other. I sought the theoretical juncture between Kress and van 
Leeuwen’s method and Gee’s “seven building tasks” by asking which building 
task does the sign system of design, color, composition, image, or semiotic mode 
exemplify. My underlying assumption was that through a critical decoding of 
book covers, we can ask ourselves what global relationships are being marketed 
and offered for consumption. Having explored the social semiotics of the book 


74  Manika Subi Lakshmanan
cover, I then proceeded to the textual analysis of the book, shuttling back and 
forth from the cover to the text, the author’s interview, and the discussion guide. 
Patricia McCormick’s interview is taken as an indication of the book’s intended 
activity. As van Dijk (1998), succinctly puts it, “a fully ﬂ
 edged theory of dis-
course and context is impossible without assuming the relevance of intentions 
of speakers or writers as part of the ‘cognitive’ dimension of the context” (p. 
217). Throughout the analysis I kept in mind Fairclough’s advice that “textual 
analysis should mean analysis of the texture of texts, their form and organiza-
tion, and not just commentaries on the ‘content’ of texts which ignore texture” 
(1995, p. 4). 
Sold is told in a series of 177 vignettes, ranging from a couple of pages, to a 
few lines. The capitalized title of each vignette succinctly captures its essence, 
whether it is a concept (THE DIFFERENCE BETWEEN A SON AND A 
DAUGHTER), an event (A TRADE), or a description (ON THE BUS). Some 
vignettes are barely a couple of lines. “A PRONOUNCEMENT,” the episode 
before Lakshmi is drugged into submission, has three sentences: “One day 
Mumtaz came to my door without her strap. ‘I have decided to let you live,’ she 
says. Then she is gone, leaving me to ponder what will happen next” (p. 118). 
The rest of the page is blank, leaving both Lakshmi and the reader to wonder 
“what will happen next.” 
In order to decode how the texture of form and content relate to a macro 
Discourse on the “other side of the world,” I focused on vignettes with repeti-
tive linguistic patterns that are also mirrored in another episode. I worked from 
the hypothesis that this intentional doubling of linguistic form underscored 
and connected certain topics. These units were taken as examples of signiﬁ
 cance 
(Gee’s ﬁ
 rst building task), which poses the question: “How is this piece of lan-
guage being used to make certain things signiﬁ
 cant or not and in what ways?”
Two sets of vignettes were identiﬁ
 ed: A NEW WORLD (number 42) on rural 
Nepal and NEXT (number 47) on urban India (Figure 4.1). In both vignettes, 
Lakshmi’s view of her spatial setting is described through the following syntac-
tical construction: indeterminate article + noun + gerund/present indicative. 
For example, as Lakshmi travels through the countryside, she sees “a man pull-
ing a wild boar on a rope.” Six such phrases illustrate the Himalayan villages. 
Similarly, when she enters the city, she looks at “a man scooping hot popcorn 
into a paper cone, next to . . . .” Conveying the frenetic urban pace, there are a 
total of twenty descriptive phrases, all patterned in a similar manner. Since my 
analysis deals with what linguistic patterning can tell us about an implied rela-
tionship with the Third World context, I categorize these vignettes as concerned 
with contextual relationships (see Figure 4.1).
The second set of mirrored vignettes were EVERYTHING I NEED TO 
KNOW (number 11) on culturally mandated behavioral norms for girls, and 
EVERYTHING I NEED TO KNOW NOW (number 95) on the ploys of pros-
titution (Figure 4.2). While the previous set of vignettes dealt with the context 
of spatial setting, these focused on time and causality, as indicated in the syn-
tactical form before-now-never-always and the conditional if/then clause. In 


Neocolonialism in Patricia McCormick’s Sold  75
EVERYTHING I NEED TO KNOW, Lakshmi’s mother tells her “Before today 
. . . you could run as free as a leaf. . . . Now . . . you must carry yourself with 
modesty.” In EVERYTHING I NEED TO KNOW NOW, Lakshmi is told that 
“Before . . . Mumtaz sent the customers to you. . . . Now you must do what it 
takes to make them choose you.” Similar parallelisms were noted in if/then 
conditional clauses, and the use of strong modal verbs.
I then used Gee’s seven building tasks to categorize these four vignettes 
(Figure 4.2). The ﬁ
 rst set (Figure 4.1), which describes rural and urban settings, 
were 
taken 
as 
examples 
of 
an 
enactment 
of 
relationship 
and 
connection 
to 
the 
activity 
Lakshmi is watching. Since the phrases under consideration are all object 
clauses (Lakshmi stares at x), identity and politics were not considered. The sec-
ond set of vignettes had to do with codes of behavior as mandated by cultural 
traditions and profession. Here, the gendered activity of being a girl or female 
prostitute deﬁ
 nes Lakshmi’s identity and ways of knowing and believing. It is a 
political discourse since these rule books distribute social goods believed to be 
of power and status, in this case the male and money (Gee, 2006, p. 2). Finally, 
keeping in mind that the conclusion of a “problem” novel often conveys a pre-
ferred outcome (Stephens, 1992), I analyzed the last vignette, THE WORDS 
HARISH TAUGHT ME.
As a further layer of investigation, I examined the book’s cover and the above 
mentioned vignettes for evidence of what Edward Said identiﬁ
 ed as stylistic 
Vignette 
Title of vignette 
Dominant linguistic patterns
number & page
42 (pp. 58–59) 
A NEW WORLD 
Contextual relationship
 
 
Indeterminate article + noun + gerund/present 
 
 
indicative
47 (pp.65–66) 
NEXT 
Contextual relationship
 
 
Indeterminate article + noun + gerund/present 
 
 
indicative
Figure 4.1 Building tasks: relationship, connections, activity
Vignette 
Title of vignette 
Dominant linguistic patterns
number & page
11 (pp.15–16) 
EVERYTHING I  
Time & Causality
 
NEED TO KNOW 
Before-now-never
 
 
Conditional causality: If/then
95 (pp. 141–143) 
EVERYTHING I 
Time & Causality
 
NEED TO KNOW NOW 
Before-now-always
 
 
Conditional causality: If/then
Figure 4.2 Building tasks: activity, identity, knowing and believing, political


76  Manika Subi Lakshmanan
ﬁ
 lters that typify an “Orientalist” perspective: repetitive tropes, synecdoches, 
establishing binary differences and hierarchy by portraying the subject as 
“incapable of deﬁ
 ning itself” (1979, pp. 300–301), and imagery and metaphors 
that classify, generalize, and accommodate the “strange” by making it familiar 
(pp. 58–59). Bhabha’s (1994) notion of cultural production in a third border-
line space was also kept in mind. 
Finally, following Fairclough’s (1992) advice, my study is directed by the need 
to identify, describe, and interpret what he referred to as cruces or moments of 
crisis. These discursive struggles alert me to shifts in hegemonic articulations. 
For an understanding of hegemony, I draw from Laclau and Mouffe (1985). 
Torfing’s (1999) rendering of their definition is pivotal to the conclusions I 
reach:
We can define hegemony as the expansion of discourse, or set of discourses, 
into a dominant horizon of social orientation and action by means of artic-
ulating unfixed elements into partially fixed moments in a context criss-
crossed by antagonistic forces. 
This definition of hegemony has a general validity for analyzing pro-
cesses of disarticulation and rearticulation that aim to establish and main-
tain political as well as moral-intellectual leadership. Thus, the concept of 
hegemony refers not only to the privileged position of a nation-state in a 
group of nation-states, but more generally to construction of a predomi-
nant discursive formation. (p. 101)
In Sold, the novel’s conflict of “antagonistic forces” and the concluding “fixed 
moment” when Lakshmi finally articulates her identity enabled me to reach 
conclusions regarding hegemonic processes that further a political D/discourse 
on America’s global role. Gee’s seven building tasks offered a heuristic that 
helped to unscramble the discursive conditions which lead to narrative con-
clusions that support American social activism and moral leadership in “third 
world” developing countries.
Reading a Book by its Cover
Gazing at us is the face of a young girl (Figure 4.3). Her mouth is covered by a 
shawl, or the end of a sari. The bright saffron yellow background, with a lightly 
printed geometric pattern, contrasts sharply with this sepia-washed photo-
graph. The capitalized title “SOLD” hovers in the middle, directly above the 
girl’s head. From a marketing point of view, the jacket “advertises” the book’s 
content in an aesthetically unique image that will capture the consumer’s atten-
tion. In doing so, it has to activate a whole chain of connections, values, and 
judgments. Therefore, even before we open the book, our Discourse models 
have been positioned to “read” it for discourses shared in our “community 
of practice.” According to Kress and van Leeuwen (1996, 2001), elements of 
design, such as the layout, color, text, typography, provenance, perspective, and 


Neocolonialism in Patricia McCormick’s Sold  77
mode, are all expressions of this discourse. Kress and van Leeuwen remind us 
that pictorial structures of design not only reflect reality but are “bound up 
with the social institutions within which the pictures are produced, circulated, 
and read. They are ideological” (1996, p. 45). As a discourse, or a certain way of 
representation, design is a sign system of knowledge that conveys a certain kind 
of relationship between the visual and the viewer. There are three dominant ele-
ments in this design: text, color, and image.
At the center is the title, Sold. The solid red typography alludes to a stamp, a 
repeatable stamp; much like a label you would find on a sold item. It is not the 
individuality of handwriting. As a word, the use of the passive voice (x is sold 
by y), which excludes agency, indicates how this thematic action will take place. 
A closer look at the printed saffron yellow background reveals several interdis-
cursive connections. To begin with, it evokes cultural connotations, directing 
the onlooker to a South Asian scenario. Significantly, saffron yellow is directly 
Figure 4.3 “Sold”


78  Manika Subi Lakshmanan
associated with the Indian subcontinent. It calls to mind the robes of Hindu 
and Buddhist monks and the deep saffron (kesari) on the Indian flag sym-
bolizes courage, sacrifice, and the spirit of renunciation. All at once, we have 
interdiscursive connections with religion, cultural values, and political identity. 
Even so, while one may read connotations onto the background, it is impor-
tant to remember what it is not. It is not deictic of any specific place in India 
or Nepal. The backdrop of regional and cultural connotations is emptied of 
any specificity. Context, it would seem, remains on the surface of evocative 
generalities. 
Clearly the focus is on the photograph of the girl. There are three partici-
pants in the communicative interaction ensuing from the photograph: the 
onlooker, the subject of the photograph (who is not acknowledged), and the 
photographer (duly credited). As a sign system, photographs are a “mechanical 
analogue of reality” (Barthes, 1977, p. 18) and experience. Since a photograph 
thereby carries the validity of testimony, truth, and objectivity, the onlooker’s 
trust is strengthened. But, as a signifier, the retro black and white photograph 
activates connections to the old, not contemporary, and hence not modern. 
The photograph also activates certain kinds of relationships between the viewer 
and the viewed. In fact, some very significant questions arise if the photo is 
viewed from the position of the photographer (shared by us): Who could 
see this person in this way? What sort of person would I have to be to occupy 
that space? And if we remember Susan Sontag’s (2003) observation that 
“photographs objectify: they turn an event or a person into something that can 
be possessed” (p. 81), we may well ask: What does it mean to objectify those 
who cannot respond? These are questions that relate to the viewer’s position of 
power.
An even closer look at the photograph reveals several semiotic signs: the cul-
tural provenance of clothing, and the embodied modes of gesture and gaze. Kress 
and van Leeuwen (2001) refer to provenance as signifieds that are “‘imported’ 
from some other domain (some other place, time, social group, culture) to sig-
nify a complex of ideas and values which are associated with that ‘other’ domain 
by those who do the importing” (p. 72). When signs of provenance are con-
sistently repeated, they fossilize into what Roland Barthes (1972) refers to as 
the metalanguage of representation. The woman’s head cover (burkha, chador, 
nijab) is a persistent example of provenance in representations of the exotic or 
repressed Oriental woman. When one considers this unrelenting and selective 
representation, the image of a girl’s covered head and mouth certainly signifies 
cultural practice, but at the second stage of Barthes’ metalanguage, it alludes 
to being voiceless (Barthes, 1972). Hence, the provenance of clothing and an 
embodied gesture have become a synecdoche for a discourse on repressive cul-
tural practices and female disenfranchisement (Said, 1979). The gaze instead, 
is strongly experiential, evoking sympathy, engagement, or at the very least, a 
voyeuristic curiosity. It is not the dreamy long-distance gaze of reverie. It is a 
middle-distance gaze “out of the frame,” that verges on the stare. Certainly, she 
is not looking at the future, but at us, engaging the onlooker in a relationship. It 


Neocolonialism in Patricia McCormick’s Sold  79
seems to speak, in lieu of the covered mouth. Much has been written about the 
gaze. According to Kress and van Leeuwen (1996), the gaze is more interactional 
than representational (p. 90). They distinguish between offer and demand in 
a gaze. An indirect address would represent an offer, whereas a direct address 
represents a demand for the viewer to enter into a relationship with the person 
(pp. 126–127). Other studies consider the frontal or oblique direction of the 
gaze from behind the camera. John Tagg (1988, p. 189) argues that frontality is 
a technique of documentation. Reminiscent of the ethnographer’s lens, it offers 
up what is represented for evaluation. Tagg describes how historically, the fron-
tal portrait is a “code for social inferiority” (p. 37). If one conceptualizes the 
photograph in these terms, then the image on the cover goes beyond its exteri-
ority, and enters a Discourse on how identities are construed, and practices of 
intercultural relationship. 
Taken as a dynamic composite of text-image-color, the cover has a narrative 
and discursive function. To begin with, it speaks about a young girl who has 
been sold. But, when the discourse of visual sign systems is dismantled, the con-
struct of the “third world” woman’s identity becomes evident. She is the not-
so-modern, voiceless, or at best muffled subaltern, who demands (Kress & van 
Leeuwen, 1996) a relationship of engagement and evaluation (Tagg, 1988). But 
is this a dominant discourse model that cuts across different genres of activity? 
Kress and van Leeuwen emphasize that “language and visual communication 
can in many cases express the same kind of relations, albeit in many different 
ways” (1996, p. 211). With this in mind, I added layers of textual analyses that 
investigate the relationship between the cover image, vignettes identified as sig-
nificant, the author’s interview, and discussion guides.
“Everything I Need to Know” about the “Other Side of the World”
The novel opens with the innocence of childhood. Much like Mary and her little 
lamb, Lakshmi goes to school followed by her goat Tali. Everything changes after 
her “ﬁ
 rst blood.” Now a woman, her mother schools her in “EVERYTHING I 
NEED TO KNOW” (pp. 15–16):
Before [italics added] today, Ama says, you could run as free as a leaf in 
the wind.
Now [italics added], she says, you must carry yourself with modesty, bow 
your head in the presence of men, and cover yourself with
your shawl. (p. 15)
Recalling the shawl-covered girl in the photograph, her look of demand or 
evaluation is now changed to a downcast gaze of submission. The axis of time 
(before, now, never) is accompanied by varying degrees of modal verbs. Before 
she “could,” now she “must,” and the future is locked in the assertion of a cat-
egorical, unconditional and non-modalized “never.” In this how-to-behave list 
of rules, Lakshmi must:


80  Manika Subi Lakshmanan
Never [italics added] look a man in the eye.
Never allow yourself to be alone with a man who is not family.
And never look at growing pumpkins or cucumbers when you are 
bleeding.
Otherwise they will rot. (p. 15)
Once she is married, the mother’s sociocultural rule book adopts a conditional 
if/then sequence, in which every activity is conditioned by the male. In this case, 
the reader knows that the antecedent (if) is not hypothetical, nor is the conse-
quence (then) contingent on a previous event. Instead, the conditional clause 
alludes to a given causality of circumstantial context.
If [italics added] he burps at the end of the meal, it is a sign that you have 
pleased him.
If he turns to you in the night, you must give yourself up to him, 
in the hopes that you will bear him a son. (p. 15)
After a series of instructions on breastfeeding a son as against a daughter, the 
vignette concludes with Lakshmi asking her mother:
“Why,” I say, “must women suffer so?”
“This has always been our fate,” she says.
“Simply to endure,” she says, “is to triumph.” (p. 16)
Like the photograph on the cover, the use of the present tense is anchored in the 
“here” and “now” and the reader/viewer becomes a participant in the protago-
nist’s activity (Traugott & Pratt, 1980). In fact, just as Lakshmi asked, “Why must 
women suffer so?” the text demands the reader’s engagement and evaluation of 
these codes of behavior. The mother’s reply becomes emblematic of the book’s 
representation of culturally determined female suffering. The sentence “Sim-
ply to endure is to triumph” appears italicized on the inner jacket of the book. 
Evoking the stereotypical notion of Hindu passivity, determinism and fatalism, 
temporality (before-now-always) and causality (if-then) are imprisoned in a 
sociocultural system which obliterates the experiential difference between pas-
sivity (“to endure”) and agency (“to triumph”). This timeless obliteration of 
the human actor is linguistically endorsed by the statement “simply to endure is 
to triumph,” in which a categorical universality is rendered by the present tense 
copula “is” (Said, 1979, p. 72), and the implicit nominalization of endurance 
and triumph, shifts the discourse from one of conditional human agency, to the 
collapsing of the actor into the action itself (Hodge & Kress, 1993, pp. 22–26). 
These episodes are directly related to at least three of Gee’s building tasks: 
identity, and ways of knowing and believing, and activities. Lakshmi’s identity 
and ways of knowing and believing are deﬁ
 ned through the activities of a girl 
of a certain culture and socioeconomic status. Gee’s seventh building task on 
knowledge poses the question: “How does this piece of language privilege or 


Neocolonialism in Patricia McCormick’s Sold  81
disprivilege . . . different ways of knowing and believing or claims to knowledge 
and belief?” (Gee, 2006, p. 13). While culture, superstition (looking at cucum-
bers and pumpkins), and gender roles dictate Lakshmi’s ways of knowing and 
believing, what about the reader? The reader too, is limited by the character’s 
referential frame and point of view. Point of view, as Fowler noted (1977, p. 52), 
constitutes perspective in literature. The stylistic choice of a ﬁ
 rst-person narra-
tive is not incidental. In the author’s interview she states:
I knew immediately that I wanted to do what no one else had done so far: 
tell this heartbreaking story from the point view of one individual girl [ital-
ics added]. (McCormick, para. 1)
Stephens (1992) reminds us that total identiﬁ
 cation with a focalizing char-
acter blurs the distance between author-narrator-reader, making the reader 
susceptible to implicit ideologies (pp. 67–69). In novels written from the per-
spective of a child, who is not privy to the heterogeneity of societies, the ﬁ
 rst-
person narrative ﬁ
 lters the complexity of context. Point of view also accounts 
for an estrangement from the context. In Sold, Lakshmi, the author, and the 
reader all view Nepal and India as outsiders. As the author says on her webpage 
interview: “It helped that I was a foreigner on the busy streets of Kathmandu 
and Calcutta, because I was as bewildered and awestruck by these places as 
Lakshmi in the novel” (McCormick, ¶ 3). Thus, while the use of the ﬁ
 rst 
person effectively focuses the reader’s identiﬁ
 cation and empathy on Lakshmi’s 
experience, thereby fulﬁ
 lling the demand of the haunting gaze on the cover, 
the individualized perspective limits the reader’s peripheral view, enacting rela-
tionships (Gee’s fourth task) that are distanced and non-dialogic. This dislo-
cated4 mode of relating to the context is brought out in the episode “A NEW 
WORLD.”
Lakshmi is sold to a go-between Auntie. As they walk past the Himalayan 
countryside, people “gape” at them (a common complaint of foreigners). 
Recalling the piercing gaze of the girl on the cover, Lakshmi too “stares” at “all 
the things” she has never seen before. 
A man pulling a wild boar on a rope.
A herd of yak hauling sacks of salt.
A mail runner ringing a cluster of bells as he nears a village.
A rope footbridge strung like a spiderweb.
A river that runs white.
And a man with teeth entirely of gold. (p. 58)
Seven pages later, the cinematic panning is repeated when Lakshmi is 
plunged into an alien Indian city. Craning her neck, Lakshmi looks at:
 a man scooping hot popcorn into a paper cone, next to
 a barber lathering an old man’s face, next to
 a boy plucking the feathers from a lifeless chicken . . . (p. 65)


82  Manika Subi Lakshmanan
In both passages, the repeated indeﬁ
 nite article “a” foregrounds each line, sug-
gesting a dislocated and distanced relationship between the author/narrator and 
pastoral Nepal or urban India (Hodge & Kress, 1993, pp. 87–89). Compare 
this with the use of a more contextually situated deﬁ
 nite article: “The river 
runs white,” “The man with teeth entirely of gold.” That would have been an 
insider’s point of view. I suggest that the technology of viewing and recording 
reality mediates ways of knowing, writing, and relating to context. McCormick 
writes on her website,“trained as an investigative reporter, I took notes and 
photos observing the sights, smells, foods, sounds, and the custom-details to 
give the book authenticity” (¶ 3). Transposed to language-use, what we have is 
a series of disjointed photographic images. This is another aspect of Kress and 
Leeuwen’s (2001) notion of provenance, which typically points to where signs 
come from, but in an “unsystematic, ad hoc manner, which is often communi-
cated as a pastiche or list” (p. 73). With a sharp focus on individuals and their 
actions, the contextual frame of reference is blurred into blankness. Rather than 
leading the reader into the visual space, zooming in from large to small (or the 
reverse), this technique quickly transitions from one scene to another, mimick-
ing a series of photographs. The panning of street life continues for the rest of 
the page, till Lakshmi wonders:
In this swarming, hurry-up city,
what will happen
next
to me. (“Next,” pp. 65–66)
By the end of the vignette, the locative connector, “next to,” takes on the added 
function of a temporal “next,” shifting the expository narration, to the happen-
ing of plot. This is achieved by the spatial splitting of “next” and “to me.” Orga-
nization of words and the use of empty space can be considered as a sign system 
which highlights the relationship between the text and the reader. Referring to 
the several episodes which are only a few lines, McCormick comments, “I also 
think the ‘white space’ between vignettes calls on the reader to engage his or 
her imagination in the story-telling process to ﬁ
 ll in the blanks.” In this regard, 
Terry Eagleton’s comment on imagination comes to mind:
The imagination is the faculty by which you can empathize with others—
by which, for example, you can feel your way into the unknown territory of 
another culture . . . But this leaves unresolved the question of where you, as 
opposed to they, are actually standing. . . . (2000, p. 45)
The episode ends with two words: “to me.” As a passive form, it forebodes the 
actions the protagonist will undergo. Drugged and beaten into submission, 
Lakshmi is now schooled in the rules, routines, and ruses of prostitution. In the 
episode “EVERYTHING I NEED TO KNOW NOW,” (pp. 141–142) Shahanna 
instructs her:


Neocolonialism in Patricia McCormick’s Sold  83
Before [italics added] when you were in the locked room, Shahanna says,
Mumtaz sent the customers to you. Now [italics added], if you want to pay
off your debt, you must do what it takes to make them 
choose you . . . 
Always wash yourself with a wet rag after the man is ﬁ
 nished . . . 
. . . If [italics added] a customer likes you, he may give you a sweet . . . 
If a customer likes you, he may give you a tip . . . 
The temporal axis of “before-now-always” and the use of conditional clauses 
mirror the earlier episode “EVERYTHING I NEED TO KNOW” when her 
mother instructed her on what a woman should and should not do. The 
similar patterning of these episodes prompts connections between the two 
activities. In fact, on publisher Hyperion’s discussion guide, students are asked 
to: “Discuss the vignette entitled ‘Everything I Need to Know Now.’ What do 
you think of the cultural mandates that she must live by? Compare it to the 
vignette of the same title that appears later when she is in the city. How does it 
represent all the changes in her life?” Gee’s building task on connections asks: 
“How does this piece of language connect or disconnect things; how does it 
make one thing relevant or irrelevant to another?” (p. 13). Both episodes are 
about female existence and identity. But, in the ﬁ
 rst episode gender roles are 
connected to cultural sanctions, whereas in the second episode the subservi-
ence and conditional causality of a woman’s existence is connected to the gen-
dered economics of sex trade. The marked parallelism in the form of the two 
episodes draws connections between these two domains: “cultural mandates” 
and “sex trade.” This latent intersection elides economic factors; parents sell 
their children because of poverty, not because of culture. The fusion of culture 
and exploitation is underscored by the shawl as a connecting signiﬁ
 er. While 
the earlier episode (EVERYTHING I NEED TO KNOW) referred to the cul-
tural function of the shawl, it now takes on the dubious roles of a marketing 
lure, a protective shield, and ﬁ
 nally a possible noose. As the girls “paint their 
faces,” one of them explains to Lakshmi another semiotic performance of the 
shawl:
There are special things you need to know about how to use your shawl, 
 she says.
Flick the ends of your shawl in a come-closer gesture and
You will bring the shy men to your bed . . . 
. . . Draw your shawl to your chin, bend your neck like a peacock.
This will bring the older men to your bed . . . 
Press your shawl to your chin with the back of your hand . . . 
when you must bring a dirty man to your bed. (pp. 142–143)
The reader can now conjecture as to why the girl in the photograph covers her 
mouth. Perhaps it was not a gesture of voiceless submission, but of repulsion. 
The passage concludes ominously with another use of the shawl:


84  Manika Subi Lakshmanan
There is another way to use a shawl, she says . . . 
. . . That new girl, the one in your old room, she says.
Yesterday morning Mumtaz found her hanging from the rafters. (p. 143)
Clearly, the D/discourse is about the annihilating exploitation of women. Cul-
turally prescribed gender roles and economic enslavement are to blame. In her 
foundational 1984 paper “Under Western Eyes: Feminist Scholarship and Colo-
nial Discourse,” Chandra Talpade Mohanty (cited in Brydon, 2000) suggests 
that “the singular, monolithic notion of patriarchy or male dominance leads to 
the construction of a similarly reductive and homogeneous notion of what I call 
the ‘Third World Difference’ – that stable, ahistorical something that appar-
ently oppresses most if not all the women in these countries” (p. 1185). Ratna 
Kapur (2005), who also writes from a framework of postcolonial feminism, 
examines how trafﬁ
 cking and violence against women and sexuality in the con-
text of human rights have served to reinforce the ﬁ
 rst world/third world divide. 
She comments that the prevalent characterization of sex workers as victims of a 
culturally endorsed practice, and the persistence of economic exploitation, is an 
approach “located on an East/West binary and assumes that choice is possible 
in the West, while economic oppression in Asia is so all encompassing, that the 
very possibility of choice or agency is negated” (p. 76).5 hile undoubtedly the 
“fetishism” of selective and homogenous representations persists, in a world of 
cultural hybridity (Bhabha, 1994) and sensitivity to what Abdul JanMohamed 
(1986) referred to as the Manichaean allegory, a critical analysis of D/discourse 
cannot be limited to ferreting out generalizations, differences, and equivalences 
in a text (such as South Asian culture = male dominance); instead, an analy-
sis of power relations needs to identify and describe how these ethical, cul-
tural, and existential models are resisted and changed within the text. In short, 
who has the power to engender change? How does Lakshmi break the shackles 
of a culture portrayed as “simply to endure is to triumph”? How does she dis-
count the calculations of poverty and dependence? How does she get and use 
voice? 
“I Know This Voice. It is My American.”
As the book progresses, Sold actually presents the hybridity of two cultures oper-
ating in India and Nepal: South Asian culture and the globalization of Ameri-
can culture and commodities. In the Himalayan village, culture is a mélange 
of Hindu festivals, cultural practices, and superstitions. But in “Happiness 
House,” American cultural icons become far more active. Though “posters of 
gods” plaster the walls, the practice of religion is not portrayed. Instead, the girls 
watch The Bold and the Beautiful. Shahanna comments, “It’s from America. It’s 
our favorite show” (p. 136). Similarly, a bottle of Coca-Cola holds promises of 
happiness. Lakshmi is curious about this drink since “the people who drink 
it on TV are happy when its tiny ﬁ
 reworks go off in their mouths” (p. 235). 
McCormick is equally wary of falling into facile moral binaries of east/west. 


Neocolonialism in Patricia McCormick’s Sold  85
Lakshmi’s customers include a gentle Indian, a drunken American, and an 
American who promises to take her away to a shelter for girls. 
However, despite the author’s careful calibration of the good, bad, and ugly, 
the power to change Lakshmi’s situation does not come from within South 
Asian society. It is not one of the many South Asian grassroots movements 
(included in the author’s acknowledgements) that comes to Lakshmi’s rescue, 
but an American. I argue that the latent message is that South Asian society 
offers little potential for positive change. Instead, the American abroad is at the 
center of a transformative discourse on literacy and the articulation of individ-
ual identity. For the women of the brothel, literacy is a curse. As Harish, the little 
boy who befriends Lakshmi, cautions: “If they ﬁ
 nd out you can read and write, 
they will think you are planning to escape” (p. 171). Harish goes to a “sing-
ing-and-playing school” run by a “kind” American lady. In this value-added 
package of friendship-innocence-literacy-freedom-America, he represents the 
mediator between the disempowered subaltern and American goodwill. It is he 
who secretly teaches Lakshmi Hindi and even English, while reassuring her that 
she can trust Americans, despite Anita’s warning: 
The Americans will try to trick you into running away . . . . Don’t be 
fooled. They will shame you and make you walk naked through the streets. 
(p. 142)
Soon Lakshmi learns “American words” from a storybook given to Harish by 
the American lady. She can now say:
Big Bird,
Elmo,
ice cream,
soccer. (p. 174)
Literacy is firmly grounded in the tropes of American childhood. Unlike the 
dubious aspirations of The Bold and the Beautiful, this is the “good” humanist 
export of American culture (a Hindi version of Sesame Street, called Galli Galli 
Sim Sim, was released in 2006, the year Sold was published). We are given to 
understand that it is thanks to Harish that the Americans organize a police raid. 
And it is Harish who teaches Lakshmi the words of self-awareness:
“My name is Lakshmi,” . . . 
“I am from Nepal.
 I am thirteen years old.” (p. 192)
These are the words she repeats to herself, and these are the words of freedom, 
that she announces to her liberators. The use of italics in both passages draws 
the reader’s attention to a connection between two Discourses: the positive icons 
of American childhood and the enunciation of her identity. In short, Lakshmi’s 


86  Manika Subi Lakshmanan
identity is articulated in terms of America and literacy. Laclau and Mouffe (1985) 
describe hegemonic discourses as the result of articulation, where articulation 
is a “practice establishing relations among elements such that their identity is 
modiﬁ
 ed as a result of articulatory practice” (p. 105). Torﬁ
 ng (1999) succinctly 
adds that “articulations that take place in a context of antagonistic struggles 
and conﬂ
 icts are deﬁ
 ned as hegemonic articulations” (p. 298). Lakshmi’s self-
deﬁ
 ning articulation is a hegemonic discourse in so far as it is contingent on the 
resolution of a discursive struggle between two political forces: the American as 
friend or foe. The role of the “good” American abroad culminates in the ﬁ
 nal 
episode titled “THE WORDS HARISH TAUGHT ME.”
Stephens (1992) reminds us that “Intentionality can only be fully attributed 
to a text from the perspective of the close” and “Endings reafﬁ
 rm what society 
regards as important issues and preferred outcomes” (pp. 42–43). Seen from 
this perspective, closures often indicate an ideological conclusion to the book’s 
discourse. It is a year since Lakshmi left her village. After “days of waiting for the 
American” who had promised to liberate her, the book concludes with a raid, 
and Lakshmi’s reassurance that “her” American has arrived:
I know this voice. It is my American . . . 
It is an American, I whisper . . . 
The American is shouting something . . . he is calling out to me . . . 
I cannot go to my American . . . 
But I can still hear the American . . . 
The American calls out . . . 
My American is leaving . . . Something inside me breaks open, and I run 
 down the steps . . . 
I see my American. There are other men with him, Indian men, and the 
 American lady from the picture.
“My name is Lakshmi”, I say.
“I am from Nepal.
I am fourteen years old.”(p. 263)
This is a political ending. Gee’s ﬁ
 fth building task is politics. Gee asks: “What 
is the politics of the situation, who has what status and power over when and 
where? (2006, p. 174). In this brief concluding episode of three pages, the word 
“American” occurs nine times. Notably, it is a political Discourse on the trust-
worthy commitment of the good American abroad, and not about collective 
or indigenous social change. This liberal humanist focus on individual agency 
as evidence of a possible challenge to systems and its eventual transformation 
dismisses the context of the social, economic, and historical. Most importantly, 
the narrative of the American as liberator discounts homegrown movements. 
The reality on the ground says otherwise. In the book’s coda of acknowledge-
ments, McCormick writes:
This book could not have been written without the help of Ruchira Gupta 
and Anuradha Koriala, who paved the way for me to visit the Maiti Nepal 


Neocolonialism in Patricia McCormick’s Sold  87
shelter for women and children in Kathmandu; the village of Goldbungha 
in the Himalayas, and the Deepika Social Welfare Center for Women and 
Children in the red-light district of Calcutta.
It is unfortunate that considering the courageous work done by several Nepali 
and Indian women, Sold portrays the “third world” woman as one whose lib-
eration and identity cannot emerge from within her own society and culture. 
One can of course dismiss the American presence as a necessary narrative ploy 
that makes the text relevant to an implied American reader. It can also be read 
as an instructive narrative about a nation’s export of goodwill, individual free-
dom, and enlightened modernity. From a humanitarian point of view, one may 
argue that the right to protect (R2P) is above and beyond nations, cultures, and 
ideologies. Others may contend that imagination is an artistic license which 
should not be conﬂ
 ated with political nuances. 
Whether the novel’s conclusion is a response to an implied market, a reflec-
tion of political models (not necessarily mutually exclusive), or is validated by 
its firm ethical footing, the question still remains as to how knowing and under-
standing “the other world” finds its resolution in praiseworthy American inter-
vention. It is a moot question if one considers the current scenario of interna-
tional relations. As Homi Bhabha (1990) puts it, the people are “constructed in 
the performance of narrative” (p. 299). The people are also constructed through 
the performance of education. In an attempt to investigate how institutions (in 
this case the publisher) further the educational “performance” of a narrative, I 
turned to publisher Hyperion’s discussion guide. Students are asked to consider: 
“What was the most disturbing part of this story for you? What facts crawled 
under your skin and continue to haunt you? Do you think there is anything you 
can do to help? What?” It appears that emotive empathy with the protagonist 
is the privileged way of understanding what happens beneath the surface. Even 
“facts” crawl “under your skin,” grafting the “other side of the world.” I suggest 
that the pedagogical enterprise of privileging ways of knowing that heighten 
individuation and relationships that are de-contextualized may induce empathy 
with a human condition, but an enthusiasm for individuals as the source of 
meaning, action, and change, is untenable because the supporting framework 
of political and socioeconomic assumptions is not accounted for. 
Constructing the “Third World” Narrative
This chapter began with the question: How does the enactment of significance, 
activities, identities, relationships, connections, and knowledge practices condition 
the political discourse on individual/social change in literature written by North 
Americans about “third world” developing countries? Operationalizing Gee’s 
seven building tasks used to “create or build the world of activities” (2006, 
p. 10) has helped me reveal the discursive conditions which lead us to accept a 
D/discourse in which emancipatory change comes primarily from an American 
presence. 


88  Manika Subi Lakshmanan
First, I would conclude that an analysis of the book cover, text, and discus-
sion guides reveals that the hegemonic political discourse on individual/social 
change in developing countries is contingent on the positive equivalence of 
a chain of activities: friendship-literacy-enunciation of consciousness-the 
American-liberation. Second, the efﬁ
 cacy of this chain of equivalence (to use 
a Laclauian term) depends on an oppositional relationship with another set. 
For example, in Sold, connections are drawn between culture-gender disem-
powerment-poverty-sexual exploitation. These connections negate the possi-
bility of change from within the “third world.” Operating from this premise, 
the promise of individual/social transformation is now open to a neocolonial 
discourse which portrays the subaltern third-worlder’s identity as “incapable 
of deﬁ
 ning itself” (Said, 1979, p. 301) in an autonomous frame of reference. 
Roderick McGillis’ description of neocolonialism comes to mind: “neocolo-
nialism manifests itself as both a depiction of minority cultures as inveterately 
other and inferior in some ways to the dominant European or Eurocentric 
culture” (2000, p. xxiv). Third, when the macro signiﬁ
 cance deals with human 
rights violations, questioning who has the power to engender change or how 
the subaltern is voiced becomes irrelevant. In such cases, it would even be 
immoral to talk about covert political deployment. This de-politicization of 
Discourse models is furthered in educational knowledge practices that promote 
affective engagement and a heightened individuation that is de-contextualized 
and un-problematized. By foregrounding personal engagement, the underly-
ing political discourse is obscured. And by continuing the dichotomy between 
West and the rest, “the other side of the world” is then once again proved to be 
incompetent. Nonetheless, it bears repeating that the importance of literature 
lies precisely in its potential to provoke a dialogue that is willing to confront 
ambiguities, fathom complexities, and challenge comfortable assumptions. 
This chapter is an attempt to stir, and bring to the surface, the kind of reﬂ
 ection 
from which such learning is launched. 
Conclusion
Learning has been described as a “community of practice” (Lave & Wenger, 
2002) or a “way of talking about the shared historical and social resources, 
frameworks, and perspectives that can sustain mutual engagement in action” 
(Wenger, 1998, p. 5). If learning activates communal identity, the problem 
for global relationships is clear. How does one veer away from the pitfalls of 
divisive parochialism? Or, as Gee (2008) observes, “with the notion of a ‘com-
munity’ we can’t go any further until we have defined who is in and who is 
not, since otherwise we can’t identify the community” (p. 88). When reading 
and re-reading Sold, I was constantly reminded that in the case of literature 
about the world, transformative learning is the willingness to question the 
“communities of practice” we are entrenched in, and identify how the text and 
image defines “who is in and who is not” part of that shared “engagement in 
action.”


Neocolonialism in Patricia McCormick’s Sold  89
Reading Sold through a postcolonial and neocolonial lens would have imme-
diately directed me to the exclusion of the “third world’s” potential in engaging 
with the telos of human emancipation. So why combine it with CDA? To begin 
with, CDA and multimodal analysis strengthen postcolonial/neocolonial dis-
course analysis, giving it a systematic process-oriented methodology that can 
translate theory into a critical praxis of reading. In fact, CDA, social semiotic 
theories, and postcolonial theories form a compatible set of analytical tools, 
sharing a common concern with the imbrications between discourse, ideol-
ogy, power, identity, and practice. Combined, this ‘tool-kit’ can lay bare how a 
book’s D/discourse places the reader in naturalized subject positions of power 
with respect to the disenfranchised. Finally, a ‘third world’ perspective satisfies 
what Fairclough described as socially transformative learning: “a relatively high 
degree of dialogicality and orientation to difference” (2004, p. 233). 
CDA, postcolonial and neocolonial theories are all concerned with the exer-
cise of power. Yet, while analyzing Sold, I became aware that power circulates 
ubiquitously, both within the text and in the interpreter. In the book, Lakshmi’s 
father, the brothel owner, and the American all exercised power over her iden-
tity. In tandem with each of these narrative sites of power, I too weighed in with 
the loci of my identities: the independent woman, the Indian-American, the 
third-worlder, the educator, and the researcher. As a woman, my sentiments 
tugged me unequivocally toward female empowerment, in whatever way that 
may come about. As an Indian-American who has lived in the United States for 
16 years, I still harbor the innate pride of a third-worlder who is always aware 
of a selective and enduring genealogy in the representation of the “third world” 
woman. Growing up in post-independence India, I belonged to a generation 
which knew about US journalist Katherine Mayo’s justiﬁ
 cation of British rule 
and her searing attack on Indian nationalism. In her infamous book Mother 
India (1927), Mayo gave a detailed account of public health in India and more 
explicitly the sexual practices of the Indian woman. Mahatma Gandhi famously 
referred to Mayo’s book as the “drain-inspector’s report.” What remains of 
this dubious legacy is the specter of how others choose to see the South Asian 
woman. As a teacher of children’s and young adult literature about the world, 
I grapple with the daunting task of balancing universal values with a principle 
of difference and autonomy. And as a critic, I am acutely aware that the bridge 
between analysis and interpretation is always suspect. It is a difﬁ
 cult position 
to be in. Yet, it is the awareness of the multiple and frequently conﬂ
 icting sites 
of our identities that strengthens how we analyze, learn, and interpret. Weaving 
into the text and out of ourselves, we can bring context and complexity to the 
way we look at the world.
Notes
1 Young (2003) has this to say about the contemporary use of the term “third world”: 
“At the Bandung Conference of 1955, 29 mostly newly independent African and Asian 
countries . . . initiated what became known as the non-aligned movement. They saw 
themselves as an independent power bloc, with a new ‘third world’ perspective on 


90  Manika Subi Lakshmanan
political, economic, and cultural global priorities”(p. 17). This was a time when the 
world was divided into two major political systems, capitalism (the ﬁ
 rst world) and 
socialism (the second world).
2 American Library Association’s 2007 Top Ten Best Books for Young Adults; Booklist 
Editors’ Choice (Youth), 2006; Children’s Literature Council’s Choice, 2007; National 
Book Award ﬁ
 nalist, 2006; Publishers Weekly, Best 100 Books of 2006; YALSA Best 
Books for Young Adults 2007.
3 In An Introduction to Discourse Analysis: Theory and Method, Gee (2006) states that, 
“a discourse analyst can ask seven different questions about any piece of language-in-
use” (p. 11). These are:
 Signiﬁ
 cance: “How is this piece of language being used to make certain things signiﬁ
 -
cant or not and in what ways?”
 Activities: “What activity or activities is this piece of language being used to enact (i.e. 
get others to recognize as going on?”
 Identities: “What identity or identities is this piece of language being used to enact 
(i.e. get others to recognize as operative?”
 Relationships: “What sort of relationship or relationships is this piece of language 
seeking to enact with others (present or not)?”
 Politics: “What perspective on social goods is this piece of language communicating 
(i.e. what is being communicated as to what is taken to be ‘normal,’ ‘right,’ ‘good,’ 
‘correct,’ ‘proper,’ ‘appropriate,’ ‘valuable,’ ‘the way things are,’ ‘the way things ought 
to be,’ ‘the high status or low status,’ ‘like me or not like me,’ and so forth?”
 Connections: “How does this piece of language connect or disconnect things; how 
does it make one thing relevant or irrelevant to another?” 
 Sign systems and knowledge: “How does this piece of knowledge privilege or disprivi-
lege speciﬁ
 c sign systems (e.g. Spanish vs. English, technical language vs. everyday 
language, words vs. images, words vs. equations) or different ways of knowing and 
believing or claims to knowledge and belief?”(Gee, 2006, pp. 11–13). 
4 Torﬁ
 ng (1999) describes dislocation as the “destabilization of a discourse that results 
from the emergence of events which cannot be domesticated, symbolized or inte-
grated within the discourse in question” (p. 301).
5 A salient example of collective agency is the Kolkata based sex workers’ union. In 
1995, the Durbar Mahila Samanwaya Committee (DMSC) formed a forum of trans-
gender, male, and female sex workers and their children. Demanding their right to 
form a trade union, they lobbied for their basic human rights, security for their chil-
dren, old age support and better working conditions. As their program director put 
it, “They work with their bodies and hence they want workers’ rights” (The Times of 
India, 2005). The DMSC’s “Sex Workers Manifesto” has been taken up by other sex 
workers’ unions in India. A copy can be downloaded from the website of Network of 
Sex Work Projects (www.nswp.org/rights/dmsc), an international organization oper-
ating in 40 countries. 
References
Barthes, R. (1972). Mythologies (A. Lavers, Trans.). New York: Hill and Wang. (Original 
work published 1957)
Barthes, R. (1977). Image-music-text. New York: Hill and Wang.
Benhabib, S. (2002). The claims of culture: Equality and diversity in the global era. Princ-
eton: Princeton University Press.


Neocolonialism in Patricia McCormick’s Sold  91
Bhabha, H. K. (1990). DissemiNation: Time, narrative, and the margins of the 
modern nation. In H. K. Bhabha (Ed.), Nation and narration (pp. 291–322). New 
York: Routledge.
Bhabha, H. K. (1994). The location of culture. New York: Routledge .
Bishop, R. S. (1990). Mirrors, windows and sliding glass doors. Perspectives, 6, ix–xi.
Botelho, M. J., & Rudman, M. K. (2009). Critical multicultural analysis of children’s 
literature: Mirrors, windows, and doors. New York: Routledge.
Childs, P., & Williams, P. (1997). An introduction to post-colonial theory. New York: 
Prentice Hall.
Eagleton, T. (1991). Ideology: An introduction. New York: Verso.
Eagleton, T. (2000). The idea of culture. Malden, MA: Blackwell.
Fairclough, N. (1992). Discourse and social change. Cambridge, UK: Polity.
Fairclough, N. (1995). Critical discourse analysis: The critical study of language. New 
York: Longman.
Fairclough, N. (2004). Semiotic aspects of social transformation and learning. In An 
introduction to critical discourse analysis in education (pp. 225–235). Mahwah, NJ: 
Lawrence Erlbaum.
Fowler, R. (1977). Linguistics and the novel. London: Methuen.
Fowler, R. (1981). Literature as social discourse: The practice of linguistic criticism. Bloom-
ington, IN: Indiana University Press.
Gee, J. P. (2006). An introduction to discourse analysis: theory and method (2nd ed.). New 
York: Routledge Taylor and Francis. (Original work published 1999)
Gee, J. P. (2008). Good video games + good learning: Collected essays on video games, 
learning and literacy. New York: Peter Lang.
Hadaway, N. L. (2007). Building bridges to understanding. In Breaking boundaries with 
global literature: Celebrating diversity in K–12 classrooms (pp. 1–6) [Introduction]. 
Newark, DE: International Reading Association.
Hodge, R. (1990). Literature as discourse: Textual strategies in English and history. 
Baltimore: The Johns Hopkins University Press.
Hodge, R., & Kress, G. (1993). Language as ideology. New York: Routledge.
JanMohamed, A. (1986). The economy of Manichean allegory: The function of racial 
difference in colonialist literature. In H. L. Gates (Ed.), Race, writing, and difference 
(pp. 78–106). Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Kapur, R. (2005). Erotic justice: Law and the new politics of postcolonialism. Portland, 
OR: Cavendish.
Kress, G., & van Leeuwen, T. (1996). Reading images: The grammar of visual design. New 
York: Routledge.
Kress, G., & van Leeuwen, T. (2001). Multimodal discourse: The modes and media of 
contemporary communication. London: Oxford University Press.
Laclau, E. & Mouffe, C. (1985). Hegemony and socialist strategy: Towards a radical demo-
cratic politics (W. Moore & P. Cammack, Trans.). Thetford, Norfolk, UK: The Thet-
ford Press.
Lakshmanan, M. (2009). Reading Canadian children’s literature as models of interna-
tional relations. Journal of Children’s Literature, 3(1), 68–88.
Lave, J., & Wenger, E. (2002). Situated learning: Legitimate peripheral participation. New 
York: Cambridge University Press. (Original work published 1991)
Lepman, J. (1969). A bridge of children’s books (E. McCormick, Trans.). Chicago: Ameri-
can Library Association.
Lewis, G. (2007). Fighting a crime that shames us all. In Speech by Mr. Gary Lewis, 


92  Manika Subi Lakshmanan
Representative, UNODC, South Asia at Commonwealth Parliamentary Association, 
New Delhi, 27 September 2007 [Speech]. Retrieved October 12, 2009, from United 
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime website: http://www.unodc.org/india/en/gl_
cwpa_27sept.html
McCormick, P. (n.d.). Author interview. In Patricia McCormick. Retrieved October 12, 
2009, from http://www.pattymccormick.com/index.php?mode=objectlist&section_ 
id=115&object_id=152
McCormick, P. (2006). Sold. New York: Hyperion.
McGillis, R. (2000). Introduction. In Voices of the other: Children’s literature and the 
postcolonial context (pp. xix–xxxi). New York: Routledge.
McKenna, M. J. (2007). Transformative literature: A teaching/learning model for using 
global literature to positively influence our world. In M. J. McKenna & N. L. Hadaway 
(Eds.), Breaking boundaries with global literature (pp. (165–180)). Newark, DE: Inter-
national Reading Association.
Mohanty, C. T. (2000). Under Western eyes: Feminist scholarship and colonial dis-
course. In D. Brydon (Ed.), Postcolonialism: Critical concepts, Vol. 3 (pp. 1183–1209). 
New York: Routledge.
Said, E. W. (1979). Orientalism. New York: Vintage Books.
Said, E. W. (1994). Culture and imperialism. New York: Vintage Books.
Sontag, S. (2003). Regarding the pain of others. New York: Farrar, Straus and Giroux.
Spivak, G. C. (1990). The post-colonial critic: Interviews, strategies, dialogues (S. Harasym, 
Ed.). New York: Routledge.
Stan, S. (2002). Books as bridges. In S. Stan (Ed.), The world through children’s books 
(pp. 27–37). Lanham, MD: The Scarecrow Press.
Stephens, J. (1992). Language and ideology in children’s fiction. New York: Longman.
Tagg, J. (1988). The burden of representation. Amherst, MA: University of 
Massachusetts.
Torfing, J. (1999). New theories of discourse: Laclau, Mouffe and Žižek. Malden, MA: 
Blackwell.
Traugott, E. C., & Pratt, M. L. (1980). Linguistics for students of literature. New York: 
Harcourt Brace Jovanovich.
van Dijk, T. A. (1985). Discourse and literature. Philadelphia: John Benjamins.
van Dijk, T. A. (1998). Ideology: A multidisciplinary approach. Thousand Oaks, CA: 
Sage.
Wenger, E. (1998). Communities of practice: Learning, meaning, and identity. New York: 
Cambridge University Press.
Yokota, J., & Kolar, J. (2008, January/February). Advocating for peace and justice 
through children’s literature. Social Studies and the Young Leaner, 22–26.
Young, R. J. (2003). Postcolonialism: A very short introduction. New York: Oxford 
University Press.
Zimmer, T. V. (n.d.). Sold [Discussion guide]. Retrieved October 12, 2009, from 
Hyperion website: http://www.hyperionbooksforchildren.com/data/books/dgpdf/ 
07868517161686.pdf


5 
Figured Worlds and 
 
Discourses of Masculinity: 
 
Being a Boy in a Literacy 
 
Classroom
 
Josephine Marsh, Jayne C. Lammers, 
 
Arizona State University
Theories about masculinities (e.g., Coles, 2009; Connell, 2005; Jackson & Salis-
bury, 1996) suggest that there are multiple Discourses (Gee, 1996; 2007; this 
volume) or ways of being and doing masculinity. Discourses of masculinity are 
constructed and reconstructed over time within different social and cultural 
groups. These groups (e.g., families, sports teams, street gangs, literacy profes-
sors, high school English teachers) share conventions about language and activ-
ities such as speaking, writing, reading, acting, interacting, valuing, dressing, 
and so on. In this chapter, we explore the activities and language conventions 
within the Discourses of a Mexican American adolescent who was aspiring to 
be a certain kind of popular male athlete and literacy student. 
Masculinity theories recognize that masculinities and femininities are con-
stituted in relation to one another, and that some Discourses1 of being mascu-
line hold more social status and power than others, depending on the particular 
social contexts (Coles, 2009; Connell, 2005; Jackson & Salisbury, 1996; Reed, 
1999). Often, however, Discourses of masculinity are represented as stable and 
nonnegotiable. For example, machismo, a concept associated with Hispanic 
masculinity, has been represented as a rigid set of practices such as domination 
of women, aggression, confrontational behavior, and a strict division of labor 
in the household (Klein, 2000). Recent research (e.g., Klein, 2000; Arciniega, 
Anderson, Tovar-Blank & Tracey, 2008) found that there are varying degrees 
and dimensions of machismo, and Hispanic men are far more complicated 
and diverse than the generalized concept of machismo might suggest. Still, the 
beliefs associated with the ideals of machismo linger and serve to perpetuate 
rigid stereotypes about Hispanic men. 
Critical discourse analysis allows for the study of the Discourses of mascu-
linity through an analysis of social practices. In this chapter, we (two middle-
class White females) adapted Gee’s (2005; this volume) guidelines for critical 
discourse analysis to explore how Chavo’s (a middle-class, Mexican American, 
18-year-old male) constructions of masculinity shaped his participation in 
school literacy activities and the way that school literacy activities and class-
room contexts, in turn, shaped his understandings of what it meant to be a boy 
in a literacy classroom. 
Chavo was aware, as early as middle school, of the different Discourses of 


94  Josephine Marsh and Jayne C. Lammers
masculinity (e.g., popular male athlete, nerd, skater) that existed at his school. 
To be recognized as a member of the popular male athlete Discourse—a Dis-
course to which he aspired—he took steps to hide his good grades and learned 
ways to pass English courses without reading the required texts. Chavo’s story is 
not unique among adolescent boys. What is unique was his ability to articulate 
the practices/activities of masculinity and literacy that he believed would help 
others recognize him as a certain kind of young man. Chavo was 1 of 21 adoles-
cent males who participated in a narrative inquiry that explored what was hap-
pening with and to them in a variety of literacy classrooms in the southwestern 
United States (Young, Hardenbrook, Esch, Hansen, & Grifﬁ
 th, 2003). Our pur-
poses in highlighting Chavo’s literacy stories in this chapter are twofold: (a) to 
complicate simplistic notions of male stereotypes; and (b) to make visible the 
ways in which critical discourse analysis can allow us to understand the mul-
tiple Discourses that inform our beliefs and understandings of masculinities 
and literacy participation. 
During the year-long study in which Chavo was a participant, Marsh (aka 
Young), along with four other researchers, observed seven adolescent literacy 
classrooms (e.g., English, reading, humanities, and writing) and selected three 
male focal students from each site to observe and interview. We interviewed 
these male students and their teachers and parents about their literacy and gen-
der beliefs and practices. We also wrote weekly ﬁ
 eld notes about the literacy 
class in general and the ways that the focal students participated in it more 
speciﬁ
 cally. 
Meant to add to the growing body of research about boys, masculinities, and 
literacies, the purpose of the study (Young et al., 2003) was to gain an under-
standing of what it is like to be a boy in an adolescent literacy classroom. This 
research was timely given the resurgence of concern over boys’ achievement, 
especially literacy achievement, in schools (e.g., Beaupre, 2003; Lesko, 2000; 
Smith & Wilhelm, 2002). These concerns rose to near panic status in the United 
States after the rash of school violence in late 1990s; statistics showing declines 
in school achievement (Hedges & Nowell, 1995) and male college attendance 
(e.g., Fonda, 2000; Goodman, 2002) were publicized, and boys’ high school 
reading and writing standardized test scores fell (Beaupre, 2003). For example, 
Sommers (2000) suggested that we are waging a war against boys, and Faludi 
(1999) wrote about betraying our boys and men. Our study was particularly 
concerned with the trouble some boys seemed to be having in the area of school 
literacy. For instance, according to the National Center for Education Statistics 
(2000), boys were three to five times more likely than girls to be placed in learn-
ing/reading disabilities classes. Boys in elementary through high school scored 
lower than girls on standardized measures of reading achievement (Hedges 
& Nowell, 1995), and were less likely than girls to enroll in advanced place-
ment (AP) courses in language, literature, and history (College Board, 2007). 
Still, almost 10 years later, our research remains timely as concerns about 
boys’ achievement and the existence of a gender gap continue to garner the 
attention of the media (Cook, 2006; Tyre, 2006) and educational researchers 


Figured Worlds and Discourses of Masculinity  95
(Downey & Vogt-Yuan, 2005; Hammett & Sanford, 2008). However, recent 
National Assessment of Educational Progress (NAEP) results (Mead, 2006) 
do not support the notion that boys’ achievement is continuing to fall. For 
example, fourth- and eighth-grade reading assessment scores on the 2003 test 
show improvement. These data, however, are less clear for older boys, with 
17-year-old boys’ scores falling, but the gap between boys and girls was not 
much different than it was in the 1970s. Boys’ graduation rates are also lower 
than those of their female counterparts, and these differences are magnified 
among Black students (Lloyd, 2007). 
Some educators, journalists, and lawmakers called for (and still call for) 
quick fixes that rely on equal opportunity approaches to curriculum (Brozo & 
Gaskins, 2009; Skelton, 1998). Solutions include returning the so-called femi-
ninized literacy classrooms back to the boys by hiring more male teachers, pro-
viding all-male classrooms and more male literacy role models, and using more 
boy books, which focus on stereotypical male interests (Brozo & Gaskins, 2009; 
Scieszka, 2003). These calls for reform tend to narrowly define masculinity and 
do not take into account race, class, and the long history of the boy problem in 
schools (Griffith, 2009; Tatum, 2008a; Tatum, 2008b; Tyack & Hansot, 1990). 
They also tend to reinforce stereotypical gender roles by pitting boys’ literacy 
needs against girls’ (AAUW, 2009) and promoting a “boys will be boys” ide-
ology (Kimmel, 2000, p. 7). In addition, these solutions have not adequately 
addressed the social complexities inherent in Discourses of masculinity and 
school literacy practices. 
Discussions that theorize masculinities are taking place within literacy edu-
cation (e.g., Alloway, 2007; Blair & Sanford, 2004; Madill, 2009; Martino & 
Kehler, 2007; Tatum, 2008a, 2008b; Young, 2000). These discussions about the 
practices of masculinity enable us to explore the ways that race, ethnicity, and 
social class complicate the picture of boys’ literacy achievements and school 
behaviors (Grifﬁ
 th, 2009; Kimmel, 2000; Tatum, 2008b). They make visible 
the practices of masculinity and includes masculinity in our discussions about 
gender (Kimmel, 2000). Discussions of masculinity also make visible the inﬂ
 u-
ence of social contexts and diversity on how boys do and think about gender 
and literacy and can inform our thinking about ways to engage boys in school 
literacy. It is our intention to highlight some of these complexities through the 
analyses presented in this chapter.
The Gender Order and Discourses of Masculinity 
Certain social practices/activities and Discourses of masculinity come with 
more social status, potential power, and social goods than others. R. W. Connell 
(1987) used the term “gender order” (p. 91) to describe the hierarchies pres-
ent between and among the different ways of being masculine and feminine. 
He theorized that the Discourses of masculinity interact with institutional and 
societal relations to negotiate and construct hierarchies and differences. These 
differences and hierarchies are known as the gender order and are inﬂ
 uenced 


96  Josephine Marsh and Jayne C. Lammers
by race, class, age, and sexual orientation. In addition, the gender order is not 
static; it is constantly changing and creating relations of power between men 
and women and among men. The gender order describes the political nature 
of Discourses of masculinity and is important to keep in mind when thinking 
about boys and literacy because it works to limit the way boys and men par-
ticipate in literate activities in and out of school. For instance, boys and men 
who strive for membership in a more dominant Discourse (one that deﬁ
 nes a 
real man) may adopt particular literacy practices that they believe will identify 
them as a member of that particular real man Discourse. These practices might 
include liking books with action-ﬁ
 lled plots, identifying with male characters 
not female ones, and selecting books and other texts written by and about men; 
or they might include withholding all participation in school literacy practices. 
In other words, boys who wish to be viewed as a boy of a certain sort (e.g., 
jocks, nerds, skaters, gays) must “talk the talk” and “walk the walk” (Gee, 2005, 
p. 21). They must learn to read (or not read), write (or not write), and so on 
like others who claim membership in that particular Discourse of masculinity. 
This learning takes place as they interact with others over time within particular 
social contexts. 
Critical Discourse Analysis 
This research depicts stories recalled by Chavo, his mother, and his humanities 
teacher of Chavo’s lived literacy experiences. The stories were told to me (ﬁ
 rst 
author, Marsh) during individual semi-structured interviews with Chavo, his 
mother, and his teacher, and they reﬂ
 ect my observations in Chavo’s senior-
level honors humanities classroom over a 6-month period and my informal 
observations of him in the sports arena for several years. As I constructed the 
stories for this chapter, I used four theoretical tools of inquiry suggested by Gee 
(2005; this volume) for critical discourse analysis. The four tools I used were (a) 
Discourses, (b) social languages, (c) situated meanings, and (d) ﬁ
 gured worlds. 
Although all of these were useful in helping me understand the Discourses that 
inﬂ
 uenced Chavo, because of page limitations I focus primarily on ﬁ
 gured 
worlds for this analysis. 
The ﬁ
 rst tool, Discourses, framed the study. I sought to identify the Dis-
courses in which Chavo, his mother, and teacher were members and under-
stand how these Discourses informed their ways of thinking, speaking, reading, 
acting, and so on. The other theoretical tools assisted me in this process and 
offered questions to guide my thinking about the data. The questions, adapted 
from Gee (2005), helped me look closely at the words, how they were put 
together within different social contexts. 
The theoretical tools of social languages and situated meanings assisted my 
analysis. Social language is the way a person speaks or writes to enact a par-
ticular identity (e.g., Chavo’s use of the phase it sucks when he described the 
humanities class to his teammates so that he appeared to be a certain kind of 
guy). Situated meanings or utterance-token meanings (see Gee, this volume), 


Figured Worlds and Discourses of Masculinity  97
refer to the multiple connotations words take on in different contexts. As I 
read the data, I asked questions to help me understand the situated meanings 
constructed and the social languages used during our interviews and informal 
chats. These questions included the following adapted from Gee (2005): What 
social language did Chavo use in his conversation during the interview? How 
did this social language represent him? How did the contexts shape the mean-
ing of his responses? What sorts of discourse patterns indicate this?
In this way, I considered how social language and the situated meanings con-
structed during the interviews inﬂ
 uenced the way participants used language to 
represent themselves and their ideas. For example, during an interview, Chavo 
told me that the humanities class “isn’t motivational.” He used language that 
deﬁ
 ned him as a student within the context of a formal interview with a profes-
sor. Using the terms isn’t motivational helped me to recognize him as an expe-
rienced student—one who knew the lingo of school and one who blamed the 
course for his disinterest. One reasonable meaning that I could infer from this 
statement was that Chavo did not like the class, but he did not want to come out 
and tell me this during the interview. Perhaps he was unsure if I would report 
back to his teacher or mother. Perhaps he did not want me to think less of him 
as a student, so he blamed the course. Interestingly, in speaking about the same 
class to a soccer teammate who was considering signing up for it the following 
year, I overhead Chavo tell him that the course “sucked.” The term sucked in 
this context helped his teammate recognize him as a fellow teenage athlete who 
did not like English courses, especially this one. As with isn’t motivational, the 
terms class sucked also placed the blame for his disinterest and dislike for the 
course on the course, but in more popular terms. In both instances, Chavo used 
social language to enact a particular kind of identity situated within different 
social contexts—one as a student talking to a professor, one as a fellow male 
athlete. 
Figured worlds is the fourth analytical tool suggested by Gee (this volume) 
and the major analytical tool used during this analysis. Applying the concept of 
ﬁ
 gured worlds helped me make visible and understand how Chavo’s construc-
tions of masculinity shaped his literacy practices and how, in turn, his literacy 
practices shaped his understandings of what it meant to be a boy in a literacy 
classroom. Figured worlds, similar to cultural models (Gee, this volume), are 
everyday storylines or theories that help individuals determine what is nor-
mal and typical within a particular Discourse. It is the beliefs, values, and atti-
tudes held that inform what we say and how we act, read, and interact. Figured 
worlds are not static; they change as we interact, read, experience, observe, and 
adapt to new situations, and they mean different things to members of different 
Discourse communities. For example, the ﬁ
 gured world storyline boys will be 
boys means something slightly different to mothers, young boys, adolescents, 
coaches, and teachers. Using ﬁ
 gured worlds as a tool of inquiry led me to ask 
interpretive questions such as: What ﬁ
 gured worlds were relevant to Chavo, his 
mother, and his teacher? How consistent are the ﬁ
 gured worlds throughout the 
study? How do ﬁ
 gured worlds relevant to Chavo, his mother, and his teacher 


98  Josephine Marsh and Jayne C. Lammers
reproduce, transform, and create Discourses and the social practices associated 
with being male in adolescent literacy classrooms? 
To construct stories about Chavo’s literacy practices/activities, I ﬁ
 rst read 
and reread the data many times and asked the questions of the data related to 
Gee’s theoretical tools (2005; this volume). I selected snippets from the inter-
view transcripts and observational data that seemed to answer my research 
question about what it was like for Chavo to participate in literacy classrooms 
and how his constructions of masculinity might have shaped his participation 
in school literacy. I organized the transcripts into lines and stanzas as deﬁ
 ned by 
Gee (2005). Each line consisted of a single idea unit or a small piece of informa-
tion, and a set of connected lines that were about a theme, perspective, topic, 
or image was considered a stanza. In other words, I left large portions of the 
transcripts intact and did not rearrange the lines of the transcripts. I titled each 
stanza to help me determine themes and perspectives of the speakers. The fol-
lowing is a stanza I titled Chavo Used to Read. It represents an idea unit repre-
sented by a snippet of intact transcript. 
Chavo Used to Read 
In sixth grade, ah, 
we had a list of all the honors’ books and 
I had my mom go pick up like four or ﬁ
 ve of those during the summer. 
In sixth grade and 
I read them all and then seventh and eighth grade 
I just, I don’t know, I just decided not to do that anymore. 
I then constructed a 27-stanza narrative that wove together transcripts from 
interviews I conducted with Chavo, his mother, and his teacher. Using Chavo’s 
transcripts as the foundation for each stanza, I selected transcripts from Cha-
vo’s mother and teacher that informed Chavo’s words. This sort of multi-vocal 
transcript provided me with a fuller picture of Chavo and his ﬁ
 gured worlds. 
It allowed me to ask analytical questions of the data and to make hypotheses 
about how the activities and beliefs about masculinity of each speaker were 
constitutive. I then separated the stanzas back by speaker in an effort to repre-
sent different perspectives about Chavo’s literacy and masculinity. 
In the following section, I present stories about Chavo’s literacies and mas-
culinities in the words of Chavo’s mother, teacher, and Chavo himself. I con-
structed stories using the word-for-word transcripts of the interviews with his 
mother, his teacher, and Chavo. I took out sound representations such as “um,” 
“ah,” and false starts to make the text more easily read (Institute of Oral His-
tory, 2001). I also deleted my interview questions that elicited these responses. I 
reorganized the stanzas for the purpose of connecting ideas or themes, but did 
not rearrange the lines within each stanza, thus leaving most of the transcripts 
intact. Then within each story of Chavo, I took apart the transcript again and 
looked carefully at the form and function of the words spoken by each par-
ticipant. For example, to understand the ﬁ
 gured worlds that were relevant to 


Figured Worlds and Discourses of Masculinity  99
Theresa, Chavo’s mother, about her son’s literate life, I found that her use of 
reported speech (dialogue used in retellings of events such as I said . . ., he said
. . .) served as evidence to support the ﬁ
 gured worlds informing her beliefs. I then 
isolated the reported speech and organized it into stanzas. This microanalysis of 
the transcripts helped me see more clearly how Theresa perceived Chavo’s liter-
acy experiences and facilitated my interpretation of the function that reported 
speech played in Theresa’s story of Chavo. Likewise, in Ms. Brown’s story of 
Chavo, I found her use of two descriptive nominalizations (compound nouns 
used to name a certain kind of person, place, thing—e.g., a literature kid or a 
man’s man) and reported speech to be powerful in determining the ﬁ
 gured 
worlds important to her. For Chavo’s story, I focused my analysis on his use of 
I-statements (e.g., I know, I read) during the microanalysis of his transcripts. In 
each case, I isolated the speciﬁ
 c words (e.g., nominalizations or I-statements) 
and thought carefully about what they were telling me about ﬁ
 gured worlds 
and Discourse. 
Stories of Chavo’s Adolescent Literacy Experiences 
From His Mother’s Perspective
Chavo’s mother, Theresa, is Hispanic and the mother of four sons. Chavo is 
the next to youngest. For many years, she stayed at home with the boys and 
participated in their school and after-school activities. She recalled that Chavo 
spent long hours putting puzzles together when he was preschool age, and that 
he loved to sit on her lap and be read to when he was young. He would snuggle 
up to her and ask her to read his favorite books. In fact, he was so interested in 
reading at an early age that she taught him to read before he entered kindergar-
ten. Later when he was a bit older, Chavo’s father took over the nightly reading 
by reading aloud to Chavo and his three brothers from classic and popular 
novels. 
Literacy was an important part of Chavo’s household. Both parents are 
strong readers, and the family always deemed education an essential aspect 
of their lives. As young children, Chavo and the brother closest in age to him 
played creatively, much of the time without toys, making up their own stories 
and games. As they grew up, they played outside sports with the neighborhood 
boys and engaged in computer games together and alone. When Chavo entered 
high school and his younger brother was in middle school, Theresa went back 
to school to become a licensed social worker. Chavo saw her reading and study-
ing during the years in which she pursued her master’s degree. He also observed 
his Euro-American father, a public health physician and university instructor, 
studying his medical journals, writing a textbook, and grading medical student 
papers. Chavo was surrounded at home by people who read and wrote, and 
never lacked literacy-related texts and tools—books, magazines, newspapers, 
computers, paper, and so on. In fact, Theresa reported that Chavo read the 
sports section of the newspaper every day. The following snapshot presented in 


100  Josephine Marsh and Jayne C. Lammers
Theresa’s voice is a brief overview of her memories about Chavo’s past partici-
pation in school literacy activities. 
Figured World 1: Chavo Was Not Challenged at School
I. 
Chavo was reading by the time he was in kindergarten, 
And, so by the time he got to ﬁ
 rst grade, 
He was in the top reading group. 
He always did like rules and he always followed them. 
It was important for him, too, for other kids to follow the rules. 
And if they didn’t, that’s when he had a bit of a problem. 
I think he had beautiful handwriting. 
Chavo was one of the best printers, 
But he worked really hard at writing so that it was done within the lines and 
by the rules. 
And I think, in elementary school, 
He was really fairly popular 
 
simply because he was hardly ever in trouble. 
But I think that his love for reading was always there. 
He did a lot of reading all the time. 
II. 
In middle school, they did a lot of group stuff. 
Chavo was one of their better students, 
Followed all the rules, did all the things he was supposed to. 
He would end up doing all the work so that the group could end up getting a 
high grade. 
He worked really hard. 
I think towards the end of eighth grade, he wasn’t being challenged enough in 
his classes. 
And he got by. 
Even his written work, I started noticing, [the work was] not the quality that it 
had been. 
I could tell and I questioned him about it and said, 
“Chavo, what is going on here?” 
And he said, “Well, it doesn’t matter. They don’t care. I’m still getting A’s.” 
So, I basically got the group of teachers together 
and I said, “You know, you’re losing him because he’s not being challenged.” 
And, one of his teachers, I think his English teacher actually said to me, 
“He’s still making very high grades.” 


Figured Worlds and Discourses of Masculinity  101
And I said, “He may be doing that but I am telling you the quality of his work 
has really gone down.” 
III. 
I tried to convince Chavo that he ought to go to St. Anthony’s (a Catholic 
boys’ prep school) so he would be challenged. 
And instead, we compromised by taking honors classes at the high school. 
And he actually got into the [high school honors] program and he did very well. 
IV. 
But I think that as time went on 
and he got interested in cross-country, 
I think that he lost the interest [in academics]. 
It [running] was very, very satisfying to him. 
I think a lot of that has to do with the fact 
that he was very much more interested [in running], 
It is very demanding and it physically wears you out. 
But I think the other half of that is that, 
I don’t think that he really had a challenge. 
And all honors meant was that it was more homework. 
It wasn’t necessarily more interesting. 
Figured World 2: Being male has nothing to do with it 
I think that with Chavo, because of his really deep love for learning, 
I don’t think that [being a boy] ever mattered to him, 
 
what anyone would say, or kid him about doing his homework, or being a 
good student. 
He thrives on being a good student. 
I mean, that is a really big thing for him to be able to accomplish. 
But, when I think of him being male, I think that he very early ﬁ
 gured out 
 
that, ﬁ
 rst of all that he loved to learn these things, 
 
but second of all, because of his rules, he knew that in order for him to 
play sports, 
 
he was gonna have to make the grades. 
I think that made sense to him . . . 
And I think the overall riding factor in that was that he does have a real huge 
love for learning. 
Two ﬁ
 gured worlds seemed to inform Theresa’s perspective about Chavo’s 
literacy and academic achievement. The ﬁ
 rst one, and perhaps the most strik-
ing, was the ﬁ
 gured world that teachers are responsible for making school chal-
lenging and motivating for all students. Chavo began school as a motivated 
student and always tried to do his best. He was a good student and knew that a 
good student followed the rules. He had a love for reading that was facilitated 


102  Josephine Marsh and Jayne C. Lammers
at home. Beginning in eighth grade, things started to change for Chavo. His 
mother believed that this was at least in part due to the fact that his teachers did 
not challenge him to achieve more than the status quo. He learned quickly by 
the middle school teachers’ responses to his work that he could get an A with-
out working very hard or even doing the same quality work he had produced 
in the past. Theresa went to the school to point out this observation and was 
greeted by a teacher who did not seem to understand her concerns because, 
after all, Chavo was still making A’s. 
What Chavo did ﬁ
 nd challenging in high school was running cross-coun-
try. Cross-country challenged him physically and mentally. He ran long cross-
country courses through the deserts of the Southwest, over terrain full of cacti, 
snakes, and rocks in hot August and September temperatures. Theresa observed 
her son running and perceived that running competitively was very satisfying 
and challenging for her son. He was animated after running and was a cheer-
leader for his teammates who ran slower than he. 
The second ﬁ
 gured world relevant to Theresa’s thinking about Chavo’s lit-
eracy was that gender had nothing to do with his participation in school lit-
eracy and other academics. She believed that peer pressure from the other kids 
in school had nothing to do with Chavo’s doing or not doing his work. The 
only thing about being male that may have inﬂ
 uenced Chavo, according to his 
mother, was his respect for rules—speciﬁ
 cally, the rule that stated he had to 
make good grades to play high school sports. 
To identify and describe the ﬁ
 gured worlds that were relevant to Theresa, I 
looked closely at what she said and listened to how she said it. The tone of her 
voice changed as she told stories about Chavo’s literacy. Her voice was warm 
with the memories of Chavo learning to read and becoming a reader and good 
student. When retelling about Chavo’s middle school years, her voice reﬂ
 ected 
the anger and disappointment she felt about Chavo’s experiences with some of 
his teachers. She spoke quickly and with much animation as she retold his mid-
dle school, emphasizing her belief that teachers had a responsibility to make 
school challenging and motivating. 
Another way Theresa represented relevant ﬁ
 gured worlds was through her 
use of dialogue or reported speech within her interview with me. Reported 
speech served several functions (Myers, 1999), including giving evidence, mak-
ing stories more vivid and interesting, and shifting the focus of attention from 
the speaker. As Theresa told stories about Chavo’s past literacy experiences, she 
included reported speech that depicted her past experiences with Chavo and 
his teachers and provided evidence of the ﬁ
 gured worlds relevant to her. For 
example, when she described her meeting with his teachers, she selected speech 
that best represented her belief that teachers should present challenging learn-
ing opportunities for students (e.g., “You know, you’re losing him because he’s 
not being challenged”) and her belief that the teachers did not believe in the 
same way (e.g., “He’s still making very high grades”; “They [the teachers] don’t 
care, I’m still getting A’s”). Her use of reported speech was powerful and served 
to emphasize and support her beliefs. 


Figured Worlds and Discourses of Masculinity  103
From Chavo’s Teacher’s Perspective 
Chavo’s honors humanities teacher was Ms. Brown. She was a 30-year vet-
eran English teacher and chair of the English department. Her passion for the 
humanities and teaching was evident in and out of the classroom. She was a 
humanities major in college until she realized she needed to broaden her ﬁ
 eld 
to English if she wanted a teaching position. She told stories of the Greeks and 
Romans with such intensity and excitement that often I forgot to write ﬁ
 eld 
notes about what her students were doing at the moment. I was enthralled by 
her stories and found her to be an engaging storyteller. Most notable was her 
desire for her students to love the humanities. She believed that humanities was 
more than literature—it was a world of ideas. 
Many of the students in her class were leaders in the school and most were 
very high achievers. She expected high-quality written and oral participation 
from these students and usually got it. Ms. Brown was very proud of her stu-
dents, and she believed that most had been raised as renaissance people. By 
this she meant that they were raised to believe they could be good at anything 
regardless of their gender. Because of this, she posited, gender was not a factor 
in determining how the students participated in this class. She believed that the 
boys participated “every bit as much as her girls,” and she explained the lack 
of boys in the class (6 of the 25 students were male) as a consequence of other 
senior English course offerings such as regular senior English and creative writ-
ing. However, she held other notions about who were and were not humanities 
or literature kids that were not so visible. 
Figured world 3: Chavo Is Not a Literature Kid
I. 
Nothing, I know nothing about Chavo. 
I said to Chavo about a month or six weeks ago 
I said “Chavo, I know you don’t like this class.” 
I said, “You remind me so much of my daughter, she didn’t like it either and I 
know your mother’s making you stay in here.” 
I said, “but would you just smile at me once in a while.” =
II. 
He must be so bored with this stuff. 
He would never, you know, I don’t know if Chavo reads on his own, 
 
but I would venture to guess if it’s not a sports magazine or a soccer 
journal, 
 
he doesn’t. 
He is not a literature kid from my perspective. 
He’s gotta B in the class. 
No, it’s not an easy class. 
And he does his work 


104  Josephine Marsh and Jayne C. Lammers
But he doesn’t love it. 
It’s not awful. 
It’s just not inspired. 
III. 
Chavo has never voluntarily participated in the discussions all year. 
He has never opened his mouth unless I call on him and then he gets all 
spazzled. 
So I don’t do that anymore because I don’t want to embarrass him. 
I’m just trying to bring him in. 
So, now I just wait, but he’s been more jovial. 
He’s smiling a bit more. 
But he is deﬁ
 nitely not a humanities kid. 
IV. 
And I don’t know if it’s because he’s a boy or not . . . 
My daughter is not a boy, she’s quite tomboyish (chuckle) [she did not like 
the humanities class] So I don’t know whether that’s just gender. 
I’d say with my daughter, (laughingly) she had too many headers [soccer 
term for passing the ball with one’s head] and maybe that’s Chavo’s 
problem. 
No, he doesn’t seem, not bright, he’s just not interested. 
V. 
It’s not like there’s not precedent, my two best discussers are boys. 
It’s not like he couldn’t if he wanted to. I don’t know that it’s a gender issue. 
Unless all boys are interested in math and science and all girls are interested in 
literacy, but I don’t think that’s true anymore. 
I just think that it’s a Chavo issue. 
I don’t think it’s gender . . . 
He is my least enthusiastic student. 
One of the ﬁ
 gured worlds that seemed relevant to Ms. Brown was that not 
all kids were literature or humanities kids. Along with that model, like Cha-
vo’s mother, Ms. Brown held the cultural model that gender had nothing to 
do with participation or enrollment in the honor humanities class. Ms. Brown 
appeared to have a picture in her mind about who were and were not literature 
or humanities kids. They could be male or female; in fact, she believed her 
best discussers were male. She also knew who were not literature or humani-
ties kids—her daughter, a tomboyish athlete, was not a humanities kid, and 
neither was Chavo. Her belief that certain kids were or were not literature kids 
seemed strong and most likely inﬂ
 uenced her interaction with these students. 
For example, she stopped trying to get Chavo involved in class after seemingly 
embarrassing him by asking him questions. She ﬁ
 nally just asked him to smile 
once in a while. She denied that being male might have inﬂ
 uenced how Chavo 


Figured Worlds and Discourses of Masculinity  105
participated or that being male had anything to do with the lack of boys in her 
class. She believed that Chavo’s disinterest in the class and his lack of participa-
tion was a Chavo issue, nothing more, and she explained that the low number 
of boys enrolled in her class was due to the number of senior English courses 
available. 
To represent the ﬁ
 gured worlds relevant to her, Ms. Brown, like Theresa, 
used reported speech to describe an interaction with Chavo and as support-
ing evidence for the ﬁ
 gured world that some kids are not literature kids. Most 
powerful in her representation of ﬁ
 gured worlds is her use of two descriptive 
nominalizations—literature kid and humanities kid—during the interview. 
By describing Chavo as not being a humanities kid or literature kid, she com-
piled lots of information into a compound noun. It is hard to know the exact 
information that went into the creations of nominalizations by Ms. Brown 
(Fairclough, 2003; Gee, 2005); we would need to know more about Ms. 
Brown’s expectations and experiences as an English teacher to completely 
understand. We are left wondering what the exact characteristics of a litera-
ture kid or humanities kid are, and characteristics of not being one. All we 
really know is that Chavo was not a literature kid, he was the most unenthu-
siastic kid in the class, and his work lacked inspiration. Nominalizations tend 
to turn concretes into new abstract entities (Fairclough, 2003; Gee, 2005), like 
literature or humanities kids. Using the nominalizations effectively named 
him without clearly deﬁ
 ning the process or attributes of being or not being a 
literature/humanities kid. 
From Chavo’s Perspective 
Chavo entered the senior honors humanities classroom with a face of stone 
each day. All expression of affect was erased from his face. He walked in and 
sat down quietly. His face told me (and his teacher) that he did not want to be 
1 of the 6 males in a class of 25 high school honors students. His facial expres-
sions were supported by his actions in the classroom. He rarely spoke in class 
or entered one of the many whole-group discussions. He slouched in his seat, 
looked down or around, and seldom looked at the teacher. Often he closed his 
eyes or put his head on his desk. 
It was hard for me to believe that this was the same guy who was captain 
of the cross-country and soccer teams. My two sons were on the same high 
school soccer team as Chavo, so I had observed him for 3 years as a student 
athlete. He was a leader and motivator. He was a role model for the other 
guys on and off the soccer ﬁ
 eld. He quietly led through mutual respect, loy-
alty, and friendship. The difference in his demeanor in the classroom and on 
the soccer ﬁ
 eld intrigued me. After a few months of weekly classroom obser-
vations, I invited him to be part of the study. I wanted to investigate what it 
was like for Chavo to be a student in this high school literacy classroom and 
explore how his constructions of masculinity might have shaped his partici-
pation in it. 


106  Josephine Marsh and Jayne C. Lammers
Figured world 4: Athletes Don’t Read Books 
I. 
In sixth grade, 
We had a list of all the honors’ books and 
I had my mom go pick up like four or ﬁ
 ve of those during the summer. 
I read them all. 
And then seventh and eighth grade, I just, I don’t know, I just decided not to 
do that [read the summer honors’ books] anymore.
Where the Red Fern Grows [was one of the summer honor books] 
I couldn’t put it down, like I’d go home and read . . . 
But non-stop and then when it ended I seriously did not want the book to 
end.
I was so caught up in the characters 
I felt like I knew ’em and stuff 
II. 
I think, I found sports more interesting [than reading] and doing stuff. 
I mean like in a house full of guys 
 
you can always ﬁ
 nd some kind of athletic activity to do. 
Whether it’s playing basketball or Nintendo or the backyard swimming. 
And especially where we live, there’s always kids like in our neighborhood. 
And then we’d ride bikes, play tag, all kinds of stuff. 
So somehow I just lost reading as a priority. 
III. 
I think also once you get involved in sports like you’re s’pose to be known as 
like an athlete. 
It’s just like a lot of the [athletes] really don’t even want to like talk about 
reading or so don’t even read. 
So you just kind of get caught up into that somewhere along the line, 
I guess. 
IV. 
I still tried to get good grades, got straight A’s in middle school. 
And I just wouldn’t like be loud about it or brag about it. 
V. 
The kids just like to harass each other in middle school 
Yeah, if he’s a good athlete like he’s better than other people 
I get kind of mad about that. 
And then also I, if he is good at something else, 
I probl’y, I guess probl’y, I’d harass him now [in high school] 


Figured Worlds and Discourses of Masculinity  107
VI. 
[The last book I read] was Grapes of Wrath [in 11th grade] 
That’s when I stopped [reading] 
Because we had a quiz on it 
And then I got like a D on it and I had read the whole book. 
It was picky questions, really picky and that’s a thick book . . . 
I decided, I could just skip reading and get the same grade. 
And that’s when I totally stopped [reading]. 
We read current events every week in Economics. I 
always read the sports page. 
Figured world 5: Guys Participate Differently than Girls 
I. 
Well, I don’t participate in that class [honors humanities] at all. 
I don’t really want to, and I probably won’t want to for the rest of the year. 
I mean I don’t know, I don’t feel uncomfortable around those people because 
I’ve been in the same class with them since sixth grade. 
But it’s just different, like, when I’m with the sports team or whatever, like 
that really motivates me and stuff like that. 
This class isn’t motivational. 
II. 
Ms. Brown thinks it’s important that everyone is heard. 
So sometime or another you have to participate. 
I don’t know, it [being called on] makes me feel kind of like, it puts me on the 
spot, really. 
And it kind of makes me feel like I’m a little bit less, or kind of, I don’t know, 
like she doesn’t think I know the answer. 
And that is usually the case. 
I don’t think she should be doing it. 
I think that she’s trying to make us feel involved. 
III. 
Since there are less of us [guys], 
I feel overpowered by the women. 
And our teacher is a woman. 
I really think that she’s like a big time supporter of women. 
How it’s their turn to get the spotlight, all this stuff. 
She’s always talking about women’s rights. 
And, I just think she’s more, this might not be true, 
I just see that she’s more lenient towards the girls. Like if they’re all involved 
in after-school activities, not necessary sports but other stuff, 


108  Josephine Marsh and Jayne C. Lammers
Well since they’re involved in other stuff that’s academically like more 
challenging, 
They seem to get a lot more exceptions. 
They turn in work late. 
I feel like I can’t even ask her if I can turn in something late 
 
because it’s dealing with a sport and 
 
I think she’ll just tell me no. 
IV.
They [guys in class] say how they feel. 
All the girls just think whatever the teacher says they’ll just do it. 
Some of us [boys] speak out against that. 
A lot of guys don’t like to do the work, especially their senior year. 
V.
Well, the ﬁ
 rst semester like I sat in the back of the room. 
Which was, I don’t know, I wasn’t really with any of my friends or whatever. 
And there’s a bunch of girls back there 
 
and so I was like having to listen to them and everything. 
And so I switched seats. 
Now I’m sitting with Dave and Peter and Johnny. 
And I think we all basically feel the same about that class. 
[I’m] more comfortable around them cause they’re my friends. 
And then I don’t know, it could be that they’re males, you know, 
 
’cause over on the other side there wasn’t (any males). 
I was sitting next to a bunch of girls 
 
and I felt really uncomfortable. 
These stories portray the ﬁ
 gured worlds relevant to Chavo’s life that seem 
to guide the choices Chavo made about his participation in reading and being 
an athlete. One of the ﬁ
 gured worlds was that male adolescent athletes do not 
read (or admit to reading) and they do not excel in school academics (or let 
anyone know if they did). Kids would harass you if they found out you were 
good in both, he believed. No one liked someone good in sports and academics. 
Chavo made decisions about his literacy practices based on this ﬁ
 gured world. 
Even after good experiences reading the summer honors books in sixth grade, 
Chavo decided not to participate in the honors summer reading again and said 
that somehow he lost reading. It appeared that he lost reading to outside play 
and sports, but not entirely. He read the sports page every morning, read cur-
rent events, and he read at least some of the required books for school until he 
learned in 11th grade that reading the book was not necessarily linked to suc-
cess on a test about that book. 
Chavo was a good student and a good athlete. This presented a tension for 
him. As early as middle school, Chavo learned how to cover up that he was a 
good student to be identiﬁ
 ed as a male athlete. In middle school, he learned 


Figured Worlds and Discourses of Masculinity  109
to keep his grades quiet. In honors humanities, he addressed this tension by 
acting bored and disinterested and refusing to participate in class discussions 
while quietly maintaining a B average. I am left to wonder how he earned the B 
without reading at least some of the required texts or paying some attention in 
class. Perhaps turning in all the written assignments and being present in class 
was enough. Perhaps he secretly read the materials. Perhaps not. Chavo did 
not openly participate in the humanities, nor did he think he ever would. His 
actions in class made it clear that the class was not motivating to him. Sports 
motivated him, the humanities did not. 
Chavo believed that girls and guys participated differently in the humanities 
classroom. This belief was informed by the ﬁ
 gured worlds he held about male 
athletes, literacy, and school and contributed to the way he participated in the 
humanities classroom. In this particular class, there were signiﬁ
 cantly more 
female than male students. This fact probably fed into his belief that girls par-
ticipated in humanities more than boys. He reported that he did not feel com-
fortable sitting among a “bunch of girls.” Yet he sat in this location for almost 
an entire semester. The girls, he said, always agreed with the teacher, whereas 
the guys would speak out against the teacher’s point of view or about a given 
assignment. Eventually, Chavo moved (there was never any restriction about 
where to sit) to sit by some of the guys. These guys questioned Ms. Brown, and 
Chavo perceived that they felt the same way about the class as he did. They were 
also athletes and wore their varsity letter jackets whenever the weather permit-
ted. Interestingly, moving next to these guys did not change his participation in 
class discussions. However, I observed that Chavo did speak to the guys during 
class and worked collaboratively with them on certain assignments. 
Another way Chavo thought the girls were different than the guys was the 
teacher’s response to them. He perceived that the teacher was more lenient 
toward the girls about late assignments, for example, because they were involved 
in after-school activities that might not be related to sports. He never tested 
this belief and continued to believe that the girls got more exceptions than the 
guys in the class without ever asking Ms. Brown for an extension himself. He 
perceived that the teacher honored academic and service after-school activities 
more than those that dealt with athletics. 
In both stories, what was most apparent in the form of Chavo’s words was 
the strength of his convictions and the personal responsibility he took for his 
views and actions. Chavo’s use of strong I-statements (e.g., I think, I read; Gee, 
2005) made more visible to me the ﬁ
 gured worlds that were relevant to him. In 
other words, how he answered my interview questions, the structure or form of 
his language, helped uncover what ﬁ
 gured worlds were relevant to him. 
Whereas Gee and Crawford (1998) used I-statements to look at differences 
in the talk of middle-class and working-class youth, I found I-statements to be 
useful in uncovering ﬁ
 gured worlds. In the 119 lines of the selected transcript, 
Chavo used 53 I-statements. I categorized the I-statements based on the kind 
of verb that followed the pronoun, I. The vast majority of I-statements were 
either cognitive (16) or action (24) as deﬁ
 ned by Gee (2005). Following Gee, I 


110  Josephine Marsh and Jayne C. Lammers
deﬁ
 ned cognitive statements as statements made about his thinking and know-
ing. I-statements such as I don’t know, I decided, I think, and I guess fell into 
this category. His cognitive statements provided information, knowledge, and 
opinions about his beliefs and experiences with literacy. They served to explain 
and state his opinions about his past literacy experiences and interactions. 
Chavo used nearly twice as many action statements as he did cognitive state-
ments. His use of action-oriented I-statements tells more about his historical 
story of being a male athlete who lost reading. His I-statements— such as I had 
my mom, I read, I’d go home and read, I found, I’d harass, I stopped reading, I 
switched, I’m sitting—paint a picture of Chavo as a young enthusiastic reader 
who gradually changed as he learned others’ expectations of him as a male ath-
lete and student, and the social practices of the Discourse of male athlete to 
which he aspired. The action I-statements he used demonstrated how he took 
responsibility for his actions. Chavo’s use of I-statements led me to believe that 
he perceived himself to be in control, that he consciously made decisions about 
his identity, and that he strongly believed that popular male athletes do not read 
(at least in public). He also believed that guys and girls participated differently 
in literacy classrooms. 
When describing his experiences in the humanities class, much of his speech 
was laced with emotions and feelings as he reported his literacy experiences to 
me. Words and phrases such as harass, uncomfortable, feel kind of on the spot, 
feel like I’m a little bit less, make us feel involved, feel overpowered by women, more 
comfortable, and I feel like I can’t even ask her exemplify the difﬁ
 culties young 
men like Chavo may feel as they navigate the terrain of being male and partici-
pating in school literacy. It is interesting that he is so aware of and open about 
his feelings and emotions associated with being a male student in the class. 
From the Researcher’s Perspective 
The Situated Meanings of Being Chavo 
My story of Chavo is from the perspective of a White, middle-class university 
researcher, the mother of two of Chavo’s teammates, and a past high school 
literacy teacher. My perspective is inﬂ
 uenced by the stories told by Chavo, his 
mother, and his teachers and my past research and reading on masculinities 
and literacy. I have a great interest in boys, literacy, and the inﬂ
 uence that Dis-
courses associated with sports have on literacy and schooling, in part, because 
of my two sons. I have watched as one of my sons quit reading as a high school 
student and as the other never developed a love or respect for reading. I also 
remember the boys who hid in the back of my classroom to read paperback 
books and magazines when I was a reading teacher at an alternative high school. 
I have long wondered about boys and literacy and have read with great interest 
theories of masculinities and boys and literacy. 
What I ﬁ
 nd so interesting in the stories of Chavo is the power of ﬁ
 gured 
worlds to shape beliefs and actions related to literacy and masculinities. Chavo 


Figured Worlds and Discourses of Masculinity  111
deﬁ
 ned masculinity as having to do with strength, courage, sticking up for what 
you believe, and responsibility as the following transcript depicts: 
Someone who shows like strength and courage, and 
Has the ability to stick up for what they believe. 
And someone who is willing to do whatever it takes . . . like on an everyday 
basis. 
Like when you’re older going to work everyday, that kind of thing. 
Of just going to school everyday and just getting what you have to do and like 
 
getting it done. 
My dad (epitomizes masculinity) 
Because . . . he could be getting paid a lot of money [as a doctor in private 
practice], but instead he is working for people that really can’t afford the 
health insurance and stuff. 
He’s working for those kind of people and manages to ﬁ
 nd money to provide 
for his family. Sometimes he worked on weekends, he did what he had to do to 
support his family. And if we ever have a problem we go to him. . . .
The Discourse of masculinity exempliﬁ
 ed by his father played an important 
role in Chavo’s constructions of masculinity and being a student. He learned 
to incorporate and emulate this model of masculinity within the Discourses of 
which he claimed membership. The attributes of masculinity—strength, cour-
age, sticking up for your beliefs, and responsibility— were evident in how he 
represented himself through language and social practices/activities. 
Chavo’s muscular body, brown skin, and big dark eyes provided him the 
look of an athlete. He worked out regularly in the school weight room and ran 
to stay in optimal shape. He pushed himself in the weight room and bragged 
to his teammates about the number of pounds he could lift. On occasion, I 
observed him and his teammates measuring their biceps to compare arm sizes 
and amount of growth. His clothing also helped others recognize him as a cer-
tain kind of young man (Harris, 1995). He selected clothes to wear such as 
tight T-shirts and baggy shorts or athletic wear, which accented his muscular, 
athletic body. If that did not do it, he wore team garb and his varsity jacket to 
school with many letters and awards sewn onto it. No one could mistake it, he 
was an athlete. 
Chavo acted the part. In addition to being a good athlete, he was known to 
be a tough competitor and good leader. He was well liked and respected by his 
peers, as evidenced by being voted captain of two sports teams—soccer and 
cross-country. He took responsibility for leading the cross-country teams to a 
state championship—this required both physical and emotional strength. As 
he positioned himself as a popular athlete, Chavo earned the respect of his peers 
and worked to not be recognized as a good student. Yet he was. His mother 
knew he was and was frustrated that his teachers did not challenge him. His 
humanities teacher did not know him as a good student, but made assump-
tions based on his status as an honor student. He started hiding his inclination 


112  Josephine Marsh and Jayne C. Lammers
to be a good student in middle school when he stopped reading honors books 
and stayed quiet about his grades as he learned the practices of the Discourse of 
popular boy athlete at his school. By his senior year in high school, he was an 
expert at doing his version of popular male athlete and student. No one would 
doubt that he was bored and did not like humanities. His whole body told the 
story, and he never spoke during class discussions. Yet he took responsibil-
ity for doing what had to be done to make a good grade. He exempliﬁ
 ed the 
practices of masculinity he revered in both the humanities classroom and the 
athletic arena. 
Surprisingly, Chavo, the good student, became visible during the last month 
of school. He won the contest for the best end-of-year humanities project. The 
project was designed to synthesize and extend what they had learned about 
humanities. The students selected a modern-day thinker, artist, and activist 
and made video or computer presentations about a common cultural theme 
the three shared. Chavo and the two guys he sat next to in humanities focused 
their presentation on three people associated with sports—Jerry Colangelo 
(great thinker who brought professional sports to Phoenix), Michael Jordan 
(great artist), and Chris Berman (a sports anchor and activist)—and demon-
strated how they contributed to a culture that treated sports in similar ways as 
the ancient people did religion. His group worked long hours on the script and 
video presentation to integrate what they had learned about human thought 
and culture with modern-day cultural concerns and emphasis on sports. His 
voice was the narrator on the video, giving rise to Ms. Brown exclaiming after 
the video showing, “I haven’t heard you speak that many words all year.” Cha-
vo’s group’s project was deemed “the best” by his classmates and teacher. He 
was recognized with a monetary prize and the grade of A on the project. One 
is left to wonder whether this is the kind of challenging curriculum his mother 
hoped for and what might have happened if Chavo had been asked to do similar 
kinds of literacy activities before the last month of school. 
Chavo’s mother and teacher embraced a ﬁ
 gured world in which gender does 
not matter. However, for Chavo gender, or his beliefs about what it meant to 
be masculine in a literacy classroom, played a role in the decisions he made 
about his participation in the literacy classroom. This was especially evident 
in the humanities class, where he reported feeling overpowered by women in 
the class and did not like the way the girls acted in class. The sheer numbers of 
female students made him uncomfortable. He believed there were differences 
in how girls and guys approached literacy courses. He participated in the way 
that he thought would best represent him as masculine. For example, he felt 
it was important to stick to his beliefs, although they were different from the 
teacher’s. He did not think the girls did this. For him, the Discourse of popular 
athlete included being masculine—strong, courageous, responsible, and having 
strong convictions. He demonstrated these qualities in the class as he resisted 
his teacher’s enthusiasm for humanities and his mother’s belief in reading, all 
the while making good grades and excelling in a class project. 
In addition to strong beliefs that gender did not matter, Chavo’s mother, 


Figured Worlds and Discourses of Masculinity  113
teacher, and Chavo held ﬁ
 rm notions of what counted as acceptable literacy 
practices. Even though he pronounced he did not read anymore, he confessed 
to reading the newspaper daily, particularly the sports pages. This apparently 
did not count as reading, but was an acceptable literacy activity within this par-
ticular Discourse of popular male athlete. 
It is important to note that in my analysis of Chavo there is only a hint about 
inﬂ
 uences of social class and ethnicity. Chavo’s mother is Mexican American 
and she and her husband share many of the same middle-class values and expec-
tations as Chavo’s teacher and myself, the researcher. Chavo’s brown skin, dark 
hair, and Hispanic heritage did not come up in any of the interviews, although 
I suspect it is always present in his interactions with others. I wish I had asked 
Chavo’s mother how she thought her Hispanic heritage might have inﬂ
 uenced 
the teachers’ response to her when she requested more challenging curriculum 
for Chavo and how she thought it inﬂ
 uenced Chavo’s beliefs about his own 
masculinity and literacy practice. I also wish I had found out from Chavo how 
he thought being Mexican American might have inﬂ
 uenced the Discourses 
of masculinity and of being a literacy student for which he aspired. Further, 
I wish I knew how it inﬂ
 uenced Chavo’s past teachers’ academic expectations 
and interactions with him. These unanswered questions are limitations to my 
analysis, and answers to these questions are needed to fully understand how 
Chavo learned to be a boy in a literacy classroom and multiple ways of being 
masculine.
Note
1 I use big “D” Discourse in the tradition of Gee to mean ways of reading, writing, act-
ing, valuing, dressing, and so on to be recognized as a certain sort of person. 
References 
AAUW. (2009). Separated by sex: Title IX and single-sex education. Retrieved January 
8, 2010 from http://www.aauw.org/advocacy/issue_advocacy/actionpages/singlesex.
cfm
Alloway, N. (2007). Swimming against the tide: Boys, literacies, and schooling—an Aus-
tralian story. Canadian Journal of Education, 30(2), 582–605. 
Arciniega, G. M., Anderson, T. C., Tovar-Blank, Z., & Tracey, T. (2008). Toward a fuller 
conception of machismo: Development of a traditional machismo and caballerismo 
scale. Journal of Counseling Psychology, 55(1), 19–33. 
Beaupre, B. (2003, March 9). Boys, not girls, on worse end of education gap. Chicago 
Sun-Times. Retrieved March 13, 2003, from http://www.suntimes.com 
Blair, H.A., Sanford, K. (2004). Morphing literacy: Boys reshaping their school-based 
literacy practices. Language Arts, 81(6), 452–460. 
Brozo, W. G. & Gaskins, C. (2009). Engaging texts and literacy practices for adoles-
cent boys. In K. D. Wood & W. E. Blanton (Eds.), Literacy instruction for adolescents: 
Research-based practice (pp. 170–186). New York: The Guilford Press. 
Coles, T. (2009). Negotiating the ﬁ
 eld of masculinity: The production and reproduction 
of multiple dominant masculinities. Men and Masculinities, 12, 30–44. 


114  Josephine Marsh and Jayne C. Lammers
College Board (2007). Advanced placement report to the nation. Retrieved November 04, 
2007 from http://apcentral.collegeboard.com 
Connell, R. W. (1987). Gender and power: Society, the person and sexual politics. Stan-
ford, CA: Stanford University Press. 
Connell, R. W. (2005). Masculinities (2nd ed.). Berkeley, CA: University of California 
Press. 
Cook, G. (2006). Boys at risk: The gender achievement gap. The American School Board 
Journal, 193, 4–6.
Downey, D. B., & Vogt-Yuan, A. S. (2005). Sex differences in school performance dur-
ing high school: Puzzling patterns and possible explanations. Sociological Quarterly, 
46, 299–321.
Fairclough, N. (2003). Analysing discourse: Textual analysis for social research. New York: 
Routledge. 
Faludi, S. (1999). Stiffed: The betrayal of the American Man. New York: William 
Morrow. 
Fonda, D. (2000, December 2). The male minority. TIME Magazine. Retrieved March 
13, 2003, from http://www.TIME.com 
Gee, J. P. (1996). Social linguistics and literacies: Ideology in discourses (2nd ed.). Bristol, 
PA: Taylor & Francis. 
Gee, J. P. (2005). An introduction to discourse analysis: Theory and method (2nd ed.). 
London: Routledge. 
Gee, J. P. (2007). Social linguistics and literacies: Ideology in discourses (3rd ed.). London: 
Taylor & Francis. 
Gee, J. P. & Crawford, V. (1998). Two kinds of teenagers: Language, identity, and social 
class. In D. E. Alverman, K. A. Hinchman, D. W. Moore, S. F. Phelps, & D. R. Waff 
(Eds.), Reconceptualizing the literacies in adolescents’ lives (pp. 225–245). Hillsdale, NJ: 
Lawrence Erlbaum.
Goodman, E. (2002, September 4). What a surprise: College gender gap in deemed in 
crisis. Arizona Republic, p.B9. 
Grifﬁ
 th, A. T. (2009). A study of the literacy experiences and related life experiences of 
incarcerated black adolescent males (Doctoral dissertation, Arizona State University, 
2009). Dissertation Abstracts International, 70, 04. 
Hammett, R. & Sanford, K. (2008) Boys and girls and the myths of literacies and learning. 
Toronto: Canadian Scholars Press.
Harris, I. M. (1995). Message men hear: Constructing masculinities. Bristol, PA: Taylor 
& Francis. 
Hedges, L., & Nowell, A. (1995, July 7). Sex difference in mental test scores, variability, 
and numbers of high-scoring individuals. Science, 269, 41–45. 
Institute of Oral History. (2001, April 14). Oral history workshop on the Web: Transcrib-
ing style guide. Retrieved January 31, 2003 from http://www.baylor.edu/Oral History/
Styleguide. html 
Jackson, D., & Salisbury, J. (1996). Why should secondary schools take working with 
boys seriously? Gender and Education, 8, 103–115. 
Kimmel, M. S. (2000). The gendered society. New York: Oxford University Press. 
Klein, A. M. (2000). Dueling machos: Masculinity and sport in Mexican baseball. In J. 
McKay, M. Messner, & D. Sabo (Eds.), Masculinities, gender relations, and sport (pp. 
67–85). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage. 
Lesko, N. (2000). Masculinities at school. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage. 


Figured Worlds and Discourses of Masculinity  115
Lloyd, S. C. (2007) Gender gap in graduation. Retrieved January 9, 2010 from http://
www.edweek.org/rc/articles/2007/07/05/sow0707.h26.html
Madill, L. (2009). Deconstructing gender: Realizing the possibilities. Canadian Journal 
of New Scholars in Education, 2(1), 1–12.
Martino, W. & Kehler, M. (2007). Gender-based literacy reform: A question of challeng-
ing or recuperating gender binaries. Canadian Journal of Education, 30(2), 406–431. 
Mead, S. (2006). The evidence suggests otherwise: The truth about boys and girls. Washing-
ton, DC: Education Sector. 
Myers, G. (1999). Functions of reported speech in group discussions. Applied Linguis-
tics, 20(3), 376–401. 
National Center for Education Statistics. (2000). Trends in educational equity of girls and 
women. Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Education. 
Reed, L. R. (1999). Troubling boys and disturbing discourses of masculinity and school-
ing: A feminist exploration of current debates and interventions concerning boys and 
schools. Gender and Education, 11, 93–110. 
Scieszka, J. (2003). Guys read. Retrieved June 24, 2003, from http://www.guysread.com 
Skelton, C. (1998). Schooling the boys: Masculinities and primary education. Philadelphia: 
Open University Press. 
Smith, M. W., & Wilhelm, J. D. (2002). “Reading don’t ﬁ
 x no Chevy’s”: Literacy in the 
lives of young men. Portsmouth, NH: Heinemann. 
Sommers, C. H. (2000). The war against boys: How misguided feminism is harming our 
young men. New York: Simon & Schuster. 
Tatum, A. W. (2008a) Literacy and African-American boys: Shifting the paradigm. Ple-
nary address delivered at National Reading Conference annual conference, Orlando, 
FL. Retrieved January 9, 2010 from http://nrconline.org/conference/conf08/videos.
html
Tatum, A. W. (2008b). Toward a more anatomically complete model of literacy instruc-
tion: A focus on African American male adolescents and texts. Harvard Educational 
Review, 78(1), 155–180.
Tyack, D., & Hansot, E. (1990). Learning together: A history of coeducation in American 
schools. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press. 
Tyre, P. (2006, January 30). The trouble with boys. Newsweek. Retrieved from http://
www.msnbc.msn.com/id/10965522/site/newsweek/
Young, J. P. (2000). Boy talk: Critical literacy and masculinities. Reading Research Quar-
terly, 35, 312–337. 
Young, J. P., Hardenbrook, M., Esch, M., Hansen, K., & Grifﬁ
 th, A. (2003). What’s 
happening with/to boys in adolescent literacy classrooms? Unpublished manuscript. 




Part II 
Critical Discourse Analysis




6 
Semiotic Aspects of Social 
 
Transformation and Learning
 
Norman Fairclough
 
University of Lancaster
Introduction
A common critique of CDA is that it has not often attended to matters of learn-
ing. Learning, in this chapter, is addressed as a performativity of texts—both 
spoken and written. Social practices such as teaching and learning are mediated 
by structures and events and are networked in particular ways through orders 
of discourse. Orders of discourse comprised genres, discourses, and styles or 
“ways of interacting,” “ways of representing,” and “ways of being.” 
This chapter theoretically reflects on semiotic aspects of social transformation 
and learning. Its particular focus is one gap in my work in Critical Discourse 
Analysis (CDA), which a number of contributors in this volume have pointed 
out: It has not addressed questions of learning. So my objective is to incorpo-
rate a view of learning into the version of CDA that has been developing in my 
more recent work (Chiapello & Fairclough, 2002; Chouliaraki & Fairclough, 
1999; Fairclough, 2000a, 2000b, 2001, 2003; Fairclough, Jessop, & Sayer, 2003). 
I approach the question of learning indirectly in terms of the more general 
and in a sense more fundamental question of the performativity of texts or, in 
critical realist terms (Fairclough, Jessop, & Sayer, 2004), their causal effects on 
nonsemiotic elements of the material, social, and mental worlds and the condi-
tions of possibility for the performativity of texts. I use the term semiosis rather 
than discourse to refer in a general way to language and other semiotic modes 
such as visual image, and the term text for semiotic elements of social events, 
be they written, spoken, or combining different semiotic modes as in the case 
of TV texts. 
Semiotic Aspects of Social Structures, Social Practices, and Social 
Events 
Let me begin with the question of social ontology. I assume that both (abstract) 
social structures and (concrete) social events are real parts of the social world 
that have to be analyzed separately as well as in terms of their relation to each 
other—a position of analytical dualism (Archer, 1995, 2000; Fairclough et al., 
2004). 


120  Norman Fairclough
Social structures are abstract entities. One can think of a social structure 
(such as an economic structure, a social class or kinship system, or a language) 
as defining a potential—a set of possibilities. However, the relationship between 
what is structurally possible and what actually happens, between structures and 
events, is a complex one. Events are not in any simple or direct way the effects of 
abstract social structures. Their relationship is mediated—there are intermedi-
ate organizational entities between structures and events. Let us call these social 
practices. Examples would be practices of teaching and practices of manage-
ment in educational institutions. Social practices can be thought of as ways to 
control the selection of certain structural possibilities and the exclusion of oth-
ers, and the retention of these selections over time in particular areas of social 
life. Social practices are networked together in particular and shifting ways. For 
instance, there has recently been a shift in the way in which practices of teaching 
and research are networked together with practices of management in institu-
tions of higher education—a managerialization (or more generally marketiza-
tion; Fairclough, 1993) of higher education. Semiosis is an element of the social 
at all levels. Schematically: 
Social structures: languages 
Social practices: orders of discourse 
Social events: texts 
Languages can be regarded as among the abstract social structures to which 
I refer here. A language defines a certain potential, certain possibilities, and 
excludes others—certain ways of combining linguistic elements are possible, 
others are not (e.g., the book is possible as a phrase in English, book the is not). 
Yet texts as elements of social events are not simply the effects of the potentials 
defined by languages. We need to recognize intermediate organizational enti-
ties of a specifically linguistic sort—the linguistic elements of networks of social 
practices. I call these orders of discourse (see Chouliaraki & Fairclough, 1999; 
Fairclough, 1992). An order of discourse is a network of social practices in its 
language aspect. The elements of orders of discourse are not things like nouns 
and sentences (elements of linguistic structures), but discourses, genres, and 
styles (I differentiate them shortly). These elements, and particular combina-
tions or articulations of these elements, select certain possibilities defined by 
languages and exclude others—they control linguistic variability for particular 
areas of social life. Thus, orders of discourse can be seen as the social organiza-
tion and control of linguistic variation. 
There is a further point to make: As we move from abstract structures 
toward concrete events, it becomes increasingly difficult to separate language 
from other social elements. In the terminology of Althusser, language becomes 
increasingly overdetermined by other social elements. At the level of abstract 
structures, we can talk more or less exclusively about language—more or less 
because functional theories of language see even the grammars of languages as 
socially shaped (Halliday, 1978). The way I defined orders of discourse makes 


Social Transformation and Learning  121
it clear that at this intermediate level we are dealing with a much greater over-
determination of language by other social elements—orders of discourse are 
the social organization and control of linguistic variation, and their elements 
(discourses, genres, styles) are correspondingly not purely linguistic categories, 
but categories that cut across the division between language and nonlanguage, 
semiosis and the nonsemiotic. When we come to texts as elements of social 
events, the overdetermination of language by other social elements becomes 
massive: Texts are not just effects of linguistic structures and orders of dis-
course, but are also effects of other social structures and of social practices in all 
their aspects, so it becomes difficult to separate out the factors shaping texts. 
Semiosis as an Element of Social Practices: Genres, Discourses, 
and Styles 
Social events and, at a more abstract level, social practices can be seen as articu-
lations of different types of social elements. They articulate semiosis (hence 
language) together with other nonsemiotic social elements. We might see any 
social practice as an articulation of the following elements: 
Action and interaction 
Social relations 
Persons (with beliefs, attitudes, histories, etc.) 
The material world 
Semiosis 
For instance, classroom teaching articulates together particular ways of using 
language (on the part of both teachers and learners) with particular forms of 
action and interaction, the social relations and persons of the classroom, and 
the structuring and use of the classroom as a physical space. 
We can say that semiosis figures in three main ways in social practices: 
Genres (ways of acting) 
Discourses (ways of representing) 
Styles (ways of being) 
One way of acting and interacting is through speaking or writing, so semiosis 
figures first as part of the action. We can distinguish different genres as differ-
ent ways of (inter)acting discoursally—interviewing is a genre, for example. 
Second, semiosis figures in the representations, which are always a part of 
social practices—representations of the material world, of other social prac-
tices, reflexive self-representations of the practice in question. Representation 
is clearly a semiotic matter, and we can distinguish different discourses, which 
may represent the same area of the world from different perspectives or posi-
tions. An example of a discourse in the latter sense would be the political dis-
course of New Labour, as opposed to the political discourse of old Labour, or 


122  Norman Fairclough
the political discourse of Thatcherism (Fairclough, 2000b). Third and finally, 
semiosis figures alongside bodily behavior in constituting particular ways of 
being, particular social or personal identities. I call the semiotic aspect of this a 
style. An example would be the style of a particular type of manager—the way 
a particular type of manager uses language as a resource for self-identifying. 
Genres, discourses, and styles are realized in features of textual meaning and 
form, and we can distinguish three main aspects of textual meanings and their 
formal realizations (similar to the macrofunctions distinguished by Halliday, 
1994) corresponding to them: actional, representational, and identificational 
meanings. These meanings are always simultaneously in play in texts and parts 
of texts. 
Social Effects of Texts and on Texts 
I have begun to discuss the causal effects of social structures and social practices 
on texts. We can see texts as shaped by two sets of causal powers and by the 
tension between them: on the one hand, social structures and social practices; 
and on the other hand, the agency of people involved in the events of which 
they are a part. Texts are the situated interactional accomplishments of social 
agents whose agency is enabled and constrained by social structures and social 
practices. Neither a broadly interactional perspective nor a broadly structural 
perspective (the latter now including social practices) on texts can be dispensed 
with, but neither is sufficient without the other. 
We also have to recognize that texts are involved in processes of meaning 
making and that texts have causal effects (i.e., they bring about changes) that 
are mediated by meaning making. Most immediately, texts can bring about 
changes in our knowledge, beliefs, attitudes, values, experience, and so forth. 
We learn from our involvement with and in texts, and texturing (the process of 
making texts as a facet of social action and interaction) is integral to learning. 
Yet texts also have causal effects of a less immediate sort—for instance, one 
might argue that prolonged experience of advertising and other commercial 
texts contributes to shaping people’s identities as consumers or their gender 
identities. Texts can also have a range of other social, political, and material 
effects—texts can start wars, for instance, or contribute to changes in economic 
processes and structures, or in the shape of cities. In summary, texts have 
causal effects on, and contribute to changes in, persons (beliefs, attitudes, etc.), 
actions, social relations, and the material world. 
We need to be clear what sort of causality this is. It is not a simple mechanical 
causality—we cannot, for instance, claim that particular features of texts auto-
matically bring about particular changes in people’s knowledge or behavior or 
particular social, political, or material effects. Nor is causality the same as regu-
larity: There may be no regular cause–effect pattern associated with a particular 
type of text or particular features of texts, but that does not mean that there are 
no causal effects.1 Texts can have causal effects without them necessarily being 
regular effects because many other factors in the context determine whether 


Social Transformation and Learning  123
particular texts as parts of particular events actually have such effects, and this 
can lead to a particular text having a variety of effects. 
Contemporary social science has been widely influenced by social construc-
tivism—the claim that the (social) world is socially constructed. 
Many theories of social constructivism emphasize the role of texts (language, 
discourse, semiosis) in the construction of the social world. These theories tend 
to be idealist rather than realist. A realist would argue that, although aspects of 
the social world such as social institutions are ultimately socially constructed, 
once constructed they are realities that affect and limit the textual (or discur-
sive) construction of the social. We need to distinguish construction from con-
strual, which social constructivists often do not: We may textually construe 
(represent, imagine, etc.) the social world in particular ways, but whether 
our representations or construals have the effect of changing its construction 
depends on various contextual factors, including the way social reality already 
is, who is construing it, and so forth. So we can accept a moderate version of the 
claim that the social world is textually constructed, but not an extreme version 
(Sayer, 2000). 
A major causal effect of texts that has been a major concern for Critical 
Discourse Analysis is ideological effects—the effects of texts in inculcating and 
sustaining ideologies. I see ideologies as primarily representations of aspects 
of the world that can be shown to contribute to establishing and maintain-
ing relations of power, domination, and exploitation—primarily because such 
representations can be enacted in ways of interacting socially and inculcated in 
ways of being in people’s identities. Let us take an example: the pervasive claim 
that in the new global economy countries must be highly competitive to sur-
vive (something like this is presupposed in this extract from a speech by Tony 
Blair to the Confederation of British Industry: “Competition on quality can’t 
be done by Government alone. The whole nation must put its shoulder to the 
wheel”). One could see such claims (and the neoliberal discourse with which 
they are associated) as enacted in new, more businesslike ways of administering 
organizations like universities and inculcated in new managerial styles. We can 
only arrive at a judgment about whether such claims are ideological by looking 
at the causal effects they have in particular areas of social life—for instance, 
factories or universities, asking whether they contribute to sustaining power 
relations (e.g., by making employees more amenable to managers’ demands). 
Dialectical Relations 
The relations between elements of a social event or social practice, including 
the relation between semiosis and nonsemiotic elements, are dialectical rela-
tions. We can say that elements are different, cannot be reduced to another, 
require separate sorts of analysis, and yet are not discrete. In Harvey’s (1996) 
terms, each element internalizes other elements. What I said earlier about over-
determination can be seen in terms of the internalization of nonsemiotic ele-
ments in semiotic elements (texts, orders of discourse). 


124  Norman Fairclough
What I said about the causal effects of texts can be seen in terms of the inter-
nalization of semiotic elements in nonsemiotic elements. 
We can see claims about the socially constructive effects of semiosis, includ-
ing the moderate social constructivism advocated earlier, as presupposing the 
dialectical internalization of semiosis in the nonsemiotic—presupposing, for 
instance, that discourses can be materialized (internalized within the material 
world) in the design of urban spaces. We can also see claims about how people 
learn in the course of communicative interaction (such as the claims in the 
chapters of this volume) as presupposing the dialectical internalization of semi-
osis in the nonsemiotic. What people learn in and through text and talk, in and 
through the process of texturing as we might put it (making text and talk within 
making meaning), is not merely (new) ways of texturing, but also new ways of 
acting, relating, being, and intervening in the material world, which are not 
purely semiotic in character. A theory of individual or organizational learning 
needs to address the questions of retention—of the capacity to recontextualize 
what is learned, to enact it, inculcate it, and materialize it. 
Dialectical relations obtain intrasemiotically as well as between semiotic and 
nonsemiotic elements. For instance, processes of organizational learning often 
begin (and especially so in what has been conceived of as the contemporary 
information society or knowledge society) with the recontextualization within 
organizations of discourses from outside—an obvious example these days is 
the discourse of new public management (Salskov-Iversen, Hansen, & Bislev, 
2000). Yet such discourses may (the modality is important in view of the mod-
erate version of social constructivism advocated before) be enacted as new ways 
of acting and interacting, inculcated as new ways of being, as well as materi-
alized in, for instance, new buildings and plants. Enactment is both semiotic 
and nonsemiotic: The discourse of new public management may be enacted 
as new management procedures, which semiotically include new genres (e.g., 
new ways of conducting meetings within an organization). Inculcation is also 
both semiotic and nonsemiotic: The discourse of new public management may 
be inculcated in new managers, new types of leaders, which is partly a matter 
of new styles (hence partly semiotic), but also partly a matter of new forms of 
embodiment. Bodily dispositions are open to semioticization (as indeed are 
buildings), but that does not mean they have a purely semiotic character—it 
is precisely a facet of the dialectical internalization of the semiotic in the non-
semiotic. What this example (and the case study by Salskov-Iversen et al.) also 
points to is the dialectic between colonization and appropriation in processes 
of social transformation and learning: Recontextualizing the new discourse is 
both opening an organization (and its individual members) up to a process of 
colonization (and to ideological effects) and, insofar as the new discourse is 
transformed, in locally specific ways by being worked into a distinctive relation 
with other (existing) discourses—a process of appropriation. 
Let us come back to the modality of the claim that discourses may be enacted, 
inculcated, and materialized. There are social conditions of possibility for 
social transformation and learning, which are in part semiotic conditions of 


Social Transformation and Learning  125
possibility (Fairclough et al., 2003). In the example of new public management 
discourse, for instance, the semiotic conditions of possibility for the recontex-
tualization and dialectical enactment, inculcation, and materialization of the 
discourse within particular organizations refer to the order of discourse: the 
configuration of discourses, genres, and styles, which is in place not only within 
a particular organization, but in the social field within which it is located and 
the relations between the orders of discourse of different fields. To cut through 
the complexities involved here, we can say broadly that the openness of an 
organization to transformations led by a new discourse, and the openness of 
the organization and its members to learning, depend on the extent to which 
there is a discourse or configuration of discourses in place within the organiza-
tion and the field for which the dialectic of enactment, inculcation, and mate-
rialization is fully carried through, and the capacity for autonomy with respect 
to other fields (not, of course, a purely semiotic matter). 
Emergence and Learning 
The CDA of texts includes both interdiscursive analysis of the genres, dis-
courses, and styles drawn on and how different genres, discourses, and styles 
are articulated together (textured together), and analysis of how such mixes of 
genres, discourses, and styles are realized in the meanings and forms of texts 
(which entails linguistic analysis and other forms of semiotic analysis, such as 
analysis of visual images or body language). The chapters in this volume by 
Rogers, and Lewis and Ketter, for instance, point to the significance in talk of 
interdiscursivity, discourse hybridity, for learning. In the critical realist frame I 
have been drawing on, one can see this as the basis for semiotic emergence, the 
making of new meanings. Yet as Lewis and Ketter indicate, the possibilities for 
emergence depend on the relative dialogicality of text and talk—the orientation 
to difference. We can schematically differentiate five orientations to difference, 
with the proviso that this is not a typology of texts—individual texts and talk 
may combine them in various ways (Fairclough, 2003): 
(a) an openness to, acceptance of, and recognition of difference; an explora-
tion of difference, as in dialogue in the richest sense of the term 
(b) an accentuation of difference, conflict, and polemic—a struggle over 
meaning, norms, and power 
(c) an attempt to resolve or overcome difference 
(d) a bracketing of difference, a focus on commonality, solidarity 
(e) consensus, a normalization and acceptance of differences of power, which 
brackets or suppresses differences of meaning and over norms 
Scenario (e) in particular is inimical to emergence. Dialogicality and orientation 
to difference depend on the sort of broadly structural conditions I pointed to 
in the previous section—conditions to do with social practices, fields, and rela-
tions between fields, which have a partly semiotic character (in terms of orders 


126  Norman Fairclough
of discourse). However, as suggested earlier, the causal powers that shape texts 
are the powers of agency as well as of structure—whatever the state of the field 
and the relations between fields, we can ask about both latitudes for agency and 
their differential uptake by different agents, including agents involved in the 
sort of critical educational research reflected in the chapters of this volume. 
A relatively high degree of dialogicality and orientation to difference can be 
seen as favoring the emergence of meaning through interdiscursive hybridity, 
although to talk about learning there needs to be some evidence of continuity 
and development (provided by longitudinal aspects of the research reported in 
this book) and retention (which one might see as requiring evidence of transfer 
and recontextualization, from one context to others). Learning can be seen as a 
form of social transformation in itself, but as a necessary but insufficient condi-
tion of social transformation on a broader scale. Learning through text and talk 
can be interpreted as part of what I referred to earlier as the semiotic conditions 
for social transformation. 
Critical Research, Learning, and Social Transformation 
In assessing the possibilities for and limitations of critical educational research 
motivated by emancipatory (e.g., antiracist) agendas for learning and social 
transformation, one needs to consider both factors of a broadly structural char-
acter and factors to do with agency. With respect to the former, educational 
research can be seen as part of a network of social practices that constitutes 
an apparatus of governance (in part semiotically constituted as an order of 
discourse; Fairclough, 2003)—a network that includes practices of classroom 
teaching, educational management, educational research, and (national, state, 
local, etc.), government, and policy making (Bernstein, 1990). The nature and 
workings of the apparatus are internally as well as externally contested—criti-
cal educational researchers are, for instance, often seeking to create more open 
and equal relations between academic research and classroom teaching. One 
issue they must consider is what I referred to earlier as the social conditions 
of possibility for social transformation and learning, which include latitudes 
for agency within educational research. These issues can be partly addressed 
from a semiotic perspective in terms of latitudes for agents in social research to 
develop, recontextualize, and seek to enact and inculcate new discourses. But 
there are also considerations to do with forms of agency in recontextualizing 
contexts (e.g., questions of the dialogicality of interactions between educational 
researchers and teachers). Once again neither a structural nor an interactional 
perspective can be dispensed with, but neither is sufficient without the other. 
Note
1 The reduction of causality to regularity is only one view of causality—what is often 
referred to as Humean causality, the view of causality associated with the philosopher 
David Hume (Fairclough, Jessop, & Sayer, 2003; Sayer, 2000).


Social Transformation and Learning  127
References 
Archer, M. (1995). Realist social theory: The morphogenetic approach. Cambridge, UK: 
Cambridge University Press. 
Archer, M. (2000). Being human: The problem of agency. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge 
University Press. 
Bernstein, B. (1990). The structuring of pedagogic discourse. London: Routledge. 
Chiapello, E., & Fairclough, N. (2002). Understanding the new management ideology. A 
transdisciplinary contribution from critical discourse analysis and the new sociology 
of capitalism. Discourse and Society, 13(2), 185–208. 
Chouliaraki, L., & Fairclough, N. (1999). Discourse in late modernity. Edinburgh: 
Edinburgh University Press. 
Fairclough, N. (1992). Discourse and social change. Cambridge, UK: Polity. 
Fairclough, N. (1993). Critical discourse analysis and the marketisation of public dis-
course: The universities. Discourse & Society, 4, 133–168. 
Fairclough, N. (2000a). Discourse, social theory and social research: The case of welfare 
reform. Journal of Sociolinguistics, 4(2), 163–195. 
Fairclough, N. (2000b). New Labour, new language? London: Routledge. 
Fairclough, N. (2001). The dialectics of discourse. Textus, 14, 231–242. 
Fairclough, N. (2003). Analysing discourse: Textual analysis for social research. London: 
Routledge. 
Fairclough, N., Jessop, R., & Sayer, A. (2003). A critical realist interpretation of the effec-
tivity of the production of meaning. In J. Roberts (Ed.), Critical realism, deconstruc-
tion and discourse. London: Routledge. 
Fairclough, N., Jessop, R. & Sayer, A. (2004). Critical realism and semiosis. In J. Joseph 
& J. Roberts (Eds.), Realism, Discourse and Deconstruction (pp. 23–42). London: 
Routledge. 
Halliday, M. (1978). Language as social semiotic. London: Edward Arnold. 
Halliday, M. (1994). Introduction to functional grammar. London: Edward Arnold. 
Harvey, D. (1996). Justice, nature and the geography of difference. Oxford: Blackwell. 
Salskov-Iversen, D., Hansen, H., & Bislev, S. (2000). Governmentality, globalization and 
local practice: Transformations of a hegemonic discourse. Alternatives, 25, 183–222. 
Sayer, A. (2000). Realism and the social sciences. London: Sage.


7 
Learning as Social Interaction: 
 
Interdiscursivity in a Teacher 
 
and Researcher Study Group
 
Cynthia Lewis
 
University of Minnesota
 
Jean Ketter
 
Grinnell College
In this chapter, we closely examine the interactions of a long-term teacher and 
researcher study group focusing on the reading and teaching of multicultural lit-
erature in a rural middle school setting. Over the 4-year span of the study, the 
group included 10 members—all White females—the two of us as researcher-
participants and eight teachers of grades 5 to 9. The purpose of the group was for 
participating teachers to read and discuss multicultural young adult literature in 
ways that would help them to make decisions about whether and how to teach 
these works in their community. (See Appendix A for book list.) In order to do 
this, our work together over the years focused not only on issues related to the 
teaching of literature but, more importantly, on our individual and collective 
assumptions about race, identity, and multicultural education in terms of how 
these assumptions shape decisions about text selection and teaching approaches. 
This study builds on earlier phases of our research that examined how our 
discussions of multicultural young adult literature were shaped by community 
contexts and by constructions of racial identity (Lewis, Ketter & Fabos, 2001; 
Ketter & Lewis, 2001). In this work, we identiﬁ
 ed the ﬁ
 xed practices in which 
all members of the group engaged, practices that seemed to create barriers to 
our learning and dialogue. We came to see how these practices were created and 
reinforced by the social and political contexts of the particular setting. 
For this phase of our longitudinal study, we were interested in understanding 
the nature of learning over time among members of the study group. In addi-
tion, we wanted to know how interaction patterns in the group sustained or 
disrupted ﬁ
 xed discourses in ways that shaped the group’s learning.
Review of Literature
Three areas of scholarship inform this research: sociocultural theories of learn-
ing, critical theories of language, and critical multiculturalism as it relates to 
This study was funded by a National Academy of Education/Spencer Foundation Postdoctoral 
Fellowship that the ﬁ
 rst author received in 2000 and by an Arts and Humanities grant from the 
University of Iowa’s Obermann Center for Advanced Studies.


Learning as Social Interaction in a Study Group  129
the reading and teaching of multicultural literature. Our theoretical framework 
views learning not as primarily a mental act but as a social act dependent upon 
interaction among people and their tools and technologies (Gee, 1999; Lave, 
1996; Rogoff, 1995; Wenger, 1999). Based on her research on learning com-
munities outside of schools, Lave argues that learning is about constructing 
“identities in practice” (1996, p. 157). Wenger (1999) also views learning as 
arising from the identity work that occurs through participation in communi-
ties of practice, communities “created over time by the sustained pursuit of a 
shared enterprise” (p. 45). Identities practiced in such communities are always 
a work in progress shaped by individual and collective efforts to create coher-
ence through participation in varied social contexts. Barton and Hamilton 
(2005) argue that the scholarship on communities of practice does not suf-
ﬁ
 ciently examine the mediating nature of language in reifying and reshaping 
communities. Our study shows how language works in these ways in one com-
munity of practice—a book group. Explicitly connecting a theory of language 
with a theory of learning, Hicks (1996) asserts that learning involves the learner 
in appropriating and reconstructing the discourses within his or her social world. 
Grounding her use of the term “appropriation” in the work of Bakhtin (1981, 
1986), she argues that his emphasis on the dialogic nature of utterances sup-
ports a generative use of the concept of appropriation. Central to Bakhtin’s 
theory of language is the sociocultural constitution of utterance, with a speak-
er’s utterance embedding prior and anticipated utterances. Hicks argues that 
this process represents a rearticulation rather than a recapitulation of existing 
discourses. 
This theoretical argument is important to our study because we are interested 
in examining what Fairclough (1992) refers to as “interdiscursivity,” deﬁ
 ned as 
the presence or trace of one discourse within another.1 Interdiscursive texts, 
according to Fairclough, can lead to dynamic rearticulations of otherwise stable 
discourses. In this way, such hybrid discourses have transformative potential 
that, in our view, connects language to learning. Related to Fairclough’s notion 
of interdiscursivity is Wenger’s description of the interdiscursive demands 
placed on anyone who enters a new community of practice whose discursive 
practices may conﬂ
 ict or contrast with those of another community in which 
the participant has been a long-time actor. All communities of practice bring 
with them unarticulated but shared knowledge—ways of acting and generic 
expectations that prescribe or make convenient certain ways of writing, think-
ing and speaking and preclude others. Hence, those who join a new commu-
nity of practice often initially operate on the boundaries of that community, 
a boundary where the participants must negotiate with intersecting and often 
conﬂ
 icting discursive practices (Wenger, 1999). Wenger argues that these 
boundary locations are exactly where new knowledge is produced and identi-
ties can be transformed. 
An examination of how the teachers and researchers in this group are chal-
lenged to rearticulate and reconstruct available and often conﬂ
 icting dis-
courses, including one another’s, has implications for what it means to learn 


130  Cynthia Lewis and Jean Ketter
in a professional development community. Moreover, such a view corre-
sponds to recent research on professional development that underscores the 
beneﬁ
 ts of teachers forming learning communities that provide intellectual 
renewal (Grossman, Wineburg, & Woolworth, 2001), productive conﬂ
 ict 
(Achinstein, 2002) and the structures necessary to form critical relationships 
(Gallego, Hollingsworth, & Whitenack, 2001). In their study of a long-term 
learning community of English and social studies teachers, Grossman et al. 
(2001) found that whereas group members initially shared their individual 
content expertise, more substantial learning over time was evident when 
individual perspectives and espistemological positions were internalized by 
other members.
Beyond these features of professional development, Lawrence and Tatum 
(1997, p. 63) argue that White teachers engaged in professional development 
related to multicultural education must examine their own racial identities in 
order to be effective educators. This argument is particularly compelling in light 
of the demographic statistics that reveal the persistence of a majority White 
teaching force, suggesting the continued need to examine issues of racial identity 
in teacher education and professional development. Moreover, the epistemol-
ogy of racism constitutes the very conditions upon which knowledge is enacted 
and evaluated within dominant institutions such as public schools (Scheurich 
&Young, 1997). In the 1990s, many theorists of race and ethnicity argued that 
White people normalize Whiteness and the privilege it represents For example, 
in her study of White teachers’ responses to workshops on multicultural educa-
tion, Sleeter (1993) found that teachers typically denied that racial identity was 
a signiﬁ
 cant factor in their teaching. White teachers did not expect to examine 
Whites as a racialized group when attending workshops. Instead, preservice 
and practicing teachers were accustomed to focusing on groups they perceived 
as “other,” groups about which they wanted information. In this way, race and 
ethnicity were marked as “foreign” and teachers were positioned as cultural 
tourists (Kincheloe & Steinberg, 1997; Purves, 1997). Recent scholarship has 
cautioned that antiracist and critical pedagogies in teacher education can result 
in alienation, shame, self-righteousness, or anger (Marx & Pennington, 2003; 
Thompson, 2003; Trainor, 2008); rather than a productive sense of responsibil-
ity or solidarity (Flynn, Lensmire, & Lewis, 2009; Sheets, 2003)
According to many scholars, reading multicultural literature in ways that 
consciously consider the cultural and sociopolitical inﬂ
 uences that shape 
authorship and interpretation can challenge a reader’s perception of self and 
other (Florio-Ruane, 2001, Medina, 2010). Fang, Fu and Lamme (1999) argue 
that multicultural literature “should be considered sociocultural and political 
texts (Taxel, 1992) for fostering students’ understanding of the historical and 
material forces underpinning the construction of cultural identities” (p. 270). 
Yet teachers are rarely taught to read children’s and young adult literature as 
political texts, nor are they encouraged to read bibliographic resources with 
a critical eye (Harris, 1993). The meanings and purposes that teachers assign 
to the teaching of literature inﬂ
 uence and reﬂ
 ect how young adult literature 


Learning as Social Interaction in a Study Group  131
functions politically and theoretically in any context, but these political and 
theoretical functions are often disregarded in curricular conversations (Bar-
rera, 1992). 
Methods and Analysis
Given our research focus on learning over time, we have found it useful to com-
bine a view of learning grounded in the literature on “communities of practice,” 
with social and critical theories of language. Doing so has provided us with the 
theoretical and methodological tools to better understand how our interac-
tions produce and at times disrupt a particular set of discourses. Whereas ear-
lier phases of this research used ethnographic tools to help us fully understand 
the context of this rural school district and community related to the teachers’ 
responses to multicultural texts, this study employs critical discourse analysis 
(CDA) to help us understand the longitudinal nature of our learning. Using 
CDA, we studied key transcripts over the 4-year period to examine the ways 
that participants took up particular world views, patterns of talk, and systems 
of thought as they related to multicultural literature and to the meaning and 
purposes of multicultural education. Teaming critical discourse analysis with 
ethnographic research allowed us to establish invaluable contexts for the sort of 
knowledge CDA extracts from texts. 
Although eight teachers participated over the 4 years of the study, ﬁ
 ve teach-
ers formed the consistent core of the study group. These language arts and 
reading teachers teach ﬁ
 fth-, sixth-, and eighth-grade students at a middle 
school that has an all-European American faculty and two administrators who 
are both White males. The student body of the middle school is over 94% Euro-
pean American and 25% of the students receive free or reduced-cost meals. We 
researcher-participants are White middle-class women who have both taught 
language arts and reading in the public schools before going on to work at the 
university and college where we are now respectively employed. We acted as 
participant/observers in the study group and saw ourselves as viable contribu-
tors to the process of text selection and procedures for discussing the texts. We 
secured funds to purchase one class set of multicultural books for each partici-
pant teacher and to pay for the books we read for all but one year of the study. 
To establish the ethnographic context for the CDA we used for this part of 
the study, we called on the wealth of data we collected and coded using the 
NUD*IST qualitative research program over the 4 years of the study. The 
ethnographic context included a careful analysis of our own positions within 
the study group and community related to status, afﬁ
 liation, and ideological 
stances. Data included audiotaped sessions of the literature discussions, audio-
taped interviews with participants and 11 community informants, written 
responses to surveys, an audiotaped focus group discussion of group dynam-
ics, and both observational and reﬂ
 ective ﬁ
 eld notes. After each session, we 
recorded our observations and analyses separately in order to insure that they 
were ﬁ
 rst articulated without the inﬂ
 uence of the other researcher. We also 


132  Cynthia Lewis and Jean Ketter
taped several key research meetings in which we examined how our roles as 
researchers and as participants played out in the literature discussions (Alver-
mann, Commeyras, Young, Randall, & Hinson, 1997).
To analyze the groups’ interactions in this phase of the study, we used a 
method of critical discourse analysis suggested by Fairclough (1992) and Chou-
liaraki and Fairclough (1999). Speciﬁ
 cally, we examined 15 transcripts taken 
from the entire span of the study (six from the ﬁ
 rst 2 years and nine from the 
last 2 years). It was important that we analyze more transcripts from the latter 
part of the study, given our research focus on change over time. We chose the 
transcripts that were most salient to our research question about learning and 
social interaction. The ones that struck us as having the most potential in this 
regard were transcripts that included segments in which we either sustained or 
disrupted discourses that had become ﬁ
 xed interactional positions taken up 
repeatedly by members of the group. We reasoned that to understand learning 
over time, we would need to closely examine segments of talk that contained 
statements and ideological positions that repeatedly surfaced in the transcripts 
and compare those segments to others that moved us beyond these reiﬁ
 ed posi-
tions. Given our long-term involvement with this study group and our multi-
layered analyses of the transcripts, we were able to use the knowledge gained 
from earlier phases of this research to locate the transcripts containing such 
segments. For instance, in our earlier work (Lewis, Ketter, & Fabos, 2001), we 
had identiﬁ
 ed statements and ideological positions in our talk that reinforced 
norms of Whiteness through the use of language that universalizes across expe-
riences. This insight—the result of both qualitative coding procedures and the 
tools of discourse analysis—was useful to us as we selected the 15 transcripts to 
be closely examined in this new phase of our research.
Once we identiﬁ
 ed the 15 transcripts, we divided each transcript into epi-
sodes, with each episode representing a series of turns that all relate to the same 
topic or theme (Marshall, Smagorinsky, & Smith 1995; Florio-Ruane, 2001). 
We then examined each episode to identify ﬁ
 rst its prominent discourses. 
Chouliaraki and Fairclough (1999, p. 63) deﬁ
 ne “discourse” as “the construc-
tion of some aspect of reality from a particular perspective.” However, in our 
efforts to identify prominent discourses in the transcripts, we found it useful to 
draw on Luke’s (2000, p. 456) deﬁ
 nition of discourse as “systematic clusters of 
themes, statements, ideas, and ideologies [that] come into play in the text.” In 
this vein, we searched the transcripts for regular clusters of themes, statements, 
and ideologies. Again, this process was aided by our extensive involvement in 
the study group and its surrounding community as well as our previous analy-
ses of the transcripts. Identifying the recurrent and somewhat ﬁ
 xed themes, 
statements, and ideologies present in these transcripts led us to formulate the 
coding categories for “discourse” listed in Appendix B. 
One dominant discourse we identiﬁ
 ed in our discussions was that of liberal 
humanism. In an article advocating for Critical Race Theory’s method of coun-
ter storytelling as a way of addressing the discomfort and defensiveness that 
arises in classroom discussion about race, Williams (2004) identiﬁ
 es two narra-


Learning as Social Interaction in a Study Group  133
tives that contribute to discomfort and resistance in such discussions. Williams 
argues that the ﬁ
 rst narrative, “Individualism trumps social forces,” is some-
what unique to the United States and ties it to meritocratic ideals upon which 
our country was founded (p. 185). The second narrative, that Whiteness is not a 
race, plays out in the discourses we describe here as an assumption that White-
ness is the norm and that race only “matters” when we are discussing those who 
are not White. In our analysis of the transcripts, we found that these narratives, 
which we identify as a discourse of liberal humanism, were often paired with a 
discourse that we researchers espoused—that of critical multiculturalism with 
a focus on recognizing Whiteness as a race and uncovering the systems or struc-
tures of inequality that act as barriers to individual achievement. Because CDA 
requires an in-depth examination of language in use, we have limited the focus 
of this chapter to these two discourses as they repeatedly surfaced over time. We 
decided to focus on the intersection of these discourses because they represent 
an epistemological conﬂ
 ict that was central to our discussions and persisted 
over time. The discourse of liberal humanism represents the individual as uni-
ﬁ
 ed, coherent, and possessing freedom of choice. The discourse of critical mul-
ticulturalism represents the individual as a socially, culturally, and historically 
produced subject. The intersection of these discourses often suggested conﬂ
 ict-
ing world views that had implications for how we interpreted and evaluated 
multicultural texts. Once intersections of the two discourses were located in the 
15 transcripts, we chose episodes for close analysis that would be most salient 
to our research questions. 
We cross-coded these episodes using the categories of genre and voice as 
deﬁ
 ned by Chouliaraki and Fairclough (1999, p. 63) as follows:
(1) Genre is “the language (and other semiosis) tied to a particular social activ-
ity . . .”
(2) Voice is “the sort of language used for a particular category of people and 
closely linked to their identity . . .”
An analysis of genre included an analysis of participant structures with regard 
to turn-taking. We established the other categories for genre by considering 
all the features of our activity setting. Given the overarching genre of “book 
group,” we made repeated passes through the transcripts to identify norms and 
expectations that were established in this social and linguistic setting, a pro-
cess that led us to formulate the codes for the category of “genre” that appear 
in Appendix B. Most of the coding categories listed under “voice” (Appendix 
B) are adapted from Fairclough (1989, 1992) and Chouliaraki and Fairclough 
(1999), who suggest that these features of language are particularly salient to 
issues of power and identity in the construction of social reality. 
The following example demonstrates how discourse was cross-coded with 
genre and voice. Rather than use an example directly related to a novel we have 
yet to discuss in this chapter, we include instead an example of a conversation 
peripheral to one of our readings. The conversation centers on whether or not 


134  Cynthia Lewis and Jean Ketter
people are inclined to prefer associating with their own race. We have omitted 
comments by all participants other than two, Barb and Carol, to provide a brief 
example of how features of genre and voice intersect and serve to coordinate 
particular discourses.
Barb 
But I think you go, you go to a major university and you see Black stu-
dents sitting with Black students and Asian students sitting with Asian 
students. You tend to (.) hang around people that have like similar 
backgrounds (.) to you=
Carol 
Right.
Barb 
=it, it seems like I mean don’t we hang around the same kind of people 
that we=
. . . 
Barb 
Yeah, you just, you just do that.
. . . 
Carol 
But I think, I think people feel threatened also.
. . . 
Barb 
I don’t think it’s threatened, it’s just that you don’t understand it. I 
mean it, it is a different culture, I mean/
Carol 
But I, I think/
Barb 
=it just is.
. . . 
Carol 
But I also think when you’re talking about this, I think they feel threat-
ened for the very reason that we’re talking about this, because you have 
now you have two kids who like each other who may eventually marry, 
so you have that, the cross cultures again and some people that fright-
ens, to have, to have (.) the mixing up of races. It does frighten them. 
[spoken softly] (..)You know, so, I think sometimes fear comes into it. 
[very softly]
The pronouns in this exchange frequently shift even within speaker turns. Barb 
uses pronouns that will draw her listeners into the stories and ideas she is relat-
ing. Her frequent use of the indefinite form of “you” creates a bond with her 
listener (“You tend to hang around people that have similar backgrounds to 
you.”). She asks a rhetorical question for the sake of affirmation and uses the 
indefinite form of “we” to stand in for ‘everybody’ (“Don’t we hang around the 
same kind of people that we =”). These are features of voice that serve to natu-
ralize the discourses being promoted. It is natural, her talk suggests, for every-
body to feel this way about being with people who have similar backgrounds. 
Carol’s pronoun use, on the other hand, first creates bonds with her listeners 
and then distances her from her subject. Consider, for example, some of the 
shifts in her final turn:
. . . because now you have two kids who like each other who may eventu-
ally marry, so you have that, the cross cultures again and some people that 


Learning as Social Interaction in a Study Group  135
frightens, to have, to have (.) the mixing up of races. It does frighten them. 
You know, so, I think sometimes fear comes into it.
First Carol creates a bond with her audience through the use of “you,” but then 
she distances herself from those other people who are threatened by interracial 
relationships. 
As in this example, CDA helps us to discover how our ﬁ
 xed discourses per-
sisted through or were interrupted by the interaction patterns and voices we 
enacted as the group evolved. Focusing closely on genre, discourse, and voice 
in these portions of text allowed us to identify subtle processes not read-
ily apparent in more holistic readings of text. Underlying our analysis is the 
assumption that ﬁ
 xed discourses are most likely to be interrupted when more 
dialogic (Bakhtin, 1981) conversations occur. These moments may be marked 
by hybridized discourses, discourses that indicate shifts in the socially situated 
identities of the participants and in which newly constructed perspectives or 
ideologies are embedded.
Findings
We begin this section with a brief discussion of the overarching discourses and 
genres that characterized our conversations about multicultural literature. We 
then move to a more nuanced analysis of transcripts from the early and middle 
years of our study to reveal the ways in which our binary discourses and our 
interaction patterns evolve over time. This paper covers a span of study group 
years from June 1997 to April of 2000.
Overarching Discourses and Genres
Across the 15 transcripts, there is a tendency on the part of the middle school 
teachers to see the inequity characters experience in novels (and real life) as 
resulting from individual choices or circumstances rather than from structural 
or systemic forces. Public schools have long been and continue to be institutions 
that deﬁ
 ne as democratic a championing of individual achievement and indi-
vidual responsibility and thus discount counter theories charging that institu-
tions and their established cultural practices oppress and disempower the poor, 
immigrants, and people of color (Spring, 2004). According to numerous stud-
ies, this view is typical of White preservice and practicing teachers (Beach, 1997; 
Fang, Fu, & Lamme, 1999; Naidoo, 1994; Rogers & Soter, 1997; Sleeter, 1993). 
The teachers also demonstrated a related tendency to attribute the cause of the 
character’s oppression to poor parenting or “abnormal” social practices rather 
than to structural barriers or institutionalized racism, a move that Bonilla-Silva 
labels “biologization of culture” (2001, pp. 147–149). We argue that the liberal 
humanist discursive practices reinforced and reinscribed through the teachers’ 
participation in their public school’s community of practice conﬂ
 icted with 
the more social constructionist practices typical of our institutions and the 


136  Cynthia Lewis and Jean Ketter
research community of practice in which we are active members. For example, 
the transcripts suggest a tendency on our part to see the inequities depicted 
in these novels as examples of structural racism and to focus on the social or 
cultural rather than the individual experience. This ﬁ
 nding is in keeping with 
research on perceptions about racism conducted by Gee (2005) in which teach-
ers’ responses focused on individual acts and professors’ responses focused on 
institutional racism.
From the beginning this group was a hybrid social and linguistic activity or 
genre: part book group, part professional development, and part academic sem-
inar. It was a site on the boundary between conflicting communities of practice 
that challenged all participants to search for coherence and stability in the face 
of our shifting identities as teachers and readers. From the academic commu-
nity of practice, the group borrowed from a seminar format with we researchers 
leading the discussion of texts. As a book group, it was part informal discus-
sion similar to book groups meetings held in people’s living rooms, where, in 
fact, we did meet on several occasions. As professional development, the talk 
frequently focused on how the books might be used in a classroom or whether 
they were appropriate for a particular age level or group of students, topics not 
typical of adult book group discussions and more likely to occur in workshops 
or seminars meant for the continuing education of practicing teachers.
In our earlier study, we found that the middle school teacher participants 
viewed us as having a kind of outside authority they did not, and we viewed the 
middle school participants as having an “insider” authority arising from their 
daily interactions with students and other teachers. In keeping with the seminar 
genre (seminar “leaders”), we were commonly the speakers who introduced a 
topic or began the discussion, particularly in the early years of the study. We 
had a tendency to make what we call “teacherly moves,” although we did not 
consciously plan these moves. Included in this category were probing ques-
tions, requests for elaboration, intertextual references, and the citing of author-
ities (e.g. scholars, children’s book authors, colleagues).
As researchers connected to the university, we often felt as though we were 
looked upon for expertise at the same time that our expertise was viewed as 
impractical or erudite. We brought to the group an orientation toward critical 
multiculturalism that shaped the discussions in ways that were alternately taken 
up, ignored, or resisted. We used verbal and nonverbal cues to signal our shift-
ing affiliations and statuses. We would look down when saying something that 
we believed might sound too academic or politically radical, for instance, and 
we often adjusted our vocabulary so that it would not be mired in the jargon of 
our disciplines. We stumbled over sentences that we would have spoken articu-
lately in our university or college settings, not intentionally, but because our 
hyper-awareness of power and status relations within the group troubled our 
speech. We assume that the teachers may have been doing some of the same, 
working out their own issues related to status and power among themselves, 
much as one of the teachers put it when she talked about feeling intimidated 
by another teacher in the group based on their long history of professional 


Learning as Social Interaction in a Study Group  137
relations. Although we usually were not conscious of these performances at the 
time, they repeatedly surfaced during our independent analyses of transcripts 
and in our reflective fieldnotes.
The Early Transcripts: Polite Opposition
Our early book discussions reveal the emergence of the two intersecting, and 
often opposing, discourses: liberal humanism and critical multiculturalism. 
We begin with an excerpt from our discussion of An Island Like You: Stories 
from the Barrio (Cofer, 1995), our third book discussion in the ﬁ
 rst year of the 
study. A theme that runs through this collection of short stories about life in a 
Puerto Rican community in Paterson, New Jersey, is that of adolescents trying 
to ﬁ
 nd a comfortable identity in the face of competing views of who they are or 
should be, some stemming from their own community and some imposed by 
normative deﬁ
 nitions of beauty and success mired in Eurocentric institutions 
and sensibilities. In this excerpt, Cynthia initiates a turn in which she tries to 
illustrate that racism and oppression have cut this barrio off from the rest of the 
country, but this move is resisted by Denise, who identiﬁ
 es with what it must 
feel like to be an individual in the barrio.2
Cynthia: It’s interesting what you said about the universality of it, too, because 
I think that is so much there, and that’s why it’s such a good book to 
use with kids. At the same time, it’s called “An Island like You” and I 
know that’s a reference to the grandparents, but I think it’s also sort 
of a claustrophobic sense of being apart from the rest of the world 
that so many of the characters feel. The barrio is sort of a part of the 
rest of the world. . . . There’s this universality, but there’s also this 
incredible difference. 
Denise: 
And the poem at the beginning says “alone in a crowd.” And, you 
know, I think that’s something kind of like an island, I mean you’re 
the only one who feels that way or the only one that thinks that way 
or the only one who’s had that experience, and you don’t connect 
with people. 
This exchange was characteristic of many early exchanges in which either Cyn-
thia or Jean makes a statement to focus on how the race or ethnicity of the 
characters marginalizes them. In this case, Cynthia was offering a response to 
an earlier comment made by Denise suggesting that the stories are about com-
mon, universal experiences. Here, Cynthia began by afﬁ
 rming Denise’s stance 
but quickly moved to what is, in effect, an argument against Denise’s view that 
the characters’ experiences are universal. Denise responded by indirectly asking 
us to identify with the experience—one we presumably all have had—of being 
a lone individual in the midst of others who do not understand the individual’s 
experience. She used “you” in a way that works to persuade her listeners to 
identify with the lone individual as she herself does (“you’re the only one,” 


138  Cynthia Lewis and Jean Ketter
“you don’t connect”). Her take on the book title and the poem that serves as 
the book’s prologue was a decidedly psychological one whereas Cynthia’s was 
sociological and cultural. 
Perhaps most interesting is the language used to signal agreement, despite the 
disagreement at the root of the exchange. Cynthia began by afﬁ
 rming Denise’s 
earlier comment valuing this book for its universality and suggested that it is 
these universal qualities that make it a good book to share with kids. This being 
only our third book discussion, Cynthia voiced her disagreement in a manner 
that was likely to be palatable and fairly indirect, couched in an overall sense of 
afﬁ
 rmation and agreement. Not wanting to claim any particular authority, she 
introduced her disagreement with the phrase “at the same time,” which sug-
gests that the two discourses can coexist, side by side, with no contradiction, 
rather than a phrase such as “on the other hand,” which would point to the 
incompatibility of the two discourses. Similarly, Denise initiated her response 
to Cynthia’s comment with the conjunction “and,” which suggests a continua-
tion of Cynthia’s idea and an implicit agreement; however, she quickly shifted 
to her focus on the individual, using the pronoun “you” and the repetition 
“only one” which create a bond with her listeners by pulling them into the 
experience of the lone individual.
Later in the same discussion, we can see the same dynamic at work, this time 
between Denise and Jean.
Denise: But, I think that self-esteem—and going back to some of the charac-
ters in this book—is such a vital thing for students. I just see kids with 
low self-esteem that are, really have big problems.
Jean: 
And it’s interesting since self-esteem issues arise out of racism they 
experience, you know, a lot these kids, like the Mateo boy, and, um, 
Luis and Arturo, to some extent, especially, I think, and the girls too. 
Here, again, the teacher, Denise, in the exchange was focusing on the individ-
ual psyche of the characters (and by association, her students), whereas the 
researcher, Jean, was focusing on the structure of racism as it affects self-esteem. 
And again, we see Jean begin her turn with the appearance of agreement (“And 
it’s interesting since self-esteem”) but then shift quickly into the discourse of 
structural inequity (racism). 
In terms of genre, we coded Jean’s initial clause, “And it’s interesting,” in 
two categories: “politeness/etiquette” and “teacherly move.” She avoided dis-
agreeing with Denise in any direct way as she might have had she known her 
better or not been concerned about appearing to be in control of the discussion. 
She did not begin her turn with something on the order of “It’s important to 
understand that the lack of self-esteem arises out of the racism these characters 
experience,” a statement which would have made her sound like a teacher who 
is correcting Denise’s response. Yet, we believe that beginning her turn with 
“And it’s interesting” represented another kind of teacherly move—one that 
we’ve both often used with our own students when we want to detract from our 


Learning as Social Interaction in a Study Group  139
own power by afﬁ
 rming the student’s point even as we disagree. This is a way 
of “honoring a response” of a speaker while arguing against it or restating it to 
make a different point. Such moves are beyond mere politeness or attempts to 
downplay difference because the “teacher” is attempting to reﬁ
 ne or reinterpret 
an idea for the participant who presented it. 
We are not suggesting that our use of language (the teachers’ or our own) 
was an intentional ploy to achieve a certain affect, for we doubt this was the 
case. It is the form and function of the text that is of interest to us and how the 
form and function constructs and is constructed by the situated identities of the 
speaker. That is, we are interested in how social identities are achieved through 
moment-to-moment interaction and how these interactions are shaped by par-
ticular identities. The process, as Fairclough (1992) and Gee (2005) make clear, 
is dialectic. 
In our discussion of Scorpians (Myers, 1988), the sixth book our group read 
together, similar dynamics were at work. When discussing Scorpians, a book 
about an African American youth caught up in a gang to which he does not 
want to belong, all of us worked to connect at an emotional level, perhaps to 
offset the effects of the opposing discourses we espoused. Here, again, Jean 
began with a comment that pointed to structural inequity as it is passed on 
from generation to generation. Denise, on the other hand, responded through 
identification with the boy who suffers in the story. Since by this point in our 
discussion, it had already become clear that our discourses about the literature 
differ, we worked to agree at an emotional level. All of us agreed from the start 
of this discussion that the characters in the stories suffer, that they are forced 
into situations that present difficult if not impossible choices even if we dis-
agree about the context that creates that suffering. 
Jean: 
But you just see this, I kept thinking about this kind of trap that 
doesn’t seem to, it doesn’t seem to be different from generation to 
generation. And one of the poignant things about this book that I 
thought was very well done was because it wasn’t overdone, but two 
times she talks about when, when the older son was born . . . how she 
has all this hope.
. . .
Denise: 
Yes. There was just no hope. I mean, how, there was no way out. 
There was just no way out, you know, and even this kid that picks on 
him at school. He doesn’t want to fight with this kid. He just wants 
to ignore him. He wants him just to go away. And yet, he’s not, you 
know, that, the other kid is not going to allow that to happen, and so 
then, what do you do if you’re that kid? And you’re constantly being 
picked on. And how many of our kids are victimized like that? And 
then they end up striking back and then they get in trouble and then 
they get a reputation and then people expect them to be bad. Just 
like all his teachers.
Cynthia: Right. Such a cycle.


140  Cynthia Lewis and Jean Ketter
Affective bonding is clear in this exchange through our direct reference to the 
emotional nature of our responses to the work. In Jean’s turn, she referred to 
the “poignancy” of the mother’s hope when her older son is born, and Denise 
spoke of empathizing with the students who get in trouble and then can’t shake 
their bad reputations. This was an emotional issue for Denise, whom we have 
found to be the consummate child advocate—always seeing the best in her stu-
dents and believing that kids have enormous capability to respond to litera-
ture in deep and thoughtful ways. When Jean co-taught with Denise on several 
occasions, she found that Denise often raised the concern that teachers make 
judgments about students based on what other teachers say, or what they know 
about the students’ families. She often spoke with outrage about a situation in 
which a teacher told one of her students that he was too “dumb to make it to 
college.”
The use of intensifiers, repetition, and pronoun usage also signify emotional-
ity or affective speech. For example, in her turn, Denise used intensifiers such 
as “just” and “constantly” to index her empathy with the character. She also 
switched to “you” in the fourth line, indicating her own empathy with the char-
acter she imagined and also to include the others as participants in her distress 
about how the boy is victimized. She referred to the victims she imagines as 
“our” kids, including all the participants as caretakers or guardians of the kids 
she describes. 
Cynthia affirmed her response with agreement and restatement. “Right. Such 
a cycle.” Although her response echoed Denise’s response with the intensifier 
“such” and affirmation of her feelings, she was also returning to Jean’s initiat-
ing turn in the episode focusing in the structural forces at work, passed on, 
in cyclical fashion from generation to generation. Denise, on the other hand, 
focused on individual experiences and choices in her analysis of the “victim’s” 
experience. 
This pattern repeats itself in another turn between Denise and Cynthia. Cyn-
thia had just asked if the lack of hope in the book would make it too difficult to 
share with adolescents. Sarah’s response initiated the following exchange:
Sarah: 
You don’t, you wouldn’t want to be preachy about it and say, “Look 
you guys, this is what could happen to you if you don’t toe the line.
Denise: 
I think the, I think the, uh, no, I think the value of the book is for 
kids to see what other kids in other subcultures are going through. 
Every day of their life. I think we’re so removed from that here. I 
mean that. Maybe we’re not.
Cynthia: Yes. And it makes those, those, these kids seem very human and 
very. And to have, they have ethics and morals and /
Although Sarah sounds as though she would not want to use the book as a 
cautionary tale, she often talked about young adult literature in just those 
terms, believing that it should present kids with moral and ethical truths they 
can live by. She tended to view students as incapable of getting beyond sur-


Learning as Social Interaction in a Study Group  141
face responses to texts and often asked group members how she could help her 
fifth-grade students “dig deeper” under the surface of the literature they read. 
This is in contrast to Denise, who, as described earlier, had every confidence 
that her eighth-grade students could think deeply and thoughtfully about 
the books they read. In response to Sarah, then, Denise somewhat tentatively 
offered her belief about the value of teaching this book. Although she seems 
to second guess herself at the end of this turn (“Maybe we’re not”), she uses 
intensifiers like “every day” and “so” and “I mean” to express her distress that 
these “other” teens, who are “in other subcultures” do not have the advantages 
Denise sees her students enjoying. Cynthia’s first response was “Yes.” Again she 
affirmed Denise’s response at an emotional level but then presented a different 
argument in that she emphasized the way that the characters in the book can 
be normalized rather than viewed as “other.” Features of voice here are very 
interesting because Denise uses “othering” pronouns—“they and we”—and 
Cynthia began by repeating this pattern, but then changed it: “those, those, 
these kids.”
In this excerpt, Denise signiﬁ
 ed the other adolescents for whom she’d like 
her students to have empathy. This way of viewing the Other can lead to a 
moral judgment or paternalism or a desire to protect the innocence of the ado-
lescents in this community. Although it is tempting for us to read her remarks 
in this way, we would like now to offer an alternative reading, one that is more 
generous and in keeping with Denise’s strong afﬁ
 nity for her students and gen-
eral advocacy for youth. Asked to come up with a reason for teaching this book 
to kids in her community, and wanting to emphatically divorce herself from 
any sense of this book as a cautionary tale, she made what we believe to be 
an attempt to situate the characters in this book within an unjust system of 
oppression and inequity. She referred to this system through her use of the 
word “subcultures,” which marks a movement away from viewing the char-
acters as individuals who make what appear sometimes to be bad choices. My 
response, on the other hand, can be read as a shift to a focus on the kids rather 
than the structures that shape them. 
This exchange is an example of interdiscursivity as deﬁ
 ned earlier – a trace 
or presence of one discourse within another. In this case, one can read the 
discourse of the individual in Denise’s remark (the individuals who are her 
students can learn from what the other individuals experience every day) and 
the discourse of structural inequity in my remark (the underlying assumption 
being that it is necessary to represent as human those who have been system-
atically represented as “other” and as malevolent). Embedded in each of these 
remarks, however, are alternate discourses: an understanding about the struc-
tural nature of subcultures in Denise’s remark and an understanding about the 
importance of foregrounding the individual, with moral and ethical dilemmas, 
in my remark. This pattern of interdiscursivity becomes more pronounced in 
later transcripts, and we argue that such hybrid language opens spaces for learn-
ing as we have deﬁ
 ned it—the appropriation and reconstruction of discourses 
within one’s social world. Fixed practices are most likely to be interrupted when 


142  Cynthia Lewis and Jean Ketter
more dialogic conversations occur resulting in subtle shifts in the social identi-
ties of the participants. 
The Middle Transcripts: Interdiscursive Moments 
In our analysis of transcripts from the middle years of this study, we found 
marked changes in the categories of genre and voice as they intersected with 
the discourses of liberal humanism (individual) and critical multiculturalism 
(structural forces). To demonstrate these changes, we focus this section on a 
lengthy exchange from our discussion of American Eyes: New Asian American 
Short Stories for Young Adults (Carlson, 1994) that took place in April of 2000. 
This collection of short stories by Asian American writers explores issues of 
assimilation and acculturation among young Asian Pacific Americans. We 
focus on two episodes from the book group discussion, and include nearly the 
entire episode in each case in order to make some points about the structure of 
participation in each episode.
We begin with an episode that starts with Carol, a teacher who taught gifted 
education and had been a member of the group for a little over 2 years at the 
time of this discussion. Carol is unique in the group because she had experience 
teaching in a rural south Texas community with a population of working-class 
Latinos. Her experience was often reﬂ
 ected in her analysis of a character’s moti-
vation and, in particular, her perceptions of the conﬂ
 icts those from a minority 
culture experience in schooling and society at large. At this point, we were dis-
cussing a story about a ﬁ
 rst-generation Japanese adolescent who revisits Little 
Tokyo in Los Angeles, where his recently deceased father had taken him many 
times as a child (Oba, 1994).
Carol: 
And it’s so funny, too, I think all the way through that that, um, 
all the way through the book, the trade off that they have to be 
an American and not give up whatever culture is offered, whatever 
their culture offers them. I’m not explaining this right, but each 
one of them has kind of a different way, like, like, when you were 
talking about that seeing ghosts, you know, calling back his uncle, 
and accepting that he would really appear, and the boy who went 
back, tried to go back to that Japanese part, yeah, yeah, to ﬁ
 nd the 
different stores and everything and they were gone, and, I don’t 
know/ . . .
Sarah: 
Oh, that was sad.
Cynthia: And he wasn’t accepted in the store [restaurant].
Carol:  
Right. Exactly. Exactly. When he sat there waiting for him
Sarah:  
Yes ( )
Cynthia: That was sad.
Sarah: 
Um hmm. It was.
Sarah:  
Was that the story where they repeated this phrase a couple times, 
“If you lived here you’d be home”?


Learning as Social Interaction in a Study Group  143
[All affirm] 
Sarah: 
There’s something about that phrase.
. . .
Cynthia: His father has died, right, and his mother is filling her life by making 
origami. That’s a great image.
Sarah: 
All over the house.
Carol: 
And she left the neighborhood, too, so it’s like there aren’t any con-
nections back with that neighborhood anymore.
The episode started with Carol struggling to explain her sense that these char-
acters are caught between American culture and the culture of their ancestry. 
One could argue that Carol’s use of the word “American” reveals an experien-
tial value (Fairclough, 1989) or ideological stance toward first generation eth-
nic minorities that marks them as immigrants or non-Americans and assumes 
White people as unmarked “Americans.” Yet, in the context of her entire turn, 
it seems more likely that the phrase “American culture” refers to “dominant” 
American culture, and that Carol is interested in how this individual’s life is 
shaped by a larger social and cultural framework. Another interdiscursive 
moment, this speaker turn holds traces of both discourses under discussion—
the individual and the structural. Given that before Carol’s turn, we had been 
discussing something entirely different (nuclear family narratives), Carol took 
control of the topic, a move not typical of the teachers in the early transcripts. 
Also related to the genre of “book talk,” Carol claimed a particular stance at 
the same time that she seemed either unwilling to claim it or unsure of herself. 
She began this rather serious statement about the characters’ cultural position-
ing with the seemingly contradictory “And it’s so funny, too,” perhaps as a way 
to undercut the seriousness of what she was about to say. A few sentences later, 
she undercut her claim to authority by stating “I’m not explaining this right.” 
We found that when teacher participants in the group began to frame their 
responses in terms of the discourse of structural forces, they did so with some 
degree of inarticulateness, using more filler words and sometimes apologizing 
for their manner of speaking (“I’m not explaining this right”). This inarticulate 
voice was far from ineffective, however, because it signaled a shift in discourse 
as participants constructed new perspectives. Carol did not simply appropriate 
a way of thinking more associated with Cynthia or Jean. Instead, she recon-
structed this world view in her own way, one that centered as much on the 
individual as it did on the social constitution of the individual.
We include most of the turns that were part of this episode because they 
reveal both the animated, collaborative talk that we displayed by this time in 
our group’s evolution, and because this series of turns serves as an extended 
example of interdiscursive talk that weaves in and out of both discourses. 
For instance, although all of the turns add a bit of detail to create a sense of 
immediacy and sadness about the predicament of this individual adolescent 
boy, three of the turns reinforce the structural nature of his predicament. Cyn-
thia reminded others that the boy was not accepted as more than a tourist in 


144  Cynthia Lewis and Jean Ketter
one of the Japanese restaurants he entered, searching for a past he had lost. 
Carol agreed and added an image of the boy waiting to be acknowledged in 
the restaurant. And, finally, Carol underscored the lack of cultural affiliation 
the boy experiences. Throughout this set of cohesive turns, we follow up on 
each other’s comments, almost finishing each other’s sentences and building 
on previous turns.
The next episode followed directly after the one just discussed. It, too, repre-
sents an instance of interdiscursivity, but one that works quite differently than 
the first episode. Sarah began by asking a question about White privilege, but 
did so from a position of dominance that served to marginalize those whom she 
refers to as “people who are different.”
Sarah: 
I wonder how many White people are aware in their day-to-day life 
how much other people are trying to be like them? You know, peo-
ple who are different. I never think of that until I read these stories 
and see about how important all these things are—the language, the 
hair color, all of those things—that striving for those things, that we 
don’t even think about it. Why, why do people feel they have to be 
just like that in order to be of worth?
Cynthia: Yeah, I don’t see them as striving for it, I see them as (pause) want-
ing
Sarah: 
envy?
Cynthia: the privilege that comes with that 
Sarah: 
Oh, okay.
Cynthia: and the power that comes with these things and feeling like they’re 
completely denigrated and treated with prejudice because they don’t 
have it. That seems like it’s more directed towards us than towards 
the self to me, but what do others think?
It was difficult for us to be generous in our response to Sarah’s initial turn in this 
episode, coming as it did nearly three years into the study group at a time when 
we had hoped we had progressed beyond such comments. In our view, her first 
sentence was inscribed with the very White privilege her comment, at some 
level, sought to challenge. Moreover, by indexing White people as “them,” she 
seems not to acknowledge her own implication in this system of privilege. Later 
in the turn, Sarah uses repetition of an article (“the” language, “the” hair color, 
“all of those things”) to refer to characteristics of White people that she believes 
are seen as desirable. Her use of “the” and shift from “these things” to “those 
things” further serves to distance her from this system of privilege. 
Indeed, there are some characters in American Eyes who measure themselves 
against Eurocentric standards of beauty; however, they do so with an awareness 
of the power differences that privilege these standards. One can read into Sar-
ah’s turn the now familiar discourse of liberal humanism (and the individual 
psyche). She was concerned that this “striving” toward White characteristics 
could be damaging to one’s self-worth. 


Learning as Social Interaction in a Study Group  145
Cynthia channeled her frustration into a response that directly opposed 
Sarah’s discourse of Whiteness, attempting to disrupt the way that Sarah con-
flated White privilege with what she perceived as the desire to be White. Even as 
Cynthia paused to consider the best way to finish her sentence about not seeing 
people of color as “striving” to be White, Sarah jumped in to finish Cynthia’s 
sentence with the word she thought would fit—“envy,” further revealing her 
belief that White people serve as objects of desire for people of color. 
Earlier in the life of our book group, as is evident from our analyses of genre 
and voice in the exchanges included in the section on early transcripts, Cynthia 
most likely would have made her point less directly. For instance, she might 
have found some common point of agreement before moving on to disagree, 
or, possibly concerned about sounding too authoritative, she might have found 
herself pulling back—speaking inarticulately, using filler words, half-spoken 
sentences, and seeming not to want to claim her position. Such was not the 
case by this time in the study group, however, and so, after a quick affirmation 
(“yeah”), she explicitly states her opposition, claiming her position, in part, 
through the use of repetition (“I don’t see them as striving for it, I see them as 
. . .”). She continued to draw on the features of book talk genre that we’ve 
labeled as “teacherly moves” and “disagreement” for several turns, strongly 
stating her position. Finally, having had control of the floor for three turns, 
Cynthia opens the floor to others in a very teacherly manner (“but what do 
others think?”). She spoke those words, as teachers sometimes do, as though 
she were completely open to other perspectives, but we now suspect that every-
thing about her words and intonation suggested otherwise. Vocabulary such as 
“privilege,” “power,” “completely denigrated,” and “prejudice,” make the dis-
course of critical multiculturalism very clear, and this discourse, it seemed to us 
when we first analyzed this episode, stands in stark contrast to Sarah’s discourse 
of liberal humanism and self-worth. 
However, as we have read and reread Sarah’s words, placing them in the con-
text of our historical understanding of Sarah and her position in our group, we 
have come to see her contribution differently. Sarah was reared in a Midwest-
ern town where she lived in what she described as a “working-class town with 
much prejudice, including [her] parents.” Many times in our years together, 
she commented, often derisively, about the way her home community would 
have treated a particular character. She was proud of her participation in this 
group, calling it a “class,” and reporting that her friends, family, and fellow 
teachers asked her questions about why she belonged to the group and what its 
value was to her. She kept count of the books we read and shared short articles 
and bibliographic entries about multicultural literature taken from teaching 
magazines. This year, the fifth year of the study, the group is continuing their 
monthly meetings without us, and Sarah, who has just retired from teaching, 
is organizing and audio-taping the meetings and leading the book selection 
process. 
Sarah’s role in the group was most always tentative. Her turns were often ques-
tions, asking for advice or elaboration, usually directed to Cynthia or Jean. She 


146  Cynthia Lewis and Jean Ketter
also had a habit of echoing the end of someone’s sentence and then nodding her 
agreement. She represented herself in interviews as someone who did not know 
as much about interpreting literature as others in the group (since she was 
elementary trained and the others were trained in secondary English). Her social 
identity as a member of this group was tentative and insecure, whereas her 
social identity as derived from participation in the group was elevated. She often 
referred to the strong bonds we had developed as a collegial learning community. 
This history of identities, relationships, and connections (Gee, 2005) moved 
us to re-see Sarah’s turn about “other people” striving to be like White people. 
In the context of Sarah’s evolution in this group, we began to realize that the 
lens through which we interpreted Sarah’s words was shaped by the way our 
academic discourse community talks about race. Thus, we did not consider that 
Sarah’s words could be read as an awareness of Whiteness as a race rather than 
a taken-for-granted norm. As she put it, “I never think of that until I read these 
stories and see about how important all these things are—the language, the hair 
color, and all of those things—that striving for those things that we don’t even 
think about it.” Here she moved in a new direction, tentatively considering the 
construction of race in relation to self and other, before the next sentence when 
she returned to a focus on the psychology of individual self-worth. This move 
was in keeping with research findings (Helms, 1990; Lawrence & Tatum, 1997) 
suggesting that becoming aware of one’s own Whiteness is an early stage of 
White racial identity development.
Although Sarah could be said to “other” those who are “different,” she also 
represents White people as other in her ﬁ
 rst sentence. Later in the turn, she 
used the pronoun “we” to refer to White people, but in the ﬁ
 rst sentence, she 
referred to White people with the pronouns “their” and “them,” setting herself 
apart from those White people who live their lives day to day naturalizing race. 
She, on the other hand, had begun to denaturalize race, and reading the litera-
ture under discussion has helped her to do so. Sarah’s way of representing the 
discourse of structural inequality was different than ours. She embedded the 
discourse within a story—the story of her thinking and reading processes.
After Cynthia asked what others thought, hoping, at the time, that someone 
else would challenge Sarah, Carol continued the episode with a turn that dis-
played a common feature of the book talk genre—the personal story. 
Carol: 
I think it is whatever that country puts up as their ideal. I know that 
my friend who came from Bolivia had, has, fair skin and, um, golden 
eyes, and dark hair. And his skin is not, and he would be my color—
he’s not, like, very fair. And he was looked down upon, I mean liter-
ally, to the point where he was carrying a knife in school to scare them 
away, because he was not dark. So, it’s just, he wasn’t Indian enough 
looking.
Denise: He didn’t fit in. That must be a sad state of affairs.
Carol: 
Right, and he was looked upon as a foreigner even though he was 
Bolivian. And his mother came from Chile.


Learning as Social Interaction in a Study Group  147
Here, as in the case of Sarah’s turn, the personal story is being used in ways 
that are quite different than one might expect. Rather than feeding into the 
discourse of the individual, Carol told a story from which we listeners were 
expected to extract signiﬁ
 cance: it is the larger structures of privilege that deter-
mine who will be marginalized, and those structures are somewhat arbitrary 
(changing from country to country). Perhaps having read Sarah’s comment as 
a privileging of Whiteness, Carol’s story served to contest that privilege. Some 
readers might suggest that her discourse is too quick to assume that the struc-
ture of power and privilege is arbitrary rather than historical, political, and eco-
nomic. However, coming on the tail of Sarah’s comment, it serves an important 
purpose in this local scene—to gently challenge within the framework of story. 
And Carol sticks with this position in her last turn, despite Denise’s attempt to 
focus on the individual circumstance of Carol’s friend (“He didn’t ﬁ
 t in.”).
The Intersection of Genre, Discourse, and Voice
In the early transcripts, the individual/structural binary was constructed through 
generic features of talk in our book group, such as politeness and affirmation. 
We researchers denied our authority even as we controlled most topics and 
made indirect teacherly moves. Although our talk was constituted in a range 
of social languages, those social languages emerged out of the discourses we 
brought to the table from our respective social worlds (e.g. liberal humanism 
for the teachers; critical multiculturalism for us). Our language bridged these 
binary discourses through elements of voice that downplayed them—through 
the use of pronouns, filler words, and intensifiers that created bonds and pro-
moted affect. In the middle transcripts, the individual/structural discourses 
were less distinct. Elements of genre intersected with these discourses in ways 
that blurred their boundaries. For instance, the use of personal story, an often-
cited feature of “book talk” genre (Florio-Ruane, 2001; Long, 1986; Marshall, 
Smagorinsky, & Smith, 1995) that serves to accentuate the individual, here 
instead provided a form through which teachers gave shape to the structural. 
Although we researchers still at times resorted to teacherly moves as a feature 
of our book talk, we did so with more explicitness, making our agendas clear 
(a feature that is even more accentuated in later transcripts). Disagreements 
among members were more explicit as well. One teacher, for instance, disagreed 
so strongly with Jean’s statement that racism was the root cause of an African 
American character’s incarceration that she strongly retorted “Now wait, wait, 
wait! You think that’s what he’s thinking? Or is that what we’re reading into 
it.” More often, during this middle period, a teacher participant would chal-
lenge another teacher’s reading of the text more effectively than we did because 
the teacher’s use of hybrid discourses (individual/structural) was accomplished 
through the use of a familiar and affective genre such as personal story. 
Our analyses of the data in this study point to the central role interdiscursiv-
ity plays in learning. If we view learning as the appropriation and reconstruc-
tion of one’s social world, then it stands to reason that interdiscursive language 


148  Cynthia Lewis and Jean Ketter
would be critical to this process. For it is through the presence of one discourse 
in another that a generative rather than fixed appropriation becomes possible. 
In this vein, the members of our study group take up one another’s genres, 
discourses, and voices over time in ways that create rather than replicate, thus 
opening spaces for new ways of constructing a teaching and learning self.3 
Appendix A: Book List
Date Read 
Book Title and Author
6/19/97 
Hold Fast to Dreams, Andrea Davis Pinkney
7/16/97 
Warriors Don’t Cry, Melba Patillo Peale*
8/6/97 
An Island Like You, Judith Ortiz Cofer
9/22/97 
Journey to Topaz, Yoshiko Uchida
11/05/97 
Last Summer with Maizon, Jacqueline Woodson
12/01/97 
Scorpians, Walter Dean Myers
1/20/98 
The Watsons go to Birmingham: 1963, Christopher Curtis
2/17/98 
Behind the Bedroom Wall, Laure E. Williams
4/07/98 
Jip, His Story, Katherine Paterson
5/05/98 
Growing up Native American, Patricia Riley (Ed.)
7/22/98 
Growing up Native American *
8/31/98 
Toning the Sweep, Angela Johnson
9/23/98 
Bless Me Ultima, Rudolfo Anaya
10/26/98 
Bless Me Ultima
12/07/98 
Novia Boy, Gary Soto
4/10/99 
Playing in the Dark, Toni Morrison* (our only text meant for 
adult readers)
5/16/99 
Sugar in the Raw, Rebeca Carroll
6/28/99 
Annie John, Jamaica Kincaid
8/11/99 
Seedfolk, Paul Fleischman
9/29/99 
Circuit: Stories from the Life of a Migrant Child, Francisco 
Jimenez
11/01/99 
True North, Kathryn Lasky
12/18/99 
Power, Linda Hogan
1/31/00 
Farewell to Manzanar, Jeanne Houston
2/28/00 
Monster, Walter Dean Myers
4/03/00 
American Eyes: New Asian American Short Stories for Young Adults, 
Lori Carlson (Ed.)
5/09/00 
Cool Salsa, Lori Carlson (Ed.)
8/07/00 
Oh Freedom, Kids Talk about the Civil Rights Movement with the 
People Who Made It Happen, Casey King, Linda Barrett Osborne, 
& Joe Brooks
9/12/00 
From the Notebook of Melanin Sun, Jacqueline Woodson
10/25/00 
If It Hadn’t Been for Yoon Joon, Marie G. Lee
12/05/00 
The Birchbark House, Louise Erdrich
1/16/01 
Discussion of article, “Reading Multiculturally,” Daniel Hade


Learning as Social Interaction in a Study Group  149
2/28/01 
Like Sisters on the Homefront, Rita Williams-Garcia
4/25/01 
The Skin I’m In, Sharon G. Flake
6/28/01 
Buried Onions, Gary Soto
8/01/01 
So Far from the Bamboo Grove, Yoko Kawashima Watkins 
* designates that the discussion of this book was not successfully audiotaped
Appendix B: Coding Categories
1. Genre
Language tied to a particular social activity (Chouliaraki & Fairclough, 1999, 
p. 63 ), in this case, a book group
 1. Topic control (note when a new topic is initiated and when it shifts)
 2. Participant structures (turn-taking—overlap, interruption, etc.)
 3. Encouragement and affirmation or agreement (encouraging someone to 
talk; affirming what someone says)
 4. Not wanting to claim something (e.g. “i don’t know if this makes sense or 
not” or “i would never do this, but”)
 5. Politeness/etiquette
 6. Humor 
 7. Personal stories 
 8. Page reference/evidence from text 
 9. Teacherly moves
 
10. Disagreement
 
11. Attention to literary devices
 
12. Seeking affirmation
2. Discourse
 1. “Construction of some aspect of reality from a particular perspective” (Chou-
liaraki & Fairclough, 1999, p. 63 ); “Systematic clusters of themes, statements, 
ideas, and ideologies [that] come into play in the text” (Luke, 2000, p. 456.)
 1. Adolescence
 
 1. Universal
 
 2. Adolescent as Other
 
 3. Developing child/maturity
 
 4. Adolescent as needing protection
 
 5. Adolescent as savvy
 
 6. Adolescent as gifted
 2. Feminism/Gender
 3. Good Parenting/Bad Parenting or good/bad families
 4. Critical Multiculturalism/structural inequity
 5. Liberal Humanism/individual choice or circumstance
 6. Teacher


150  Cynthia Lewis and Jean Ketter
 
 1. Overworked
 
 2. Beleaguered
 
 3. Under Surveillance
 
 4. Teacher knowledge/lack of knowledge
 7. Capitalism
 8. Popular Culture
 
 1. Corrupting
 
 2. Useful
 9. YA lit. as moral guide
 
10. Whiteness
 
11. Book group as useful
 
12. Racism/prejudice/social class divisions
 2. The way the perspective is put forth 
 1. Reference to book or author (or other person) as authority
 2. Personal experience
 3. Teaching story
 4. Reference to another form of popular culture
 5. Reference to speciﬁ
 c section of book under discussion
 6. Reference to book group history or members’ particular frameworks
3. Voice
Language used for a particular category of people and closely linked to their 
Identity (Chouliaraki & Fairclough, 1999, p. 63 ). The way we use language to 
present ourselves in relation to others in the group and outside the group, or in 
relation to the text.
 1. Pronouns (particularly places where we shift within our own utterance or 
where the pronoun shifts from speaker to speaker; note all uses of We and 
You)
 
 1. Affect
 
 2. Cognition
 
 3. Othering
 
 4. Bonding
 2. Modality (should, would, could, may)
 3. Qualifiers 
 4. Inarticulateness (e.g. not completing sentences), fillers, or apologizing
 5. Passive voice/Active
 6. Register (word choice associated with various statuses and identities)
 7. Kinds of questions
 
 1. Probing or asking for elaboration
 
 2. Asking what someone thinks
 
 3. Asking what to do
 
 4. Asking to challenge
 
 5. Asking in order to speculate


Learning as Social Interaction in a Study Group  151
 8. Repetitions
 9. Irony
 
10. Intensifiers
 
11. Strong statement (lack of fillers, many intensifiers, affect-laden)
Notes
1 Fairclough’s use of the term “interdiscursivity,” also referred to as “constitutive inter-
textuality,” draws heavily from Kristeva’s (1986) use of the term “intertextuality” 
in her explication of Bakhtin’s (1981, 1986) dialogic theory of social languages and 
genres.
2 The following conventions are used in the presentation of transcripts: [text] indicates 
descriptive text added to clarify elements of the transcript; text indicates overlapping 
speech; ( ) indicates unintelligible words; . . . indicates extracts edited out of the tran-
script; / indicates interrupted or dropped utterances.
3 We are interested in studying how the teachers’ learning in the study group might 
shape their work with each other and with their students now that we have left the 
site. Currently the study group is continuing without us—a group that includes ﬁ
 ve of 
the core teachers plus two new teachers. The teachers have agreed to provide us with 
audiotapes of their discussions, which will allow us to study instances of interdiscur-
sivity as they occur without our participation. We are also interested in how our study 
group may have shaped discussions of multicultural texts in the teachers’ classrooms. 
To this end, we are currently analyzing interviews with the teachers that speak to this 
subject as well as the artifacts and narratives related to their teaching that the teachers 
brought to our study group meetings. In addition, Jean has taught three collaborative 
units with Denise in her eighth-grade classroom. The data from this collaboration will 
provide more information about the role of interdiscursivity in learning as it plays out 
in the classroom context.
References
Achinstein, B. (2002). Conflict amid community: The micropolitics of teacher collabo-
ration. Teachers College Record, 104(3), 421–455.
Alvermann, D. E., Commeyras, M., Young, J. P., Randall, S., & Hinson, D. (1997). Inter-
rupting gendered discursive practices in classroom talk about texts: Easy to think 
about, difficult to do. Journal of Literacy Research, 29(1), 73–104.
Bakhtin, M. (1981). The dialogic imagination: Four essays (Michael Holqiust, Ed.). Aus-
tin: University of Texas Press.
Bakhtin, M. (1986). Speech genres and other late essays (C. Emerson, Ed.). Austin: Uni-
versity of Texas Press.
Barrera. R. B. (1992). The culture gap in literature-based literacy instruction. Education 
and Urban Society. 23(2), 227–244.
Barton, D. & Hamilton, M. (2005). Literacy, reification and the dynamics of social inter-
action. In D. Barton and K. Tusting (Eds.), Beyond communities of practice: Language, 
power and social context (pp. 14–35). Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press
Beach, R. (1997). Students’ resistance to engagement with multicultural literature. In 
T. Rogers & A. O. Soter (Eds.), Reading across cultures: Teaching literature in a diverse 
society (pp. 69–94). New York: Teachers College Press.
Bonilla-Silva, E. (2001). White supremacy and racism in the post-civil rights era. Boulder, 
CO: Lynne Rienner Publishers.


152  Cynthia Lewis and Jean Ketter
Carlson, L. (1994). American eyes: New Asian American short stories for young adults. 
New York: Holt & Company.
Chouliaraki, L., & Fairclough, N. (1999). Discourse in late modernity: Rethinking Critical 
Discourse Analysis. Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press.
Cofer, J. O. (1995). An island like you: Stories of the barrio. New York: Puffin.
Fairclough, N. (1989). Language and power. New York: Longman.
Fairclough, N. (1992). Discourse and social change. London: Polity Press
Fang, Z., Fu, D., & Lamme, L. (1999). Rethinking the role of multicultural literature 
in literacy instruction: Problems, paradox, and possibility. The New Advocate, 12(3), 
259–276.
Florio-Ruane, S. (with de Tar, J.). (2001). Teacher education and cultural imagina-
tion: Autobiography, conversation, and narrative. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum 
Associates.
Flynn, J.E., Lensmire, T.J., & Lewis, C. (2009). A critical pedagogy of race in teacher 
education: Response and responsibility. In S. Groenke & A. Hatch (Eds.), Critical 
pedagogies in K-12 pre-service teacher education (pp. 85–98). New York: Springer. 
Gallego, M. A., Hollingsworth, S., & Whitenack, D. A. (2001). Relational knowing in the 
reform of educational cultures. Teachers College Record, 103 (2), 240–266.
Gee, J. P. (1999). An introduction to discourse analysis: theory and method. London and 
New York: Routledge
Gee, J. P. (2005). An introduction to discourse analysis: Theory and method (2nd ed.). 
New York: Routledge.
Grossman, P., Wineburg, S., & Woolworth, S. (2001). Toward a theory of teacher com-
munity. Teachers College Record, 103(6), 942–1012.
Harris, V. J. (1993). Literature-based approaches to reading instruction. In L. Darling-
Hammond (Ed.), Review of Research in Education (pp. 269–297). Washington DC: 
American Educational Research Association.
Helms, J. E. (1990). Toward a model of white racial identity development. In J. E. Helms 
(Ed.), Black and white racial identity: Theory, research, and practice. New York: Green-
wood Press. 
Hicks, D. (1996). Contextual inquiries: A discourse-oriented study of classroom learn-
ing. In D. Hicks (Ed.), Discourse, learning, and schooling (pp. 104–144). New York: 
Cambridge University Press.
Ketter, J. and Lewis, C. (2001). Already reading texts and contexts: Multicultural 
literature in a predominantly white rural community. Theory into Practice. XI(3), 
175–84.
Kincheloe, J.L. & Steinberg, S. R. (1997). Changing multiculturalism: new times, new cur-
riculum. London: Open University Press.
Kristeva, J. (1986). Word, dialogue and novel. In T. Moi (Ed.), The Kristeva Reader (pp. 
34–61). Oxford: Basil Blackwell.
Lave, J. (1996). Teaching, as learning, in practice. Mind, Culture, and Activity, 3(3), 
149–164.
Lawrence, S.M, & Tatum, B.D. (1997). Teachers in transition: The impact of antira-
cist professional development on classroom practice. Teachers College Board, 99 (1), 
162–178.
Lewis, C., Ketter, J., & Fabos. B. (2001). Reading race in a rural context. International 
Journal of Qualitative Studies in Education, 14(3), 317–350. 
Long, E. (1986). Women, reading, and culural authority: Some implications of the audi-
ence perspective in cultural studies. American Quarterly, 38, 591–612.


Learning as Social Interaction in a Study Group  153
Luke A. (2000). Critical literacy in Australia: A matter of context and standpoint. Journal 
of Adolescent and Adult Literacy, 43(5), 448–461.
Marshall, J. D. Smagorinsky, P. & Smith, M. W. (1995). The language of interpretation: 
Patterns of discourse in discussions of literature. Urbana, IL: National Council of Teach-
ers of English.
Marx, S. & Pennington, J. (2003). Pedagogies of critical race theoretical experimen-
tations with white preservice teachers. International Journal of Qualitative Studies, 
16(1), 91–110. 
Medina, C. (2010). “Reading across communities” in biliteracy practices: Examining 
translocal discourses and cultural flows in literature discussions. Reading Research 
Quarterly, 45(1), 40–60. 
Myers, W. D. (1988). Scorpions. New York: Harper Collins.
Naidoo, B. (1994). Through whose eyes? Exploring racism through literature with white 
students. In David Graddol (Ed.), Researching literacy and language in social context 
(pp. 62–81). Bristol, UK: Multilingual Matters.
Oba, R. (1994). Home now. In L. M. Carlson (Ed.), American eyes: New Asian-American 
short stories for young adults. New York: Holt & Company.
Purves, A. C. (1997). Introduction: The grand tour and other forays. In G. Cruz, S. Jor-
dan, J. Meléndez, S. Ostrowski, & A. C. Purvis (Eds.), Beyond the culture tours: Studies 
in the teaching and learning of culturally diverse texts. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum 
Associates.
Rogers, T. & Soter, A. O. (Eds.). (1997). Reading across cultures: Teaching literature in a 
diverse society. New York: Teachers College Press.
Rogoff, B. (1995). Sociocultural activity on three planes. In J. V. Wertsch, P. Del Rio, & 
A. Alvarez (Eds.), Sociocultural studies of mind (pp. 139–164). New York: Cambridge 
University Press.
Scheurich, J. J., & Young, M. D. (1997). Coloring epistemologies: Are our research epis-
temologies racially biased? Educational Research, 26 (4), 4–16.
Sheets, R. H. (2003). Competency vs. good intentions: diversity ideologies and teacher 
potential. International Journal of Qualitative Studies in Education, 16(1), 111–120.
Sleeter, C. E. (1993). How white teachers construct race. In C. McCarthy & W. Crichlow 
(Eds.), Race, identity, and representation in education (pp. 157–171). New York: Rout-
ledge.
Spring, J. (2004). Deculturalization and the struggle for equality: A brief hisotry of the edu-
cation of dominated cultures in the United States. New York: McGraw Hill
Taxel, J. (1992). The politics of children’s literature: Reflections on multiculturalism, 
political correctness, and Christopher Columbus. In V. J. Harris (Ed.), Teaching mul-
ticultural literature in grades K–8 (pp. 1–36). Norwood, MA: Christopher-Gordon.
Thompson, A. (2003). Tiffany, friend of people of color: White investments in antira-
cism. International Journal of Qualitative Studies in Education, 16(1), 7–29.
Trainor, J. (2008). Rethinking racism: Emotion, persuasion, and literacy education in an 
all-white high school. Carbondale, IL: Southern University Illinios Press.
Wenger, E. (1999). Communities of practice: Learning, meaning, and identity. New York: 
Cambridge University Press.
Williams, B. (2004). Truth in the tale: Race and “counterstorytelling”: in the classroom. 
Journal of Adolescent and Adult Literacy, 48(2), 184–189.


8 
Language, Power, and 
 
Participation: Using Critical 
 
Discourse Analysis to Make 
 
Sense of Public Policy
 
Haley Woodside-Jiron
 
University of Vermont
State and federal policymakers in the U.S. have never been more concerned 
with reading than they are today. Nationwide we have seen a tremendous 
increase in state legislation around reading and phonics (Allington, 2002; 
Paterson, 2000). At the federal level we are experiencing what some refer to 
as a “policy epidemic” (Hopkins, 2001, p. 4). The No Child Left Behind 
(NCLB) Act and Reading First legislation provided $1 billion a year for read-
ing education beginning in 2002 and ended in 2007.1 These changes mark a 
significant shift that has taken place not only around reading, but also around 
the role of elected officials in defining how to teach. Traditionally, issues of 
pedagogy and teaching content have been left to teachers and administra-
tors. These more recent trends in policymaking, however, take a different 
approach—one that pushes against constitutional rights for local, school-based 
control. 
These shifts have not taken place in a vacuum. Newspapers across the coun-
try report that all children must be reading on grade level by grade 3, that there 
is a crisis in education, and that scientific research should be the basis for most 
if not all decision making. Despite the omnipresence of this agenda and the 
apparent persuasiveness of the media and agenda setters, we need to complicate 
these discourse practices of cultural models and expertise. Instead of simply 
assuming that they are both stable and correct, we need to reach the text, dis-
course practices, and social practices behind them (see Coles, 2000; Edmond-
son, 2000; Rogers, Mosley, & Kramer, 2009). 
By combining the works of Fairclough (1992, 2003) and Bernstein (2000), 
this chapter explores the use of Critical Discourse Analysis (CDA) as a tool in 
the critical analysis of public policy. Through the close analysis of changes in 
reading policies in California between 1995 and 1997, this research seeks deeper 
understandings of how power and policy are interrelated.2 
As Fairclough suggested, policies define how we are to act and by what rules 
we must abide. Through public policy we come to be socialized in many ways 
into what is thinkable and unthinkable (Bernstein, 2000). Policy and politi-
cal discourse represents the authoritative allocations of values and goals and 
socially situated representations of the world (Ball, 1990; Fairclough, 1995a). 
These cultural models (Gee, 1996, 1999) or understandings about the world 


Using CDA to Make Sense of Public Policy  155
position people in specific ways. Although it is easy to point to the evidence 
of power in policymaking and policy documents, it is quite another thing to 
be able to show how that power is generated, the role individuals play in that 
power structure, and the implications that those lines of power have for policy 
consumers. Given this complex web, a critical analysis of policy is necessary—
one that pushes past questions of efficiency and outcomes to questions of “how 
power is used to define the parameters of particular questions, to set the rules 
for particular practices, and to shape particular agendas” (Edmondson, 2002, 
p. 114). 
Prunty (1985) defined policy as an agenda or set of objectives that legitimizes 
the values, beliefs, and attitudes of its authors. He argued that issues of how 
problems arise and appear on agendas, how issues are developed, how policy 
is developed, and how policy is implemented are each important features for 
critical policy analysis. 
Kingdon’s (1995) framework for policy analysis speaks to this view of 
analysis, offering explicit analyses of the contexts, constructs, and social roles 
played by those inside and outside of policymaking. Although Kingdon’s 
framework addresses much of what Prunty called for in the critical analysis 
of policy, it does not engage us in critical social analysis or inquiries into how 
such political power constructs (and is constructed by) larger social practices. 
Critical analyses of policy include inquiry into underlying issues of power 
and ideology embedded within the definition of the perceived problem and 
solution. Although more recent analyses of reading policies in the United 
States make explicit the political nature of policymaking, they do not lead 
us to examine how political power with respect to dominant voices actually 
flows throughout (or drives, as the case may be) the policy domain (Wood-
side-Jiron, 2003). Helpful in thinking about the different layers of inquiry 
necessary in this sort of policy analysis is Fairclough’s (1992, 2003) frame for 
CDA. 
CDA, Bernstein, and Policy Analysis in California 
Fairclough and CDA 
Fairclough (1992, 2003) named discourse as a mode of action—one that is 
socially constitutive. He identified texts, discourse practices, and social prac-
tices and how they each come together to carry constructive effects. In his 
framework, he adopted a Hallidayian (Halliday, 1978) definition of text as 
spoken as well as written language. Discourse practices involve the processes 
of text production, distribution, and consumption. Social practices represent 
discourse as ideology and power. 
As Rogers (this volume) points out, local, institutional, and societal levels 
of interpretation necessarily take place at each of the three levels of analysis in 
CDA: text, discourse practice, and social interaction. I argue here that plac-
ing these domains in relation to one another is complex and requires a sys-


156  Haley Woodside-Jiron
tematic theory and analysis of relationships. What is often missing in CDA are 
the specific analytic procedures—something that Bernstein’s framework and 
Fairclough’s more recent works (2003) offer to CDA. 
Bernstein and the Pedagogic Device 
Bernstein’s (2000) work sheds light on this issue by offering a specific theory 
of relationship among the various levels of discourse under study. Specifically, 
Bernstein presented the Pedagogic device reflecting the relationship between 
regulative and instructional discourses. In his framework, Bernstein presented 
regulative discourse as the moral discourse that creates order, relations, and 
identity and ultimately controls instructional discourse. Instructional discourse 
is that which creates specialized skills and their relationship to each other. Ber-
nstein suggested that the regulative discourse ultimately controls the instruc-
tional discourse. By placing these discourses in detailed relation to one another 
and examining how the regulative discourse actually shapes the instructional 
discourse, we begin to understand the pedagogic device or specific power rela-
tions between the two. The charge to the researcher combining this frame with 
Fairclough’s CDA is to thoughtfully and systematically identify these discourses 
(i.e., texts, discourse practices, social practices) as regulative, instructional, and 
pedagogic so they can be examined in relationship to one another, offering a 
more complete understanding of the social analysis present in CDA (see Table 
8.1). This analytic approach offers a way for the critical policy analyst to explore 
Table 8.1 Combining Lenses to Inform Critical Discourse Analysis 
Fairclough/Chouliaraki Bernstein 
Implications for Research/Reflexivity
Local context:  
Instructional discourse: Places where things are being
Interactions or  
What is thinkable/ 
redefined for the larger public
outcomes of the  
unthinkable 
(language/text).
institutional context 
 
Issues of genre or ways of 
 
 
interacting
Institutional context:  
Regulative discourse: 
Governing bodies that name those
Social and political  
Dominant forces, 
redefinitions (organization/
institutions that  
voices, or decision 
discourse practice).
frame the local  
makers 
Issues of discourse or representing
context 
 
Societal context:  
Pedagogic device: 
What larger context/ideas make 
Larger governing  
Relationship between 
this arrangement of knowledge
bodies including  
the two. Sociological 
and decision making possible? 
policies, mandates,  
nature of pedagogic 
(cultural models/norms/member
and political climates  
knowledge. 
resources/ social practice)
that influence the  
 
local and institutional 
 
contexts 
What makes this kind 
 
of communication/ 
Issues of style or ways of being
 
phenomena possible? 


Using CDA to Make Sense of Public Policy  157
not only the presence of power structures in social change, but also how, 
specifically, power structures influence social change. 
The concepts of text, discourse practice, and social practice referred to in 
Fairclough’s CDA, and those of instructional discourse, regulative discourse, 
and pedagogic device (respectively) in Bernstein’s work are combined in my 
use of CDA in critical policy analysis. For the ease of discussion, I will refer 
simply to text, discourse practice, and social practice throughout the rest of this 
chapter.
Fairclough and Bernstein’s Frames in the Context of Critical Policy Analysis 
In working to understand how policy and power fit together in creating change, 
Fairclough (1995a, 1995b) referred to cruces tension points as moments of cri-
sis. These are times when things are changing or going wrong. What is sig-
nificant about these moments is that they provide opportunities to deconstruct 
the various aspects of practices, particularly language practices, that are often 
naturalized and therefore difficult to notice. In this regard, important sites for 
investigation include policy documents, well-circulated documents that serve 
to redefine current thinking, and specific events where particular voices, ideas, 
or agendas are brought to the front and acted on. These texts have the potential 
to direct our attention away from the more complex sites of political tension 
where issues of equity and justice reside. 
For analysis, I will now turn to the reading policy changes in California 
between 1995 and 1997. This account and inquiry will serve as a springboard 
for continued critical policy analysis in education, including the most recent 
Race to the Top, and is designed to go beyond describing and interpreting these 
changes to explaining them through the use of CDA. 
Inquiry Context 
I selected California as the site for this inquiry for several reasons. First, the 
state of California has the largest population in the United States, with 5 mil-
lion elementary and middle-school-age students currently being affected by the 
reading policies recently put into place. Second, California is the second larg-
est textbook adoption state. The textbook market is a fiercely competitive one. 
Whichever publishers win California adoption typically win a huge chunk of 
the national textbook market (Manzo, 1997). Therefore, the legislated read-
ing policies passed in California inevitably find their way into textbooks and 
thousands of classrooms across the nation. Students and teachers across the 
entire country are affected by California’s policies by default. Third, Califor-
nia provides an extremely visible account of considerable policy change over 
a relatively short period of time, thereby facilitating critical conversations 
around change— questions ignored in the functional analysis of policy. Basing 
my sampling strategy on cases of political importance (Kuzel, 1992; Patton, 
1990) affords a particular advantage in making explicit how policy can be used 


158  Haley Woodside-Jiron
as a means to create social change with respect to teaching and literacy learn-
ing, and how terms like “systematic, explicit phonics” and “phonemic aware-
ness instruction” have influenced the way reading is to be taught in California 
and elsewhere, ultimately influencing students’ apprenticeships into literacy 
(Collins, 1995; Egan-Robertson, 1998; Ferdman, 1990; Gee, 1996; Mahiri & 
Godley, 1998; Mertz, 1996; Vygotsky, 1978). 
Data 
The data for this study included formal and informal documents, and written 
and oral texts, including legislated policy documents, official state education 
agency documents, professional listserve and private correspondence, news-
paper articles, and documents from popular media sources with high circu-
lation rates such as Time and Newsweek. Related discourse practices were also 
included in the data set. Historical context data were drawn from significant 
events that took place in California around this body of policy. These historical 
events included electoral events, shifts in the organization of educational deci-
sion-making procedures specific to California’s governance system, temporal 
links between various documents, and legislative hearings (videotapes) where 
consistent and influential voices were present. Situating fine-grained discourse 
analysis in political and cultural context allows researchers to both explore cul-
tural models and how they interact with moments of change, and to exam-
ine how educational processes and practices are constructed across time and 
how discourse processes and practices shape what counts as knowing, doing, 
and being within and across events (Fairclough, 2003; Gee, 1996, 1999; Gee 
& Green, 1998; Rogers, 2003). Steeped in this collection process, I maintained 
detailed field notes and research journals to record analytical decisions and 
explanations of social practices over time, and in order to register my ongoing 
reflections. Fairclough (1995a) noted that this third level of analysis is the most 
explanatory and thus requires such a system of accountability. 
Analysis of Text 
Fairclough (1992) suggested that the analysis of spoken and written texts can 
be organized under four main headings: vocabulary, grammar, cohesion, and 
text structure. His more recent work (2003) focuses more elaborately on genres 
(ways of acting), discourses (ways of representing), and styles (ways of being). 
Particularly interesting in the critical analysis of policy are features of text that 
speak to the genre (Chouliaraki & Fairclough, 1999; Fairclough, 2003) of policy, 
including the vocabulary used while presenting new rules about the way people 
function and the way in which policies are written so as to produce cohesion. 
Here authoritative sentence structure in the introducing of new information 
and the intertextual features of the text work together to create cohesion (which 
is a property of neither the text nor the interpreter, but rather the intersection 
of the two). 


Using CDA to Make Sense of Public Policy  159
For this analysis, I have broken the selected texts into information units 
(Halliday, 1994) and identified theme and rheme in the sentence structure to 
interpret their structural role in the introduction of new information. As one 
analyzes spoken and written texts in CDA, one is at the same time addressing 
questions of form and meaning. I also looked at the nonstructural features of 
text that contribute to particular interpretations of text and social change. Spe-
cifically, I made note of the use of determiners in establishing authority and 
facts as well as the consistency of vocabulary in contributing to the cohesion 
of the overall text. How, during a time of policy change, did the policymakers 
make use of language to construct a perceived consensus among and between 
outsiders and insiders? 
Analysis of Discourse Practice 
With the tools and methods of CDA, I saw that policies were layered on top 
of one another to create cohesive collections of policy. When the discourses 
of policymakers are repeated over and over again, when policymakers talk 
about them collectively as “the final word” or “the most authoritative version,” 
these texts come to be established as fact or normal when, in fact, they are 
simply individual texts bundled rhetorically. Also important in studying the 
production, distribution, and consumptions of these texts is the social and 
political context from which they come. In this study, I point to the opening 
of policy windows in California and the way in which new policies and text 
are strategically linked to established texts to promote minimal resistance. 
Further, I interpret the ways in which people are actually forced to consume 
the policy through mandatory and monitored professional development 
experiences. 
Analysis of Social Practice 
I have paid particular attention to the way in which consensus was actually 
crafted by influential policy professionals both in the context of legislative poli-
cymaking and in the popular media. Here we are able to explain levels of par-
ticipation in the construction of new knowledge and think about how that new 
knowledge gets presented. In looking at the legislative and public contexts, we 
can begin to explain how particular individuals and research were strategic in 
the development of legislative policy and the preparation of the public for these 
policies through the popular media. Being able to then turn these understand-
ings back on the prior analyses of texts and discourse practices in relationship 
to one another, as Bernstein’s frame allows, strengthens my analysis of social 
practices and how people come to be positioned in various ways. Having intro-
duced critical policy analysis into the frame of CDA, now let us explore one 
such case study of policy. 


160  Haley Woodside-Jiron
The Language of Politics and the Politics of Language in California 
Reading Policy 
As I analyze the changes that took place throughout California’s reading poli-
cies, it is interesting to watch the ways that a seemingly small assumption grows 
and hardens into mandated teacher practices and instructional materials. The 
first of the five policies presented “the fundamental skills required” in read-
ing, a construct that would become the stem from which basic instructional 
materials and current and confirmed research would be named.3 As each of 
these policies gained speed individually and collectively, the restrictive nature 
of the policy increased, further narrowing decision-making processes and the 
definition of reading, teaching, and learning. By engaging in this close analysis 
of changes that took place over time, I am able to not only describe the changes, 
but push further to explain how these changes occurred. 
Text 
Texts and Themes in the CDA of California’s Reading Policies
In January 1995, the California state Assembly introduced the first of five 
bills that would later redefine reading instruction in California. Given this 
surge of California legislation and the tremendous impact it had in creat-
ing radical changes in California’s state documents, instructional materials, 
and professional development experiences, these legislative documents are 
key data in the critical analysis of California policy. These policies (individ-
ually and collectively) represent radical changes in how California named 
reading in K to 3 and also the underlying assumptions about teaching and 
learning. 
Making the Unfamiliar Familiar Through Text Structure
The bills inscribe an underlying assumption or assertion (no small difference 
there) that there were some predetermined “fundamental skills required” in 
reading. This language was first introduced (and mandated) through Assembly 
Bill 170 (1995a), Instructional Materials. 
Fairclough (1992) highlighted that “it is always worth attending to what 
is placed initially in clauses and sentences, because that can give insight into 
assumptions and strategies which may at no point be made explicit” (p. 184). 
In the analysis of the semantic relationship between information structure and 
thematic structure, Halliday (1994) noted that generally a speaker will “choose 
the Theme from within what is Given and locate the focus, the climax of the 
New, somewhere within the Rheme” (p. 299). Theme can most easily be defined 
as the initial part of a clause, whereas rheme is the later. This particular type of 
writing—where new information is linked with given, more familiar informa-
tion in legislation—is important because it provides a set of conditions that 


Using CDA to Make Sense of Public Policy  161
exploit the potential of the new information being presented. New information 
here does not necessarily mean brand-new methods of instruction or defini-
tions of reading. To be sure, California has experienced several cycles of more 
and less phonics-based methods of reading and instruction throughout its edu-
cational history. Rather, “new” in this analysis means new with respect to its 
presence in the given conversation: for example, in 1987, “these details [pho-
nics, word-attack skills, vocabulary, and the conventions of language], when 
taught, should be in context and not in isolation” (Honig, 1991, p. 110). In the 
1999 framework, however, “students first learn to apply and practice decod-
ing and word-attack skills in carefully controlled, decodable texts” (California 
Department of Education, 1999, p. 4). A significant shift has taken place with 
respect to how reading, teaching, and learning were being presented in Cali-
fornia’s framework. The phonics and word recognition approach is considered 
“new” because it provides such a contrast to the previous framework, which 
emphasized meaning. How the given and new information of the first bill 
(A. B. 170, 1995a) information was positioned within the text ensured particu-
lar interpretations.4 
1. 600200.4. (a) The State Board of Education shall ensure that the basic 
instructional materials that it adopts for mathematics and reading in Grades 1 
to 8, inclusive, are based on the fundamental skills required by these subjects, 
including, but not limited to, systematic, explicit phonics, spelling, and basic 
computational skills. 
2. (b) It is the intent of the Legislature that the fundamental skills of all 
subject areas, including systematic, explicit phonics, spelling, and basic com-
putational skills, be included in the adopted curriculum frameworks and that 
these skills and related tasks increase in depth and complexity from year to 
year. 
3. It is the intent of the Legislature that the instructional materials adopted by 
the State Board of Education meet the provisions of this section. 
We can see specific patterns in how tensions between language and language 
structure present opportunities to make the unfamiliar familiar. These ulti-
mately represent struggles over meaning and truth. The first information unit 
begins with a theme possessing a given: 
1. “The State Board of Education shall ensure that the basic instruc-
tional materials that it adopts for mathematics and reading in Grades 1 to 8, 
inclusive . . .” 
California has long been a textbook adoption state (Honig, 1991; Manzo, 
1997). The State Board of Education is the governing force in this process. 
Therefore, the given information in the initial positioning of this sentence 
refers to this long-standing policy of textbook adoption. The new information 
is then presented in the final position of the sentence: 


162  Haley Woodside-Jiron
1. are based on the fundamental skills required by these subjects, including, 
but not limited to, systematic, explicit phonics, spelling, and basic computa-
tional skills. 
The way in which this new information follows an already established fact 
relays to the reader a sense of order and logic. Here new ideas are attached to 
more familiar ideas, thus naturalizing the new concept at hand (Fairclough, 
1992, 1995b). In the next sentence, this new information is picked up and 
placed in the initial position, thus relaying that it is now given information and 
used to introduce additional new information: 
2. (b) It is the intent of the Legislature that the fundamental skills of all 
subject areas, including systematic, explicit phonics, spelling, and basic com-
putational skills, be included in the adopted curriculum frameworks and that 
these skills and related tasks increase in depth and complexity from year to 
year. 
Here, policymakers strategically link yet another established policy (curric-
ulum frameworks) with the newly introduced “systematic, explicit phonics.” 
However, specific attention was also being given to the order and sequence of 
skills to be taught (“increase in depth and complexity”), which again marks 
a change from previous legislative authority. These maneuvers typically feel 
obvious and natural to the reader given their flow and reference to already 
established policies. They have come to be naturalized. In essence, however, 
they represent the privileging of particular ideologies and paradigmatic com-
mitments. Finally, the authors of A. B. 170 use the last information unit in this 
sample to reiterate the purpose of the document: 
3. It is the intent of the Legislature that the instructional materials adopted by 
the State Board of Education meet the provisions of this section. 
In summarizing new information in this way, the authors make what was 
initially unfamiliar familiar. The information that sounded new at the outset 
of this policy (“the fundamental skills required,” “systematic, explicit phonics,” 
sequential “depth and complexity”) is now established as fact (“the provisions 
of this section”; italics added). Although views about reading, teaching, and 
learning are manipulated via theme and rheme, later in the 1999 framework 
these same principles of order and complexity attain the status of fact claim-
ing “the reality that standards in the earlier grades are building blocks for 
proficiency in the later grades” (California Department of Education, 1999, 
p. viii)—a significant shift. 
In part through the structuring of the text, the elected officials have come to 
naturalize new information that was not present in California’s reading poli-
cies immediately prior to that time, thus changing the language being used in 
conversations around reading and reading instruction. In essence, they are 


Using CDA to Make Sense of Public Policy  163
claiming a moral high ground of sorts from which they are able to establish 
moral order as a given. 
Whereas the analysis of theme/rheme and the structuring of given/new infor-
mation inform our understanding of how meaning is organized at the elemen-
tal level, the analysis of lexical cohesion offers an understanding of the ways in 
which continuity is established in text via the use of key words, their repetition, 
and other words that are used as synonyms. Analyses of these nonstructural 
features are important in that they also can give any passage of text the status of 
fact—an important tool in influencing the readers’ construction of text. 
Lexical Cohesion: Fact or Foe
One discourse practice often present during times of change in educational 
policy is the use of specific new terms to name what is important or of value in 
the given policy (Fairclough, 1995a). These terms are often difficult to identify 
because they are presented with such authority and ofcourseness that we tend 
to pass over them. For example, “systematic explicit phonics instruction” is 
repeated time and time again throughout California’s reading policies between 
1995 and 1997. This phrase is repeated in documents from state education 
agencies as well as the popular media. These terms are used as places where par-
ticular views of reading, teaching, and learning are systematically mandated. 
In the first information unit described earlier, the fundamental skills required 
for reading were introduced. This new information is then repeated in each of 
the subsequent information units5 that follow and warrants our attention in 
terms of how it is used to mandate new definitions of reading and instructional 
materials. Significant in the phrase “the fundamental skills required” (italics 
added) is the presence of the word the. In this case, the is a determiner (Gee, 
1999), which serves as a cohesive devise communicating that there is some 
finite and stable set of skills that have been identified that correlate with read-
ing achievement. Although the is a tiny word, it carries with it a tremendous 
amount of power. It serves in this context to signal some universal agreement 
on how reading is acquired. It assigns the status of fact to phonics as the funda-
mental or primary skill required in learning to read. In keeping with the previ-
ous analysis of text, such specific skills would typically be introduced earlier in 
the document, and then the determiner the would link back to them. This would 
indicate that that information was assumed to be predictable or known on the 
basis of the preceding sentences. Here, however, the fundamental skills is only 
defined later by the newly introduced systematic, explicit phonics with respect to 
reading, thus marking the introduction of new and favored information. It is 
as if the fundamental skills is used to initially arrange a general commonsense 
agreement among the audience members and is then returned to later and used 
interchangeably with systematic, explicit phonics. It is a discourse practice that 
has a quiet way of nursing the audience along in your way of thinking. 
The intertextual nature of such structuring of change through various influ-
ential policy documents (formal and informal) necessitates the close analysis 


164  Haley Woodside-Jiron
of text in understanding how new information comes to be established as fact. 
Particularly important in the intertextual chains throughout California’s policy 
changes is the genre of policy. Specifically, the use of grammar and vocabulary 
in claiming authority while reducing resistance was significant. Together the 
use of grammar and vocabulary contributed to cohesion through consistency 
as new information became fact in these policies. 
Differences in Discourse
We see as we begin to engage in the interpretive analysis of discourse practice in 
the changes taking place that California policy in mandating systematic, explicit 
phonics placed restrictive measures on teachers’ professional development and 
knowledge. California legislation went so far as to mandate that “systematic 
explicit phonics instruction does not mean ‘embedded phonics instruction’ 
which is ad hoc instruction in phonics based on a random selection of sound 
and word elements” (A. B. 1086, 1997, p. 5; italics added). This means that the 
professional development that embraced or even entertained such a perspec-
tive would not (and did not) receive state funding, which is a huge regulative 
and restrictive exercise in power affecting how people are positioned. In this 
case, the opportunities to actually explore differences in discourse and how 
educators deal with difference are minimized, leaving the opportunity for a 
metadiscourse about change defunct (see Toll, 2002). 
Discourse Practice 
The analysis of discourse practice necessarily involves processes of text pro-
duction, distribution, and consumption. By investigating these processes, we 
come to see how various member resources (Fairclough, 1992, 2003) are drawn 
on and how. As Fairclough suggested, pin-pointing the context of situation in 
terms of this mental map provides two bodies of information relevant to deter-
mining how context affects the interpretation of text in any particular case: 
a reading of the situation which foregrounds certain elements, backgrounds 
others, and relates elements to each other in certain ways; and a specification 
of which discursive types are likely to be relevant. (Fairclough, 1992, p. 83). 
In other words, understanding how texts are produced, distributed, and con-
sumed informs our understanding of how authors work to ensure particular 
interpretations of text and how this engages our various member resources. 
Discourse Practices and Themes in the CDA of California’s Reading Policies
During this period of change in California’s legislative and state policies, larger 
political changes were also taking place. In November 1994, California Repub-
licans gained control of the State Assembly, the majority of the nation’s gov-
ernors were Republican for the first time in decades, and bipartisan agreement 
over issues of education began (Carlos & Kirst, 1997). 


Using CDA to Make Sense of Public Policy  165
As California’s new reading policies were being mandated, California’s sys-
tem of educational decision making was reorganized. Traditionally, the State 
Department of Education (CDE) had been the governmental unit charged with 
turning legislative policy into local policy, with the State Superintendent, Bill 
Honig, acting as overseer in this process. However, dismal test scores, fiscal 
improprieties, and bipartisan agreement with a back-to-basics agenda pre-
sented a unique window for policy change. Honig resigned, and power conse-
quently shifted from the CDE to the State Board of Education (SBE). Important 
in California’s educational governance system is the fact that members of the 
SBE are appointed by the governor. This meant that with the shift in control 
from the CDE to the SBE came more top-down power and political influence 
from elected officials via the governor’s influence over the SBE. Instead of CDE 
members turning policies into action, now members of the SBE, handpicked 
by the governor, held this power. Also important is that this change took place 
in the context of fear and disbelief among the larger public in California. Again 
this represents another narrowing of decision making among a governing body 
that is responsible for much of the translating of legislation into local-level 
policy and instruction ultimately affecting California’s teachers and students. 
Assigning “Current and Confirmed Research” 
One month after the introduction of the first reading bill, the Assembly intro-
duced a second one, A. B. 1504 (1995b—Instructional Materials: Spelling). 
This bill was introduced by the same legislators (Burton, Alpert, and Conroy) 
and was designed with the legislative intent of ensuring the adoption of “basic 
instructional materials.” 
In this second bill, legislators specified the criteria for the adoption of instruc-
tional materials mandating that: 
(1) The submitted basic instructional materials are consistent with the crite-
ria and the standards of quality prescribed in the state board’s adopted curricu-
lum framework. In making this determination, the state board shall consider 
both the framework and the submitted instructional materials as a whole. 
[. . . ]
(3) The submitted instructional materials are factually accurate and incor-
porate principals of instruction reflective of current and confirmed research. (A. 
B. 1504, 1995b, p. 2) 
There are two different features of this policy text that warrant our atten-
tion with respect to the institutional shaping of discourse. First, in this policy, 
legislators have made an explicit link between the frameworks that were, at 
that time, under revision and the textbooks that the SBE could approve. Align-
ing instructional materials in this way with “the state’s educational philosophy, 
theory, current research, and best practices teachers are to follow” (Chrispeels, 
1997, p. 459) is a pedagogic maneuver influencing both how reading is defined 


166  Haley Woodside-Jiron
and how it is to be taught. Such legislated policy serves to place power over 
many among a small number of elected and appointed officials. It also reduces 
access to the naming of reading and reading instruction because fewer people 
are making decisions. Because of this decision-making structure or pedagogic 
device, there is little room for debate or conflict. Decision-making information 
is not provided, and public voice is not welcomed. The legislators mandating 
this link with a curriculum framework, which is ultimately, although implic-
itly, subjective and ideological, creates an understanding of and a compliance 
with a social order that, in this case, positions elected and appointed officials 
as authority. 
The second feature of this policy sample is that “principles of instruction 
reflective of current and confirmed research” are introduced and named as cri-
teria for selecting textbooks. Here “principles of instruction reflective of cur-
rent and confirmed research” represent an intrinsic logic and favored agenda. 
This bill was making its way through the Legislature at the same time that dis-
mal scores from the National Assessment of Educational Progress (NAEP) and 
California Learning Assessment System (CLAS) were being reported and local 
and national newspapers were riddled with conversations about America fall-
ing behind, “scientific research,” America Reads, and reading on grade level by 
third grade. Gee (1999) suggested that such understandings are simplifications 
about the world that leave out many complexities. Problematic is that cultural 
models like this can do harm by “implanting in thought and action unfair, dis-
missive, or derogatory assumptions” (p. 59). 
As systematic, explicit phonics, spelling, and basic computational skills were 
boldly named among the fundamental skills in mathematics and reading in the 
first ABC bill (A. B. 170, 1995a) without explicit and grounded logic, so we see 
instruction being linked with current and confirmed research here in this pol-
icy. Although legislators go no further than to define the research that instruc-
tion is to be based on as “current and confirmed” in this particular policy, later 
this principle was extended and transformed considerably. Two years later in 
A. B. 1086: Reading Instruction (1997), current and confirmed research would 
be further defined: 
(j) . . . “Current” research is research that has been conducted and is reported 
in a manner consistent with contemporary standards of scientific investigation. 
“Confirmed” research is research that has been replicated and the results dupli-
cated. “Replicable” research is research with a structure and design that can be 
reproduced. “Generalizable” research is research in which samples have been 
used so that the results can be said to be true for the population from which the 
sample was drawn. (A. B. 1086, 1997; italics added)6 
Control over such discourse defining reading and how it is to be taught cre-
ates the rules of social order in educational decision making. This is a process of 
recontextualzation—of redefining knowledge with respect to reading, teaching, 
and learning. It is the process of regulations being placed on the formation of a 


Using CDA to Make Sense of Public Policy  167
specific pedagogic discourse. This legislation serves to eliminate entire bodies 
of quality research, including qualitative research that reports by means differ-
ent from the replicable, generalizable “contemporary standards of investiga-
tion.” Such a maneuver is a significant tool in naming what is thinkable and 
unthinkable in California’s teaching of reading. As Bernstein (2000) suggested, 
it attempts to regulate those who have access to this site and in this way control 
alternative possibilities. We see this being done in the naming of instructional 
principles based on current, confirmed research complying with contemporary 
standards of scientific investigation in California’s reading policies.7 
Eliminating Resistance: A. B. 3482 and A. B. 1086—California’s Teacher 
Training Bills
Up to this point, we have been talking about policy documents as if there is a 
direct relationship between policy and practice. Of course, this is not necessar-
ily true, and policymakers know this. To ensure the success of policy, one must 
engage in discourse practices that eliminate as much resistance as possible. This 
can take many forms. In California it took the form of mandatory and heavily 
screened professional development for teachers. 
Less than a year after both Instructional Materials had been passed (A. B. 
170, 1995a; A. B. 1504, 1995b), a third bill came along (Education: Teacher 
Reading Instruction [A. B. 3482, 1996]). This was the first of two bills dedicated 
entirely to influencing teacher inservice training. It mandated that: 
44756. To be eligible for funds pursuant to this chapter, a school district 
shall certify to the State Department of Education that not less than 90 percent 
of its certificated employees who provide direct instructional services to pupils 
enrolled in Kindergarten or any of grades 1 to 3, inclusive, have received the 
type of inservice training described in [the policy]. 
Whereas the prior bills had targeted instructional materials primarily, this 
legislation mandated that the vast majority of California’s K to 3 teachers 
receive specified inservice training in how to teach reading. A fourth bill, A. 
B. 1086, specified that teachers must abide by developmental progressions and 
that their instruction must be direct, systematic, and explicit. Embedded pho-
nics instruction was not to be taught in these service training sessions because it 
was deemed by policymakers to be “ad hoc instruction in phonics based on a 
random selection of sound and word elements.” 
This policy was followed by the last of the California reading mandates: 
Reading Instruction (A. B. 1086, 1997). This final bill provided explicit details 
about the specific criteria for the teacher inservice training sessions man-
dated in A. B. 3482 (1996). One year later, the State Superintendent of Public 
Instruction, the SBE, and the California Commission on Teacher Credential-
ing collectively authored and published the advisory report Teaching Reading: 
A Balanced, Comprehensive Approach to Teaching Reading in Prekindergarten 


168  Haley Woodside-Jiron
Through Grade 3 (Reading Program Advisory, 1996). The report was designed 
to “provide the policy direction and instructional guidance needed to support 
the improvement of reading achievement in California” (p. v).8 Recognized 
as being influential in the content provided were 10 of the 27 authors of the 
earlier Task Force report issued the year before. Tracing the authors in this way 
is an important part of critical policy analysis because it enables us to further 
explore which voices are influential and which power sources dominate. For 
instance, the State Superintendency is an elected position in California, as is the 
office of governor. The SBE and this taskforce, however, were appointed posi-
tions controlled by Governor Wilson and State Superintendent Eastin at that 
time. Making explicit the pedagogic device, who controls knowledge, and how 
control over time, text, and space come to exist (Bernstein, 1990) is essential in 
the critical analysis of policy. Given that these reports were intended to inform 
policy and resulted in more prescriptive policies, we see how increased control 
over issues of educational content and instruction were situated among a rela-
tively small number of elected and appointed officials. Again these connections 
represent the naming and distribution of influential ideas and ideologies about 
reading and reading instruction in California. 
Teaching Reading was in direct response to the recommendations outlined 
in the report of the Superintendent’s Reading Task Force, Every Child a Reader 
(September 1995). It was also designed to support two new statutes known as 
the ABC bills (Assembly Bill 170, Chapter 765, Statutes of 1995, and Assembly 
Bill 15, Chapter 764, Statutes of 1995), which required, in part, that the SBE 
adopt materials in grades 1 through 8 that include “systematic, explicit phonics, 
spelling, and basic computational skills.” The advisory amplified both the rec-
ommendations of the Reading Task Force report as well as the new requirements 
in law, and it was offered as a policy statement rather than a “how-to manual” 
(Reading Program Advisory, 1996). Particularly interesting in our inquiry here 
are (a) the intertextual link and “support” for the previous ABC bill, and (b) the 
statement that Teaching Reading was not intended to be a “how-to manual.” 
Because it was distributed to all of the schools in the state, the Reading Pro-
gram Advisory was the intertextual link with the ABC bills and its support for 
such policy, Teaching Reading served to add to the cohesiveness of this move-
ment in reading ideology toward systematic, explicit phonics instruction and 
current and confirmed research. 
The second feature—the statement that Teaching Reading was not intended 
to be a how-to manual—extends beyond intertextual to intratextual relations 
(Bernstein, 2000, p. 53) Although its authors express that Teaching Reading was 
not intended to be a how-to manual, we find, in the same text, the contradic-
tory intent that it will “provide the policy direction and instructional guidance 
needed to support the improvement of reading achievement in California” 
(Reading Program Advisory, 1996, p. v). These two intentions are in conflict 
with one another. Although the Task Force states that it is not intended to be a 
how-to manual, they did state their intent that it provide “policy direction and 
instructional guidance.” The recommendations from this document would 


Using CDA to Make Sense of Public Policy  169
later be found in the subsequent legislative policy (A. B. 1086, 1997). Here we 
see a discourse practice being used that leads readers to believe that this report 
is something that it is not, creating dissonance between what is being articu-
lated and what is actually being carried out. Bernstein (2000) referred to this as 
the carrier versus what is carried. This makes manifest the institutional power 
that elected and appointed officials have in producing new information and 
ideas via such influential documents and legislation. 
Institutional Arrangement and Power
As particular concepts such as current and confirmed research come to be privi-
leged and defined in more detail and by fewer people, we witness an example of 
Bernstein’s (2000) regulative discourse. Understanding this shifting of power 
and the ways in which it changes the larger discourse is key in moving beyond 
recognizing the presence of power to understanding how such political power 
constructs and is constructed by larger social practices. 
Social Practice 
While understanding how texts are produced, distributed, and consumed 
informs our understanding of how authors work to ensure particular interpre-
tations of text, the analysis of social practices makes explicit the connections 
between the discourse practices and the social practices of which they are a part 
(Fairclough, 1992). Fairclough’s more recent work suggests that “social prac-
tices can be thought of as ways of controlling the selection of certain structural 
possibilities and the exclusion of others” (2003, p. 23). This dialectical ordering 
of discourse reinforces the fact that discourse as a political practice is not only 
a site of power struggle, but also a stake in power struggle: Discursive practice 
draws on conventions that naturalize particular power relations and ideologies, 
and these conventions and the ways in which they are articulated are a focus of 
struggle (Fairclough, 1992). 
The Role of the Expert in Influencing the Policymaking Forum and Building 
Consensus
Immediately following the first of the [teacher bills] (A. B. 3482, 1996), a spe-
cial Hearing on Reading of the Education Committee of the California State 
Assembly was held on May 8, 1996 (Honig, 1996). During this hearing, former 
State Superintendent Bill Honig was called on to provide expert testimony. 
Throughout Honig’s testimony, one of his main messages was that of a need 
for consensus: 
this research that you are about to hear [NICHD research]. It’s very pow-
erful stuff. I think it backs up this consensus position. It shouldn’t be a 
right, or left, or moderate, or at all. It really is what works with youngsters 


170  Haley Woodside-Jiron
and if enough of us get behind it I think we’re going to make a difference in 
California. (italics added) 
During his testimony, Honig made several references to the “convergence of 
research and best practice,” “the secret to getting a consensus position,” “fash-
ioning a message,” “singing the same tune on this position,” and the need for 
major players such as the State Board, Department of Education, legislators, 
governor, and educators to “get behind” this consensus message. His message 
was clear to the Assembly Education Committee: Together, they were crafting 
a consensus (Allington, 1999) for the educational institution and larger public 
to consume. 
Also during this hearing, G. Reid Lyon of the National Institute of Health 
(NIH), then acting chief of the division of Child Health and Development, 
was invited to provide expert testimony with respect to reading research. Lyon 
emphasized that phonemic awareness, phonics, and high-interest, decodable 
texts are necessary to ensure the “fast, accurate decoding of words.” Lyon 
manipulated his testimony to best persuade his audience with respect to what is 
rational and what is not in terms of reading and reading instruction (thinkable 
and unthinkable in Bernstein’s terms). Via Lyon’s title, and supported by the 
cultural assumptions about “science and research” that he presents as com-
monsense to the Assembly, he painted a simple picture of what reading is and 
how best to go about teaching it. 
The Education Committee assembled was chaired by Assemblyman Steve 
Baldwin with Committee Vice Chairwoman Mazzoni. Nine months later, 
they would become first and second authors of California’s most restrictive 
professional development bill yet, A. B. 1086. During this special hearing, 
Assemblyman Baldwin introduced Lyon to the rest of the Assembly as clearly 
being the authority figure on reading. Lyon initially established his cred-
ibility to the Assembly member quorum by linking himself with real science 
(e.g., neurobiologist neophysiologist, biomedical research, genetics). He then 
emphasized that he was “recruited” by the federal government to develop 
the research he was about to share. This discourse practice is effective in 
appealing to the Assembly members present and positioning himself as expert. 
Further, he emphasized that the NIH oversees 12 research sites around the 
country that are studying “the reading issue” to which Baldwin referred. He 
offered that the annual budget for NIH reading research is $14 million, and 
“since 1983 the cumulative budget looking at these issues that I’ll talk with you 
about today is about $104 million dollars.” Despite his deep investment in this 
particular collection of research, however, he strategically positioned himself 
as being “unbiased”—another important discourse practice in establishing 
credibility. 
Lyon: You won’t hear me endorse any reading approach today or any read-
ing method. That’s not the job of the NIH. The job of the NIH is to distill the 
information so we understand “what does a human being have to do to be able 
to read?” 


Using CDA to Make Sense of Public Policy  171
To be sure, Lyon has a vested interest in maintaining the health of the NIH 
research budget—his own paycheck depends on it. Yet he claimed to remove 
himself politically and ideologically from the testimony he was about to give—
he was only there to provide the distilled information and inform policy. This 
image of distilled information relayed a message to the audience that they were 
about to receive “facts” about the “reading issue” from the authority figure in 
the field of reading in their most pure and unbiased form. This, of course, is 
misleading because with any kind of inquiry come choices about which infor-
mation is valued and which is dismissed. One of the more recent and visible 
examples of this is the Congressionally commissioned National Reading Panel 
and their distillation process. That panel, in attempts to “build on the recently 
announced findings presented by the National Research Council’s Commit-
tee on the Prevention of Reading Difficulties in Young Children,” limited the 
research that they reviewed and that would be used to “identify gaps in the 
knowledge base for reading instruction and the best ways to close these gaps” 
(National Research Council’s Committee on the Prevention of Reading Dif-
ficulties in Young Children, 1998). 
Lyon later appealed to the Assembly members present with the agenda of 
improving reading education by claiming what he believed to be an irrefut-
able truth: “If you don’t learn to read, you simply don’t make it in life.” Such a 
declarative moral and causal statement fanned the flames of existing fears and 
tuned the ear of his captive Assembly member audience. After all, the Assembly 
members’ job is to serve the people and preserve the peace. Surely finding a way 
to ensure that we “make it in life” qualifies as an agenda for immediate action. It 
primed the Assembly and positioned them as recipients for the distilled infor-
mation and research provided in Lyon’s testimony. He linked illiteracy with 
those who do not finish school, end up in prison, and become unwed mothers. 
Such presuppositions are effective ways to manipulate people because they are 
so difficult to challenge (Fairclough, 1992, 2003). Here they are presented as 
fact and in causal relationship. There is little room in Lyon’s discourse practice 
here to challenge these assumptions because he distilled the information, insist-
ing that he does not want to “belabor or bore” the Assembly with the “technical 
issues.” Ultimately, this means they are not able to evaluate the information 
firsthand, but rather are forced to go on his own expert interpretation. There 
is little room for debate because of the moral high ground laced throughout 
his argument. As such, anyone who would get in the way of policy intended 
to “help children learn to read” would be seen as ultimately getting in the way 
of children and success. This is a moral battleground that few are willing to 
enter—especially those who are publicly elected and rely on people’s votes. 
Despite Lyon’s admission that he is the lead person within the federal gov-
ernment by way of the time he spends in it versus his knowledge, he offered and 
claimed the authority to name reading as “fast, rapid, automatic decoding and 
recognizing of words” and “fast, accurate decoding of single words.” He then 
identified phonological or phonemic awareness as the solution, which in just 
9 short months would be found in the final policy and criteria for mandated 


172  Haley Woodside-Jiron
inservice providers, affecting at least 90% of all California’s primary teachers 
and their students. 
The Role of the Expert in Influencing the Larger Public and Building Consensus
This consensus was also portrayed throughout the popular media during Cali-
fornia’s changes in reading and instruction policies. October 27, 1997, was a 
particularly interesting day in popular print media with respect to education 
and, more specifically, reading education. On this day, both Time and News-
week, two of the most widely circulated and accessible print media sources, ran 
feature articles specific to how children learn to read. These feature articles were 
distributed the week prior to when the Reading Excellence Act (1998) was to 
pass through Congress, reinforcing the consensus position that Honig referred 
to earlier (see Coles, 2000; Taylor, 1998). 
The Newsweek (Wingert & Kantrowitz, 1997) reporter reported that: 
Researchers have identified four distinct steps in learning to read; break-
downs anywhere in this process can explain severe reading problems. G. 
Reid Lyon, acting chief of the child-development and behavior branch of the 
National Institutes of Child and Human Development, says that reading for 
all children begins with phonological awareness. (p. 60; italics added) 
Note that it is the reporter and not G. Reid Lyon speaking himself—an inter-
esting reporting style because it removes the reader from the original source of 
information. We saw the same authorial move by Lyon in his testimony when 
he said things like, “I don’t want to belabor or bore you” with the technical 
details (p. 7). We also experienced this in Honig’s testimony when he made 
broad claims about the NICHD research as being “powerful stuff.” We also hear 
this in many, many different arenas as people claim “the research shows” yet do 
not provide the original research so that the intended audience can decide for 
themselves. This Newsweek quote goes on to complete the list of four steps that 
include linking sounds with specific letters, becoming fast readers, and finally 
concentrating on the meaning of the words. This information is the same that 
Lyon presented in his testimony before the Assembly. 
It is interesting to note that, in this article, Lyon’s voice consumes more space 
than those of any of the other experts or researchers referenced throughout the 
article. Also Lyon is introduced with the long and authoritative title of “acting 
chief of the child-development and behavior branch of the National Institutes 
of Child and Human Development” attached to his name. This use of status, 
as in the prior legislative hearing, lends him credibility as an expert throughout 
this article. 
In the Time (Collins, 1997) article, Lyon is again referenced directly—this 
time on the heels of two other well-known researchers. The reporter in this 
article foregrounded similar steps to learning to read via these researchers, and 
then added: 


Using CDA to Make Sense of Public Policy  173
As the 1990s progressed, more verification of the importance of phonemic 
awareness came from studies conducted by the National Institute of Child 
Health and Human Development at the National Institutes of Health. 
Under the direction of Reid Lyon, researchers have found that problems 
with phonemic awareness correlate extremely closely with reading failure. 
Other NICHD studies have reaffirmed the conclusions reached by Chall 
and Adams—that programs with some systematic phonics instruction lead 
to better outcomes. (p. 80; italics added) 
Both of these reports actively construct a perceived consensus in terms of 
both the problem at hand and the solution. The first is the authority given to 
research. Throughout the prior texts, research identifies, verifies, finds, and reaf-
firms conclusions. These are powerful and uncontested actions in this context. 
From these claims specific assumptions about reading, teaching, and learning 
are advanced. As we saw in the legislative changes discussed earlier in this chap-
ter, such claims have significant impacts on how children come to experience 
reading and reading instruction in the classroom. Understanding the specific 
ways by which policymakers and scientific research are placed in positions of 
authority and how they relay certain understandings about knowledge and our 
role in the production and consumption of knowledge is essential because it is 
constitutive (Bourdieu, 1991, p. 52). 
What we see through these discourse practices is the naturalization and con-
solidation of the message that both Honig and Lyon conveyed in their expert 
testimony before the Education Committee of the California State Assembly. 
In naming reading as a series of set steps and in explicitly focusing on a nar-
row body of research, reading in California was redefined and recontextualized. 
These ideologies and agendas were then effectively distributed through what 
would be the last of California’s reading bills at that time. These points are 
important because they push our thinking about the intersection between the 
text and the reader. Understanding this relationship offers us the opportunity 
to explain the ways in which learning takes place throughout the many facets 
of policymaking (e.g., participation in policymaking, the way in which partici-
pation—limited or not—positions people, and the structural power that that 
contributes to in the policymaking process and, in this case, the power of few 
over many). 
Gee suggested that we do not have a reading crisis in our schools. Rather, we 
have an affiliation crisis. To affiliate with particular people, practices, institu-
tions, methods, and so on is to “participate fully in the attitudes, values, and 
norms the practice requires” (Gee, 2001, p. xviii). This is not realistic for many 
students coming in contact with legislated and one-size-fits-all policy, curri-
cula, and assessments. We need to find ways to engage in larger dialogue and 
systematic research about how the ways in which literacy-related social prac-
tices do and do not recruit children’s affiliation (Gee, 2001). 


174  Haley Woodside-Jiron
Current Policy Impacting Literacy Education Today
Since the first edition of this book was published, the Presidential administra-
tion has changed, the costly “War on Terrorism” continues, and the economic 
crisis looms large. To date, the U.S. carries a national debt of $12.5 trillion and 
a national unemployment rate of 9.7% (U.S. Department of Labor). NCLB’s 
Reading First was initially authorized for FYs 2002–2007. It was then extended 
with significantly less financial support. Now the reauthorization of the ESEA 
is on the horizon once again. It is certainly welcomed at a time when resources 
are scarce and schools feel more accountability pressure than ever before. How-
ever, many schools are also anxious about what the reauthorization will require 
and how responsive it will be to the genuine challenges faced by children and 
schools gripped by poverty, changing family dynamics, and often times increas-
ingly contrastive home and school experiences. NCLB was scorned for what 
seemed to many education practitioners an overly simplistic approach to 
assessing Annual Yearly Progress (AYP). Teachers and administrators remain 
thoughtful as to how English Language Learners and Special Education Stu-
dents will fit within the legal parameters of the next wave of legislation. 
California has also experienced changes of its own to be considered in this 
changing political climate. It now serves more than 6.2 million students. Cur-
rently approximately half of the state’s students come from low-income fami-
lies, a quarter of them are ESL students, and about one in 10 requires Special 
Education services (EdSource). Finally, the state has made more than $17 
billion in cuts to education in the past two years and is likely to cut more in 
the near future (ABC News). This means a potential loss of more than 19,000 
teachers, which certainly presents daunting challenges for the nation’s most 
populous state. 
Most recently, the federal economic stimulus package channeled 4.35 billion 
dollars to the U.S. Department of Education for a competition called “Race to 
the Top.” This competition fund is targeted specifically for education reform 
and is of obvious interest to both California and all other states in a time of such 
economic stress. 
Arne Duncan, U.S. Secretary of Education, communicated the competitive 
nature of the “race” on the U.S. Department of Education website:
the president and I want to send a message to everyone: governors and 
mayors, school board members and teachers, parents and students; busi-
nesses and non-proﬁ
 ts. We all need to work together to win this race so 
that our students can outcompete any worker in the world.
 To win the race, states have to have standards and tests that prepare stu-
dents to succeed in college and careers. They’ll need to recruit and reward 
excellent teachers and principals. They must have data systems to track 
students’ progress and to identify effective teachers. They must identify 
their lowest-performing schools and take dramatic action to turn them 
around.


Using CDA to Make Sense of Public Policy  175
 In addition to the “Race to the Top” competition, the administration 
has another $5 billion available to targeted efforts to reform schools.
 We have the resources at the federal level to drive reform. Now all of us 
need to take this challenge on and work together to reform our schools. 
(http://www.ed.gov/blog/2009/07/race-to-the-top-begins/)
There are many assumptions embedded within this text, discourse practice, 
and social practice. Words such as win, race, and outcompete name values and 
norms that you must buy into if you are to participate in the race (and who can 
afford not to?). College is lifted up as a commonsense practice when the reality 
in today’s economic crunch is that many cannot afford the burgeoning costs 
associated with college. These assumptions represent but one particular set of 
ideas about how to set education policy or conceptualize reform. 
In terms of school reform in Duncan’s comments, teacher effectiveness is 
bound with student progress with little or no regard for the challenges that 
states like California are currently facing. Also, the call to identify “lowest-
performing schools and take dramatic action to turn them around” implies a 
very top heavy approach to school reform. Decades of school reform literature 
makes explicit that lasting school change is an inside out process. Fullan (2001) 
observed, “Educational change is technically simple and socially complex” (p. 
69). The perception that children and schools can be “turned” is simplistic. 
Instead, struggling schools must be given support that meets them where they 
are in their development and guides them forward with urgency and acceler-
ated learning toward equity and ever narrowing achievement gaps. 
While California did compete for funds for the “Race to the Top,” the state 
did not receive support in the first of two rounds of applications. As often hap-
pens when demonstrating a perceived consensus is important for approval, fin-
ger pointing increases and scope of vision decreases. A reporter from the San 
Francisco Gate (March 6, 2010) reported:
One thing that definitely went wrong [with California’s “Race to the Top” 
application for funds] was the attitude of the state teachers’ unions. Union 
leaders fought the reform legislation at every turn and managed to water 
down the [application] package that eventually passed in January. Marty 
Hittelman, president of the California Federation of Teachers, even said 
he wasn’t sorry that California lost the first round. And in part because of 
these kinds of feuds within the education community, lots of California 
school districts opted out of participation in Race to the Top. In Kentucky, 
every single school district signed on. 
The tenor of this text is blame—frustration with losing the first round of the 
“race.” While Hittelman is blasted for not being sorry that California lost the 
first round, the unwritten text is why he wasn’t sorry. Were the differences of 
opinion really “feuds within the education community”? Were they perhaps 
deeper, more experienced commitments to lines that he was not willing to cross 


176  Haley Woodside-Jiron
in terms of what is best for children and their learning? Did the compromises 
required to be successful in this application mean a bigger compromise that 
some students would excel while others would be further pushed to the mar-
gin? Recognizing the exercise of power that is embedded with federal funding 
is important. Most grant-funded activities require applicants to endorse the 
funder’s assumptions as the point of departure and provide limited flexibility 
for one’s own agenda or context. These are the larger issues that are impor-
tant to unpack in both written and unwritten texts present in all federal policy 
documents and subsequent state and local responses. These difficult locales are 
where questions of power and authority lie waiting to be pulled apart and put 
back together again in more equitable and just ways. 
Discussion 
Extending critical analyses of policy to include explanations of how political 
power constructs and is constructed by larger social practices is an important 
process because policy is constitutive. It serves not only to distribute, but to 
mandate such ideals across a much larger forum—the educational institution 
and its members. This is particularly important as we consider larger social 
issues and trend data reflecting social injustices linked with literacy education, 
children and families of poverty, and second language learners. As we have seen 
here, the close analysis of text, discourse practice, and social practice through 
CDA extended by Bernstein’s theory of relationships makes explicit the ways in 
which text, discourse practice, and social practice come together to foster social 
change. Across all three of these dimensions was the drive to create consensus 
and restrict potential resistance. 
Typical to information structures, we saw in California’s policies the ways 
in which text was structured to ensure particular interpretations. In the close 
analysis of particular texts in context, we saw how informational units were 
structured so that given information preceded the new. Structuring text in this 
way contributes to what is known as the “good reason” principle (Halliday, 
1994, p. 308; see also Habermas, 1996, for a more thorough discussion) and 
ultimately constitutes the internal resources for structuring the clause as a logi-
cal, grounded message. This contributes to the process of naturalization (Fair-
clough, 1992; 2003). 
Analyzing this process of naturalization in the structural analysis of text, we 
understand the ways in which ideologies are embedded in discursive practices 
and made more effective by becoming naturalized. When this happens, the ide-
ologies and discourse practices attain the status of common sense and become 
difficult to recognize or push against. 
Naturalization takes place not only in the structural elements of text, but also 
in the nonstructural elements. Lexical cohesion through consistent vocabulary 
or reference to “current and confirmed research” also builds cohesion and 
helps naturalize a text. Regardless of whether there is intrinsic logic to “current 
and confirmed research,” the ways in which it is promoted and imposed on the 


Using CDA to Make Sense of Public Policy  177
educational institution are what Bernstein (2000) called social facts. In trans-
mitting this particular idea about how things are and should be, policymakers 
are positioning themselves in a rather dictatorial way, which means that others 
must be more passive and receptive. At the core of this naming of what counts 
and what does not is a power relation between dominant and passive partici-
pants, thus influencing principles of selection. 
As elected and appointed officials force changes in the terms that we use, the 
focus of our attention changes, creating similar conversations among larger 
populations and thus altering what is perceived as normal. By doing this, resis-
tant readings of the policy are reduced by way of anchoring new and often vague 
terms against specific bodies of research, proclaimed experts, and instructional 
materials. In changing which instructional resources are to be made available 
and prohibited, we not only further influence what practices and conversations 
are likely to take place, but also the potential content and pedagogical knowl-
edge made available to teachers. The implications of such positioning mean that 
such discourse methods actually gather steam from the people being systemati-
cally eliminated from them in the first place. Also important is that the readers 
contribute to this unknowingly because the text is structured to be seamless and 
naturalized. Again, this ultimately creates a distraction from the larger social 
issues that are at the root of imbalances of power and representation. 
Understanding the shift in California’s system of educational decision mak-
ing in power (CDE to SBE), we must also look at how the ideologies and agendas 
represented by influential players were advanced both within the policymaking 
forum and among the larger public. Studying the relationship between power 
and ideology in this way extends Fairclough’s attention to text and context via 
CDA. “Particular interpretive principles come to be associated in a naturalized 
way with particular discourse types, and such linkages are worth investigating 
for the light they shed on the important ideological functions of coherence in 
interpellating subjects” (Fairclough, 1992, p. 84). 
The presence of the NICHD research in these policy development forums, 
as well as the ways in which it is naturalized and effectively distributed, cannot 
be ignored. It represents a body of research that was hand picked by the fed-
eral government and policymakers, which many have been passively selected as 
the authoritative source on reading and reading instruction. Influential reviews 
(sometimes including second- and third-generation published research) as well 
as the physical presence of NICHD researchers and staff members in legislative 
sessions have influenced how reading has come to be defined and taught via 
legislation in California. 
As reflexive and critical discourse analysts, we must make decisions about 
how to interpret, describe, and explain texts, discourse practices, and social 
practices. Bringing Bernstein’s pedagogic device to CDA offers us the oppor-
tunity to understand how text, discourse practice, and social practice represent 
the elements of social analyses that Fairclough highlighted (i.e., social matrix, 
orders of discourse, and the ideological and political effects of discourse). In 
placing text and discourse practice in relation to one another in this way, we 


178  Haley Woodside-Jiron
come to see not only the function of language in change, but also the social 
network that underlies the degree of success or failure to impact change that 
language and discourse practices can have. 
Concluding Thoughts 
Political discourse, by its very nature, is designed to influence people’s repre-
sentations of cultural norms and the principles of classification which underlie 
them. “The power of political discourse depends upon its capacity to consti-
tute and mobilize those social forces that are capable of carrying into reality its 
promises of a new reality, in its very formulation of this new reality” (Fairclough, 
1995a, p. 182). Throughout this analysis we have used critical discourse analysis 
to make sense of reading policy in public schools. This analysis of California 
policy between 1995 and 1997 makes explicit the ways in which policy is con-
stitutive and can have a lasting impact reaching social systems far and wide. 
It presents specific examples of cruces for analysts of educational policy to 
examine to identify the deeper social practices at hand. As a result, we are left 
with urgent questions for continued critical analysis: What are the new reali-
ties presented in today’s policies? What principles of classification are being 
defined, mandated, and used across diverse populations with complex and 
varying needs? Here we see that there are procedural changes that take place 
with policy implementation (i.e., reading curriculum and policy) but that there 
are also social changes that require close analysis if we are to truly understand 
the social practices and the relationship between instructional and regulative 
discourses (Woodside-Jiron & Gehsmann, 2009). In taking a critical approach 
to policy analysis in this way we are better equipped to understand the intended 
and unintended consequences of policy-induced change in schools. Schools are 
democratic institutions and as such require reorienting of our means of policy 
inquiry (Fischer, 2009). Critical discourse analysis offers one such means of 
doing so with its multidimensional approach to both inquiry and analysis.
Fundamental to critical policy analysis is the explicit analysis of the process 
of naturalization in policy development, policy communication, and policy 
implementation. This is especially important because the procedures and prac-
tices may be politically and ideologically invested and because these procedures 
and practices position people in specific ways. In this naturalization processes 
or shaping of cultural models, some norms are brought to the center and oth-
ers are pushed to the margin. In the case of policymaking around reading in 
education, select policy players and policy informants took center stage while 
parents, teachers, administrators, taxpayers, and students were pushed to the 
margin. How people participate in the language and power of policy shapes 
their surrounding social structures, social relations, and agendas. Often this is 
an invisible process that strengthens the language, power, and participation pro-
cesses. This is particularly problematic when participating in this way continues 
to push some people to the margin and silence them from the conversation. 
Such hegemonic processes must be not only brought to light, but aggressively 


Using CDA to Make Sense of Public Policy  179
pushed against and restructured. As researchers and leaders in education, it is 
essential that we become better at communicating such practices to the larger 
public being supplied with these crafted consensuses around such constructs as 
scientific research, reading crisis, and one-size-fits-all solutions like systematic, 
explicit instruction. Such balances of power and orders of discourse have serious 
implications. Such manipulative (discursive) practices shape our children and 
their literacy learning experiences. CDA as a framework for analyzing power 
and cultural models offers a promising means to better understand the links 
between policy and those who experience policy firsthand and offers a social 
lens for change. 
Notes
1 The authorization for the program was automatically extended for one additional fis-
cal year (through FY 2008) under section 422(a) of the General Education Provisions 
Act (GEPA) (20 U.S.C. § 1226a(a)) but at a significantly lower rate. 
2 This period of change in California is particularly illustrative of this process given 
the presentation of popular media and political power at that time. Further still, the 
unusual size of the state and its subsequent impact on the larger educational publish-
ing industry is signiﬁ
 cant. 
3 This later extended to the federal level as NCLB legislation linked increased funding 
to “scientifically proven methods of reading instruction” (NCLB, 2003, p. 2). 
4 Note that these have been broken into information units (Halliday, 1994).
5 Here the provisions of this section refers to the fundamental skill further defined as 
“systematic, explicit phonics, spelling, and basic computational skills.” 
6 It is interesting that these terms are all present in G. Reid Lyon’s testimony before the 
Assembly Education Committee Hearing on Reading on May 8, 1996. 
7 At the national level, we see this being done through the Congressionally mandated 
review of research by the National Reading Panel. Their review included a restrictive 
screening process by which whole bodies of research were systematically eliminated. 
8 Baldwin referenced this report as if looking forward to it in a policy decision in the 
May 1996 hearing. 
References
ABC KGO-TV SanFrancisco, CA (n.d.) . Retrieved March 6, 2010, from http://abclocal.
go.com/kgo/story?section=news/education&id=7311615
Allington, R. L. (1999). Crafting state educational policy: The slippery role of educa-
tional research and researchers. Journal of Literacy Research, 31, 457–482. 
Allington, R. L. (2002). Big brother and the national reading curriculum. Portsmouth, 
NH: Heinemann.
Allington, R. L., & Woodside-Jiron, H. (1999). The politics of literacy teaching: How 
“research” shaped educational policy. Educational Researcher, 28(8), 4–13. 
Assembly Bill 170, Instructional materials, Chapter 765 (1995a). 
Assembly Bill 1504, Instructional materials: Spelling, Chapter 764 (1995b). 
Assembly Bill 3482, Education: Teacher reading instruction, Chapter 196 (1996). 
Assembly Bill 1086, Reading instruction, Chapter 286 (1997). 
Ball, D. L. (1990). Reflections and deflections of policy: The case of Carol Turner. 
Educational Evaluation and Policy Analysis, 12(3), 247–259. 
Bernstein, B. (1990) The structuring of pedagogic discourse. New York: Routledge. 


180  Haley Woodside-Jiron
Bernstein, B. (2000). Pedagogy symbolic control and identity: Theory, research, critique. 
Bristol, PA: Taylor & Francis. 
Bourdieu, P. (1991). Language and symbolic power. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University 
Press. 
California Department of Education. (1999). Reading/language arts framework for 
California public schools. Sacramento: Author. 
Carlos, L., & Kirst, M. (1997). California curriculum policy in the 1990s: “We don’t 
have to be in front to lead.” Paper presented at the annual meeting of the American 
Educational Research Association, Chicago, IL. 
Chouliaraki, L., & Fairclough, N. (1999). Discourse in late modernity: Rethinking critical 
discourse analysis. Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press. 
Chrispeels, J. H. (1997). Educational policy implementation in a shifting political cli-
mate: The California experience. American Educational Research Journal, 34(3), 
453–481. 
Coles, G. (2000). Misreading reading: The bad science that hurts children. Portsmouth, 
NH: Heinemann. 
Collins, J. (1995). Literacy and literacies. Annual Review of Anthropology, 24, 75–93. 
Collins, J. (1997, October 27). How Johnny should read. Time, pp. 78–81. 
Edmondson, J. (2000). America Reads: A critical policy analysis. Newark, DE: Interna-
tional Reading Association. 
Edmondson, J. (2002). Asking different questions: Critical analyses and reading research. 
Reading Research Quarterly, 37(1), 113–119.
EdSource. (n.d.). Retrieved April 17, 2010, from http://www.edsource.org/sys_students.
html
Egan-Robertson, A. (1998). Learning about culture, language, and power: Understand-
ing relationships among personhood, literacy practices, and intertextuality. Journal of 
Literacy Research, 30(4), 449–487. 
Fairclough, N. (1992). Discourse and social change. Cambridge, UK: Polity. 
Fairclough, N. (1995a). Media discourse. London: Arnold. 
Fairclough, N. (1995b). Critical discourse analysis: The critical study of language. New 
York: Longman. 
Fairclough, N. (2003). Analyzing discourse: Textual analysis for social research. New York: 
Routledge.
Ferdman, B. M. (1990). Literacy and cultural identity. Harvard Educational Review, 60, 
181–203. 
Fischer, F. (2009) Democracy & expertise: Reorienting policy inquiry. New York: Oxford 
University Press.
Fullan, M. (2001). The new meaning of educational change. New York: Teachers College 
Press.
Gee, J. P. (1996). Social linguistics and literacies: Ideology in discourses (2nd ed.). Bristol, 
PA: Falmer. 
Gee, J. P. (1999). An introduction to discourse analysis theory and method. New York: 
Routledge. 
Gee, J. P. (2001). Forward. In C. Lewis (Ed.), Literacy practices as social acts: Power, 
status, and cultural norms in the classroom (pp. xv–xix). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence 
Erlbaum Associates. 
Gee, J. P., & Green, J. L. (1998). Discourse analysis, learning, and social practice: A 
methodological study. In P. D. Pearson & A. Iran-Nejad (Eds.), Review of research in 
education. Washington, DC: American Educational Research Association. 


Using CDA to Make Sense of Public Policy  181
Habermas, J. (1996). Between facts and norms: Contributions to a discourse theory of law 
and Democracy (W. Rehg, Trans.). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. 
Halliday, M. A. K. (1978). Language as a social semiotic: The social interpretation of lan-
guage and meaning. London: Arnold. 
Halliday, M. A. K. (1994). An introduction to functional grammar (2nd ed.). London: 
Arnold. 
Honig, B. (1991). California’s experience with textbook improvement. In P. G. Altbach, 
G. P. Kelly, H. G. Petrie, & L. Weis (Eds.), Textbooks in American society: Politics, 
policy and pedagogy (pp. 105–116). New York: State University of New York Press. 
Honig, B. (1996, May 8). Hearing on reading. Testimony before the Education Commit-
tee of the California State Assembly. 
Hopkins, D. (2001). School improvement for real. New York: RoutledgeFalmer.
Kingdon, J. W. (1995). Agendas, alternatives, and public policies (2nd ed.). New York: 
Longman. 
Kuzel, A. J. (1992). Sampling in qualitative inquiry. In B. Crabtree & W. L. Miller (Eds.), 
Doing qualitative research (pp. 31–44) (Research Methods for Primary Care Series, 
Vol. 3). Newbury Park, CA: Sage. 
Lyon, G. R. (1996, May 8). Hearing on reading. Testimony before the Education Com-
mittee of the California State Assembly.
Mahiri, J., & Godley, A. J. (1998). Rewriting identity: Social meanings of literacy and 
“revisions” of self. Reading Research Quarterly, 33(4), 416–433. 
Manzo, K. (1997, January 15). California text adoption puts emphasis on phonics. Edu-
cation Week, p. 12. 
Mertz, E. (1996). Recontextualization as socialization: Text and pragmatics in the law 
school classroom. In M. Silverstein & G. Urban (Eds.), Natural histories of discourse 
(pp. 229–249). Chicago: University of Chicago Press. 
National Research Council’s Committee on the Prevention of Reading Difficulties in 
Young Children (1998, March 27). NIH News Release. 
NCLB Act of 2001: Reauthorization of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act 
Legislation and Policies Website. Retrieved January 17, 2003, from www.ed.gov/
offices/OESE/esea/factsheet. html 
Paterson, F. (2000). The politics of phonics. Journal of Curriculum and Supervision, 
15(3), 179–211. 
Patton, M. Q. (1990). Qualitative evaluation and research methods. Beverly Hills, CA: 
Sage. 
Prunty, J. J. (1985). Signposts for a critical educational policy analysis. Australian Jour-
nal of Education, 29(2), 133–140. 
Reading Excellence Act, 20 U. S. C.§ 6601. et seq. (1998). 
Reading Program Advisory. (1996). Teaching reading: A balanced, comprehensive 
approach to teaching reading in prekindergarten through grade three. Sacramento, CA: 
California Department of Education. 
Rogers, R. (2003). A critical discourse analysis of family literacy practices: Power in and out 
of print. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates. 
Rogers, R., Mosley, M., & Kramer, M. A. (2009). Designing socially just learning commu-
nities: Critical literacy education across the lifespan. New York: Routledge
SanFrancisco Gate. (2010, March 6). Why Did California Fail Race to Top Test? Retrieved 
April 17, 2010, from http://www.sfgate.com/cgi-bin/article.cgi?f=/c/a/2010/03/05/
ED1E1CBI13.DTL#ixzz0hbzYfTvX
Taylor, D. (1998). Beginning to read and the spin doctors of science: The political cam-


182  Haley Woodside-Jiron
paign to change America’s mind about how children learn to read. Urbana, IL: National 
Council of Teachers of English. 
Toll, C. A. (2002). Can teachers and policy makers learn to talk to one another? In 
R. L. Allington (Ed.), Big Brother and the national reading curriculum: How ideology 
trumped evidence (pp. 137–154). Portsmouth, NH: Heinemann. 
U.S. Department of Education. (2009, July 24). Race to the Top Begins. Retrieved April 
17, 2010, from http://www.ed.gov/blog/2009/07/race-to-the-top-begins/
U.S. Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics. (n.d.). Retrieved April 17, 2010, 
from http://www.bls.gov/
Vygotsky, L. S. (1978). Mind in society: The development of higher psychological processes 
(M. Cole, V. John-Steiner, S. Scribner, & E. Souberman, Eds.). Cambridge, MA: 
Harvard University Press. 
Wingert, P., & Kantrowitz, B. (1997, October, 27). Why Andy couldn’t read. Newsweek, 
pp. 56–64. 
Woodside-Jiron, H. (2003). Critical policy analysis: Researching the roles of cultural 
models, power, and expertise in reading policy. Reading Research Quarterly, 38(4). 
Woodside-Jiron, H., & Gehsmann, K. (2009). Peeling back the layers of policy and 
school reform: Revealing the structural and social complexities within. International 
Journal of Disability, Development and Education, 56(1), 49–72.


9 
Locating the Role of the 
 
Critical Discourse Analyst
 
Lisa Patel Stevens
 
Boston College
Historically, Critical Discourse Analysis (CDA) first involved analysis of lan-
guage and its ideological echoes in public speeches and platforms, with the ana-
lyst functioning as a conduit between the public and the ideologies conveyed 
through language by public office holders. For example, Norman Fairclough, 
a foundational author of both uses and methodological structures of CDA, has 
used CDA (2000) to explore the neoliberal ideologies enacted through pub-
lic speeches by British Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher and United States 
President Ronald Reagan. In uses such as these, the direct interface between the 
analyst and the speaker is limited, with the analyst examining language that was 
readily available to and heard by others and publishing the analysis to academic 
and public audiences. 
Across the use of CDA in educational research, two trends have emerged. 
First is a trend largely in keeping, relationally speaking, with CDA’s first analy-
ses of public speech, in the form of critical policy analysis using CDA to explore 
educational policies’ ideologies and positions (e.g., Dworin & Bomer, 2008; 
Jones, 2009; Liasidou, 2008; Stevens, 2003). A second trend is characterized by 
CDA used in situations where the researcher and the speaker are in close rela-
tional proximity to each other, with the analyst working with and/or research-
ing teachers, students, and parents’ uses of language (e.g., Rogers & Mosley, 
2008; Sieg, 2008; Tuten, 2007). This proximity brings to bear altogether differ-
ent questions of power and responsibility, particularly pressing for researchers 
and study participants. 
Some of the questions instigated by an up-close use of CDA include: What 
responsibilities and roles do educational researchers using CDA hold in school 
settings? How does the public intellectual, who holds the explicit role of analy-
sis and exploration of ideologies, work in settings where the researcher and 
participant work together closely? How does this role of the public intellectual 
fluctuate within structured and informal relationships where power slips and 
glides across interactions? In these types of settings, what promise is held by 
CDA as both an exploration of potentially harmful discourses and social rela-
tions and as potentially transformative of those social practices? 
These questions are not unique to CDA but carry with them a disturbingly 
opportunistic legacy of educational research in school settings. Educational 


184  Lisa Patel Stevens
research has been conducted, published and fed academic knowledge that has 
diminutized and then pathologized ‘at-risk’ populations (Stevens, 2009). This 
trend emanates not from malicious intents but more so of a mismatch between 
the pursuit of ‘scientific’ and objective knowledge and a more humanistic and 
engaged praxis (Freire, 1970; Bartolome, 1994). Similarly, some educational 
research, particularly qualitative research that is conducted in classrooms and 
schools, has a tendency of being less than forthright about intents (Newkirk, 
1996). Again, this mismatch can be mapped to the intents of academic pursuits 
and the responsibility researchers have to participants, not just to academic 
publishing. Critical inquiry into language holds both the potential to re-enact 
these opportunistic trends and the possibility to recraft the presence and use of 
critical language awareness in educational research. 
In this chapter, I draw upon my own uses of CDA and critical linguistics 
from educational praxis and research settings to explore these questions and 
the potential possibilities of shared critical discussions about language and 
ideology in educational settings. In particular, I describe and analyze my uses 
of CDA as a researcher with teachers. In relation to the data I present here, I 
held various institutional positions as a literacy specialist, a co-teacher, and a 
researcher. Common to these positions was my explicit interest in the ways that 
language practices can be better understood to shed light on the dynamics of 
power and identity in educational spaces. However, as I moved from  literacy 
specialist and collaborator to researcher and critical discourse analyst, my dia-
logic exchanges with teachers became more complicated, contested, and, argu-
ably, better. In this chapter, I share some of these conversations and what they 
portend for educational researchers using critical linguistic approaches in the 
field. In particular, I articulate two key concepts crucial to the exploration of 
this role: reflexivity and answerability. 
From the fields of sociology and psychology, reflexivity is defined as an act 
of self-reference where examination or action bends back on itself, refers to, 
and affects the entity instigating the action. Social theorist Margaret Archer 
(2007) refers to reflexivity as  “the regular exercise of the mental ability, shared 
by all normal people, to consider themselves in relation to their social contexts 
and vice versa” (p. 11). Archer elaborates upon this definition to describe the 
internal conversations that humans have with themselves, explaining, justify-
ing, interrogating themselves and others in the social world. Thus, as we bring 
CDA into the field and use it in direct action with participants, we engage in 
acts of reflexivity, bring internal conversations into the realm of the interper-
sonal, with potential affects on all participants, including ourselves. 
In moving internal conversations into the realm of the spoken and inter-
personal and prompting this shift, we also engage in dialogic exchanges with 
research participants never broached by analysts of Thatcher’s speeches. These 
interpersonal exchanges hold, as with any dialogic exchange, the promise and 
portend of answering each others’ invitations to engage, what philosopher and 
semiotician Mikhael Bakhtin called answerability (1990). Bakhtin described 
every utterance as answerable, as it is part of a dialogue with another who is 


The Role of the Critical Discourse Analyst  185
part of our dialogic exchange, an interlocutor. Those are the rules of illocution-
ary discourse but interlocutors feel those moments of dialogic promises and 
responsibilities to respond in immediate and subsequent exchanges. In that 
sense, conducting CDA in schools with/on participants brings to bear ques-
tions of answerability that are different in analyses conducted from afar. In the 
following, I share my research approach, particularly the steps in my methodol-
ogy that magnified questions of reflexivity and answerability.
Shifting roles as interlocutor
In my research approach, I endeavored to share my uses of Critical Discourse 
Analysis with my participants, to seek their perspectives as ways of better 
understanding possible interpretations of classroom practices. Using CDA in 
educational settings with participants, as opposed to on participants, requires 
high levels of trust and the willingness of both parties to engage in an explora-
tion of plausible descriptions and interpretations of discourse. In the data that I 
present, I had different shared sets of inquiry stances with the participants over 
time. The work here was drawn from my dual relationship as a researcher and 
literacy specialist working with a sixth-grade science teacher. Within the study, 
I paid attention to, and the participants paid differential attention, to the ways 
that language enacted ideologies. 
Working as a Literacy Specialist
When I was a literacy specialist working at a middle school, I worked primarily 
with the school’s content area teachers, modeling effective literacy strategies 
and lessons in their classrooms and mentoring their use of the literacy practices. 
Within that middle school context, I worked with all of the school’s teachers, 
and my goal was to support how language and literacy were leveraged and used 
within their content area teaching. With other teachers in the school, there was 
a shared interest in developing and using metalanguage to identify how lan-
guage, both semantically and syntactically, represents worldviews (Halliday, 
1985). With some teachers, these exchanges were closely connected to a text-
centered literacy strategy used to engage students with content, and the conver-
sations that I examine in this chapter draw from such a collaboration. 
Throughout my work as a literacy specialist and transitioning into my 
doctoral research, collected at the same school, I worked with Dawn Scolari 
(pseudonym), an experienced sixth-grade life science teacher. Dawn was a 
thoroughly pragmatic teacher, interested in her students achieving well on dis-
trict and state assessments. Dawn was the science department’s chairperson, 
a veteran teacher with 15 years’ experience at the time of our pedagogical and 
research collaboration, and she held the reputation of a teacher who covered 
well her Earth Science curriculum. When I was a literacy specialist assigned 
to the school where Dawn worked, our interactions typically went something 
like following: 


186  Lisa Patel Stevens
Dawn:  Hey, Lisa, that vocab strategy worked really well the rest of the day. 
The kids seemed to like it a lot. 
Lisa:  
Great. They should be used to adding the pictures and sentences, since 
we already practiced that with the vocab cards. 
Dawn: Mmhmm. I’ll save some samples so you can see their work. 
Lisa:  
OK, cool. Hey, I’ve got another strategy that has the kids do the same 
thing, except they take more of the lead in picking words they don’t 
know well. 
Dawn: Yeah? 
Lisa: 
Yeah. I’ll drop a copy in your box. And maybe I can come back in to 
demo it. 
Dawn: Sounds good. See you later. 
What is superficially a simple exchange about both past and present interactions 
contains nuances of our different educational roles. From a discourse analysis 
view (Gee, 1996) of this exchange, there are clearly defined differentiations in 
our roles, although we share a few key identity kit aspects being female and 
teachers at the same middle school. Another view of the interaction, with some 
critical discourse analysis notations, shows more clearly the shades of distinc-
tion between our roles. The italicized comments are notes about the dialogic 
positions taken up within the exchange. The underlined text shows the style 
choices, the particular language choices to position the speaker, and the itali-
cized text shows the genre, or mode of interaction taken up in the exchange. 
Dawn:  Hey, Lisa, that vocab strategy worked really well the rest of the day. 
The kids seemed to like it a lot. Review, Report of last interaction and 
reference to student response as indicator of success. 
Lisa:  
Great. They [the students] should be used to adding the pictures and 
sentences, since we already practiced that with the vocab cards. Con-
firmation of report and connection to previous work conducted. Use of 
we to promote collaborative stance
Dawn:  Mmhmm. I’ll save some samples so you can see their work. Offer of 
access to the students’ work to an outsider. Reference to student work as 
another source of support. 
Lisa:  
OK, cool. Hey, I’ve got another strategy that has the kids do the same 
thing, except they take more of the lead in picking words they don’t 
know well. Offer of similar activity follow-up, with slight modifica-
tion. Working within the style of what has already occurred in the 
collaboration
Dawn: Yeah? Expression of interest. 
Lisa: 
Yeah. I’ll drop a copy in your box. And maybe I can come back in to 
demo it. Reiteration of follow-up and offer for assistance. 
Dawn: Sounds good. See you later. 
Within our interaction between literacy specialist and classroom teacher, Dawn 
assumed the role of reporting back to me, and I used modalities such as maybe 


The Role of the Critical Discourse Analyst  187
to offer support for her report and for offering an additional team teaching 
situation while resisting directives and other strongly worded viewpoints. As 
the literacy specialist for the school, I was still a teacher on the same profes-
sional level as Dawn, but also responsible for mentoring and coaching teachers 
in their literacy practices. This was a challenge in several ways: being younger 
yet being in the role of a coach when not all the teachers in the school felt they 
wanted a coach. My professional role was to mentor them, ideally through team 
teaching in their classrooms, and nurture a professional learning community. I 
was responsible for mentoring but beholden to the teachers to allow me access 
to their practices, and in some cases, to their beliefs about teaching and learning 
through language.
During one year of my doctoral work, I resigned from my literacy specialist 
role in the school and focused full time on graduate studies, with emphasis on 
gathering empirical data, at this same school, about the shape of literacy prac-
tices in science teaching. Again, I appealed to the collaborative generosity of 
colleagues to provide me access to their classrooms and pedagogical practices 
and beliefs. Certainly throughout my roles as a literacy specialist and through 
the initial months I came back to the school as a researcher, Dawn and I did 
not necessarily share the same critical theoretical perspective on language. Our 
respective roles of classroom teacher and literacy specialist were more closely 
knitted to discourses of what works, what is effective, for classroom learning of 
science content. Our genre of conversation had tended to revolve around plan-
ning and reviewing classroom strategies, but stylistically our linguistic choices 
in terms of words and syntax reflected an experienced classroom teacher and a 
younger, academically leaning specialist. 
The patterns of discourse are particularly notable in my appropriation of 
Dawn’s pragmatic view of teaching and learning (what works), in a way to 
establish intersubjectivity and somewhat shared understandings. Subtext to 
this discussion was the more tenuous relationships of mentor and learner, more 
experienced and less experienced teacher, older and younger women. In our 
discussions, these roles and identities were backgrounded and our exchanges 
more cleanly reflected the roles of classroom teacher and literacy specialist.
Working as a Researcher
However, these dimensions of subjectivity (Stevens, 2005), or more accurately 
their surface performances, were further complicated when Dawn participated 
in a year-long professional development project centered on content area lit-
eracy, which I facilitated. The dimensions were further deepened and trans-
formed in the immediate when I returned to Dawn’s classroom as a researcher 
using ethnographic and discourse analysis to study secondary science teachers’ 
beliefs and practices about literacy. 
As a literacy researcher, and one using CDA (Fairclough, 1989, 1992) as a 
framework and methodology, I navigated different territory with Dawn than I 
had as a literacy specialist. I chose to use CDA as a way to analyze how language 


188  Lisa Patel Stevens
was reflection and enacting ideologies and beliefs within the science classroom. 
This stance was, and continues to be for me, informed by sociological views 
of literacy and education (Bourdieu, 1991; Luke, 2008). However, this was a 
different role than the one I held as literacy specialist with some of the school’s 
teachers, including Dawn. Visiting her classroom on a weekly basis for 1 year, 
I found the role of the critical discourse analyst in an educational setting to be 
much more complex, tentative, rewarding, revealing, and fraught with con-
frontation than that of a literacy specialist whose primary concern was access to 
teachers’ classroom. As I used CDA as a set of tools to examine the relationship 
between knowledge, power, and identity in her science classroom, I also began 
to share my findings and perspectives with Dawn. I shared my field notes, tran-
scriptions of interviews, and first sets of analyses not in an effort to triangulate 
or arrive at a shared truth, but rather, to be explicit about the research, to put 
it “on the stage” (Anfara, Brown, & Mangione, 2002, p. 28). In this sense, CDA 
became a tool for discussions about her classroom, the school context, and 
society. Dawn and I shared interactions that touched on much deeper issues 
than we had previously, including our differing positions and epistemologies as 
educators. These conversations, in which we used a metalanguage to talk about 
the discursive and ideological choices made by both Dawn and myself, also 
brought forth an opportunity to explore the potentially transformative nature 
of CDA. Although the precise use of the term critical in this setting evokes, for 
me, the dialectical relationship between language processes and social worlds, 
it also holds in a Freirian sense the possibility of analyzing and exploring dis-
course as a mediational tactic to understanding and transforming these social 
relations. It is within that definition that CDA holds great promise to be reflex-
ive and answerable to those who use it.
As Dawn and I discussed my CDA of her practice, I found that our interac-
tions marked a different sort of dialogic process around the ideologies of educa-
tion, literacy, and young people. In other words, it was only through sharing the 
CDA and more so, sharing a common metalanguage, that we were able to see 
the patterns in our talk and interactions and engage, often disagreeing, about 
those patterns and what they meant. 
The Research Methodologies 
For the discourse analysis, I used Gee’s (1996) explication of social linguis-
tics and discourses, as well as Fairclough’s (1989, 1992) CDA as both frame-
works and methodologies. From the perspective of these frameworks, language 
works to construct us as much as we use language to construct possible worlds 
(Foucault, 1999). Related, language both embodies and constructs ideologies 
(Fairclough, chap. 6, this volume).
However, for a study examining literacy practices and beliefs in a largely tex-
tually mediated setting, CDA provided an appropriate perspective and meth-
odology. Further, my desire to address close dialectic between language and 
social relations necessitated the critical perspective that Fairclough’s (1989) 


The Role of the Critical Discourse Analyst  189
work lent. Working with these frameworks, I positioned the form and function 
of language in relation to Dawn’s literacy practices. Using Fairclough’s orders of 
discourse (Fairclough, chap. 10, this volume), I analyzed the study participants’ 
words, including Dawn’s during class and interviews for the genres, discourses, 
and styles used to create and constrict literate possibilities for their students. 
I transcribed and analyzed classroom and out-of-classroom discussions 
between myself and the study participants for elements of (a) genre, the loosely 
configured relations typically associated with a type of exchange; (b) discourse, 
the systematic clusters of themes; and (c), style, the ways of being taken up 
within a dialogic exchange. In analyzing the transcripts shared in this chapter, 
I paid particular attention to the ways in which style choices complicated the 
genres of research and pedagogical conversations.
 In the study, I used these analyses to draw conclusions about the various 
societal discourses, or clusters of ideologies (Gee, 1996), about adolescents and 
literacy that were operationalized in classroom practices. The overall purpose 
of these approaches was to provide a continual mediation between interper-
sonal uses of language and its reflection and creation of social relations. Dur-
ing the weekly classroom visits, participant observation techniques (Merriam, 
1998) were used to document the literacy activities in the classroom. I sat in the 
back portion of the room and recorded field notes on a computer, noting the 
classroom environs, activities, physical factors, and particularly the discourses 
during the class sessions. After the field notes were collected, I immediately 
transcribed them all into detailed descriptions. Additionally, class sessions 
were audiotaped, occasionally videotaped, and later transcribed for discourse 
analysis. 
Sharing the Analyses
Each week I created a one-page summary of my observations and analyses and 
sent it to Dawn. These one-page summaries were first developed to gain feed-
back from Dawn and ultimately became one of the key tools used to medi-
ate our discussions about her beliefs and practices and my discourse analysis. 
These one-page summaries became pivotal because they served as the initial 
launch pads for the conversations that Dawn and I had about my analyses of 
her literacy practices. 
Interviews—both structured and unstructured—were conducted to inquire 
about specific literacy practices, general notions of literacy in the content class-
room, and perceptions of the staff development project and its components. 
Unstructured interviews, which occurred primarily directly before and after 
each classroom observation, were noted using field notes and followed the 
same transcription process as the observation field notes. 
At first, I shared the one-page summaries of interviews and observations 
out of advice from another qualitative researcher and to be somewhat consis-
tent with the open and forthright relationship that Dawn and I had known as 
colleagues working in the same school. However, both of these premises for 


190  Lisa Patel Stevens
sharing back qualitative notes proved remarkably shallow for navigating the 
issues of answerability and reflexivity that surfaced. 
Although I knew Dawn would not restrict me from making my own analy-
ses and to a certain extent could not, I was also relatively certain that I would 
not gain validation in the form of a member check, as is sometimes sought from 
participants in ethnographic studies. In many cases, member checks are used as a 
form of triangulation, a method of ensuring validity of the study. In fact, since the 
publication of the first edition of this edited volume, triangulation has regained 
once critiqued ground (Blaiki, 1991) as a mechanism of establishing validity 
across quantitative and qualitative approaches (e.g., Kadushin et al., 2008). 
However, I was interested in a method that would help me to be explicit 
about my subjective interpretations in Dawn’s classroom, and I hoped that 
sharing my research would help me move more fluidly between the reflection 
and realism for which reflexivity calls, and more so, make these subjective anal-
yses more explicit and traceable to others (Luttrell, 2000). 
Sharing the analyses and findings with Dawn proved complex. Discussions 
of her discourse and how it often supported what literacy researchers would 
deem less than desirable ideologies about teaching and learning were difficult 
topics for discussion. Using discourse analysis revealed much about Dawn’s 
literacy practices and ideologies, but it also raised questions of how to conduct 
research in ways that are reflexive to all parties and how to be answerable to 
field participants. 
Shifting Roles 
Contrasted with the pragmatic identity that I enacted with Dawn as an onsite 
literacy specialist, my purpose as a critical discourse analyst marked an indelible 
departure from the seemingly apolitical relationship we had previously culti-
vated. Although many ethnographic and qualitative researchers (e.g., Merriam, 
1998; Spradley, 1980) have documented the challenge of working with research 
participants in qualitative inquiries, the prospect of entering Dawn’s classroom 
to explicitly investigate local, institutional, and societal enactments of ideology 
in language required more than just gaining access to her physical classroom. 
Beyond access to her room, I also needed access to her beliefs and practices, and 
although analyzing her classroom discourse revealed much about her beliefs, 
I found it necessary to debrief with Dawn after each classroom observation. 
These discussions marked the first turn we took toward discourse analyst and 
participant. After one classroom visit, I was talking with Dawn about the school-
wide emphasis on organization. All students were expected to keep a three-ring 
binder, with one section for each class. In many classes, teachers did spot checks 
of the binders, including Dawn. She directed her students to number the pages 
in their binders as a way to make sure that the students all had the same notes, 
handouts, and worksheets in their science binders. After a classroom observa-
tion in November 2000, Dawn and I were discussing this highly structured use 
of notebooks with her sixth graders: 


The Role of the Critical Discourse Analyst  191
Lisa: 
I wonder if this school-wide emphasis on organization can even be 
somewhat stifling for the students who don’t, um, value that way of 
learning. 
Dawn: Maybe, but that’s what they need to get through the system and be 
successful, don’t you think? 
Lisa:  
Without a doubt. I think what I’d like to question, though, is how the 
system might be too narrow in how it defines success for all students. 
Dawn: Yeah, maybe. 
Dawn: (after a pause) But that is the system we’re working on, and that is 
what these kids need for college, isn’t it? 
Lisa:  
Yeah, to a certain extent, but also to a certain extent not, ’cause I’m 
not sure this is the one and best way of getting there. Does that make 
sense? 
Dawn: Um, not really. Until they develop their own systems of organizing 
their stuff, they need to be shown how to do it. 
Within this exchange, Dawn and I are making an explicit turn in our previous 
patterns of discussion of ‘what works,’ beginning to discusses the underlying 
purposes and functions of classroom practices like maintaining a uniformly 
organized binder. In this conversation, I make judicious use of modalities 
 
(Halliday, 1985)—words and phrases like I wonder, I’d like to, might, if, I’m not 
sure, and does that make sense. These are all modalities used to soften my stance 
that the monochromatic practice of organizing information prioritized certain 
types and stances towards knowledge. The use of these modalities also echoes a 
mismatch between my discourses as an emerging researcher using sociological 
lenses and that of both my former role as a literacy specialist and Dawn’s epis-
temological stance as a science teacher. This mismatch is on the surface in this 
conversation across all of those subjectivities. 
Of note here also is the contrast between this conversation and the conversa-
tion at the start of the chapter, where I used some but far fewer modalities, and 
my and Dawn’s style choices matched more closely. The genre of our conversa-
tion had also shifted significantly, in that we were no longer working within the 
genre of evaluating a classroom strategy and making room for another one. In 
the latter conversation, our genre shifted significantly to discussing not what 
works but more so for what purposes and intents, and what the side effects 
might be of classroom strategies that work more so to maintain order than to 
result in learning. 
As we moved into this genre, I made some stylistic turns in how I interacted, 
most notably through the markedly increased use of modalities as I etched out 
a different theoretical stance on the binders than Dawn. One interpretation 
of my usage of these modalities is that as a linguistic researcher, I am at once 
analytical of the discourse but also interested in opening possibilities for con-
versation around alternative views. Looking back, I used these modalities both 
to strive for a dialogic exchange and out of my own hesitations at taking up 
considerable representational power and not yet fully grasping how to name 


192  Lisa Patel Stevens
and claim my own subjectivities within the study as a first step, and as next and 
more important steps, how to share findings in ways that make the dialogue 
accessible and meaningful for all involved. In short, how to make it answerable. 
When I am responding from an overly academic style—one that stems from a 
critical orientation—I am enacting an answerability that is not a shared order 
of discourse between myself and Dawn. This, then, undercuts the potential for 
shifts in reflexivity, or at least for those shifts to be part of the shared language 
and shared discourses of the interlocutors.
It is actually with the refractive view that CDA provides of this interaction 
that I was able to discern an increase in modalities on my part. I might have 
suspected that, due to the long-range nature of my relationship with Dawn, I 
would be more forthright and less guarded about my viewpoints, but the analy-
sis done with CDA shows just the opposite. Although other grounded theories 
and discourse analyses might offer insights into the conversational pattern, CDA 
helps provide the metalinguistic tools of style, genre and discourse to highlight 
this compelling example of the mismatch in discourses across exchanges over 
time. 
What is also of note is Dawn’s ease and willingness to disagree with me and, 
more largely construed, my then affiliation with a university. It may seem prob-
able that the professional relationship we maintained, as specialist (or grant 
facilitator, or researcher) and classroom teacher, would reflect the power 
dynamics in which the specialist (now researcher) maintains a more expert 
position in educational systems where higher education is positioned as more 
advanced than secondary contexts. This is far from the case in this and reflects 
a more nuanced understanding of power than as residing easily within institu-
tional roles. 
Rather, Dawn’s clarity about her philosophy of teaching, her goals for her 
students, and her identity as a teacher remained relatively fixed over the course 
of our professional relationship, where my role shifted from literacy specialist 
and teacher to researcher. For example, although Dawn occupies what could 
be viewed as a lower status position of being a teacher in juxtaposition to a 
university-affiliated researcher, she uses phrases like don’t you think so and 
isn’t it as openings and markers for me to take up part or all of what she has 
just said, exerting her own position and authority as a practicing teacher—one 
who is in the trenches and interacts with theories and research from a practical 
level. 
Pursuant to this more fluid and fluctuating power footing is Dawn’s strongly 
established identity as an experienced and successful teacher of 22 years, her 
position as department chairperson in the school, and our previous relation-
ship in which she chose what she found useful from what I had to offer as a 
literacy specialist. In short, in the social field of the school, Dawn had a tre-
mendous amount of status, of cultural and social capital. She could take up 
what she found useful from my offerings as a literacy specialist, focusing on 
text-based strategies, and leave behind other themes such as critical approaches 
to language and schooling.


The Role of the Critical Discourse Analyst  193
Also relevant to these types of exchanges was the relationship we had formed 
over several years of working together. Dawn and I enjoyed a high level of 
mutual professional regard. This was not born out of closely overlapping ide-
ologies, but instead came out of multiple successful partnerships as teachers, 
working alongside each other with both her sixth graders and the rest of the 
science faculty. This collegial regard carried over into my presence in her class-
room as a critical discourse analyst, but not without some explicit references to 
the shift in my roles, as is demonstrated in the following excerpt. 
While Dawn and I were debriefing a typical one-page summary in which I 
posed some questions about school-sanctioned literacies versus other types of 
literacies, she and I had the following exchange: 
Dawn: What did you mean here by “dichotomy between in-school literacies 
vs. out-of-school literacies?” 
Lisa: 
Well, what I was getting at was that in all of the stuff that I’m listening 
to, it’s just about the kinds of reading, writing, listening and speak-
ing that’s found in schools. And not so much all of the things that we 
might do well outside of school, like digital literacies, you know, like 
the Internet, visual literacies. That kind of stuff. 
Dawn: (slight laugh). I must be missing the point here. Aren’t we supposed to 
teach them the stuff they need for school? 
Lisa: 
Well, yes and no. It’s kind of like the question that kids ask: When am 
I ever going to use the stuff that you’re teaching today? Um, I guess 
what I am saying is that seems to be a pretty valid question in today’s 
world. And I’m, uh, wondering about all the literacies our kids have, 
maybe even some of our struggling kids, that don’t ever get acknowl-
edged. Ya know? 
Dawn: Hmmmm. I guess you have more time to think about that kind of 
stuff now, huh? 
Lisa: 
Yeah, that’s definitely true. But I was thinking about some of this stuff 
when I was still here. 
In this conversation, Dawn and I are again providing different interpretations 
to the core purpose of schooling, and the purpose of literacy and language ped-
agogy within that purpose. Coupled with this difference in viewpoint is Dawn’s 
interpretation that I bring up these observations at this juncture in my profes-
sional trajectory because, as a doctoral student, I must have more time for these 
observations. These points are expressed both explicitly through the content 
that is discussed but also through stylistic choices made by both of us. In this 
exchange, we find the same types of modalities used by me and the same types 
of attempts for shared understandings from Dawn. Yet what is perhaps most 
compelling is Dawn’s mention of the shift in my role from teacher to researcher 
with far more flexibility with time than the typical teacher enjoys. Dawn’s mes-
sage is spot on and speaks strongly to the institutional roles and responsibili-
ties that differ strongly from school to university. From a classroom teacher’s 


194  Lisa Patel Stevens
perspective, researchers and discourse analysts obviously enjoy great luxuries 
of time to review myriad nuances of classrooms, including language, the use 
of which seems as automatic as the intake of oxygen. Therefore, the develop-
ment and use of a metalanguage for the analysis of something so automatic and 
pervasive can seem frivolous and indulgent. It was out of this perception of dis-
course analysis as something for academics, Dawn’s curiosity, and the promise 
of Critical Discourse Analysis as transformative (Fairclough, 1989) that I began 
to share more of my discourse analysis with her. What is most compelling to 
me here is Dawn’s gradual uptake of the metalanguage used in my analysis. 
Antithetically, although Dawn quite cogently levels an implicit critique of the 
luxury of discourse analysis, she is able to do so from the vantage of acquiring 
and learning some of those very skills and processes. In other words, Dawn 
engages in a conversation about the types of literacies that are sanctioned by 
school, a conversation spun into motion from the presence of a researcher, and 
then is able to critique the conversation for its dabbling into less pressing mat-
ters, like out of school literacy practices. 
This instance gives a point of reflection on the role of learning in these inter-
actions. First, drawing from Gee’s (1996) work, we must first try to distinguish 
between learning and acquisition in this situation. I spoke explicitly to Dawn 
about the methodologies I was using, but we also began to use terms like lit-
eracies, metalanguage, sanction, and power in our conversations. In this way, 
we can see nuances of both acquisitions (through use) and learning (through 
explicit explanation) of this metalanguage. As we gradually began to share a 
metalanguage, Dawn and I were able to discuss the connections that I was mak-
ing between some of her discourses and the social relations in her classroom 
and in broader contexts, as seen in the following example about Dawn’s dis-
course about young people. Within these exchanges, though, my reflexivity 
went through unexpected and important challenges. I needed to be answerable 
to Dawn’s critique of my shifting role, and more so, to her critique of the rele-
vancy of academic research to classroom practice, a consistent discourse across 
many of our conversations. I found it to be fairly easy to engage with these her 
in instances where we negotiated differing interpretations, but when there was 
a stronger disconnect between worldviews, as with our views of adolescents, 
our exchanges demonstrated stronger gaps in answerability and engagement. 
Differing perspectives on youth
The discourse of adolescent as bundle of raging hormones was readily appar-
ent in Dawn’s instruction. A large and pervasive societal discourse of youth 
characterizes them as bundles of raging hormones, virtually devoid of rational 
thought, as they are at the will of their changing physiologies. This discourse is 
present not only as a commonly held notion, but also goes largely unchallenged 
in educational settings (Finders, 1998; Lesko, 2001). Ascribing to this notion 
that adolescence is a life stage that amounts to little more than a hormonally 
induced confusion contains common sense, almost teleological, implications 


The Role of the Critical Discourse Analyst  195
for instruction, including positioning the teacher as agent of control in the 
classroom, choosing activities that allow for minimal student interaction, and 
using unidirectional, didactic instructional strategies. 
In keeping with the purposes of CDA and also stemming from a sociological 
analysis, I spent time in the study participants’ classrooms, noting how their 
conceptions of youth were enacted in their classroom interactions. Using the 
discourse analysis to note turn-taking patterns, the overwhelming predomi-
nance of Dawn’s turn taking (Fairclough, 1989) and the series of unidirectional 
directives underscores Dawn’s consistent role as decision maker in her class-
room. The discourse is also apparent in the highly structured routine and for-
matting that her students followed. There was little or no room for students’ 
individual identities to have voice in her classroom, the implication perhaps 
being that as bundles of raging hormones the adolescents had little sense of 
identity to offer; this stance was expressed in her classroom interactions and in 
our conversations about her teaching, as seen in the last conversation analyzed 
in this chapter. 
In conversations about teaching sixth graders, Dawn often referred to her 
duty to train them, including showing them how to organize their notebooks 
according to her system and teaching them how to behave in middle and high 
school classrooms. Expected behaviors included only speaking during the 
course of a lesson and only after raising their hands, asking the teacher only 
those questions deemed by the teacher pertinent to the daily lessons, and fol-
lowing teacher-given directions (Field notes, 3/26/00, 4/ 15/00, 8/28/00, and 
10/12/00). During an interview in March 2000, Dawn also used several meta-
phors that described the characteristics of her sixth graders as animals:  
Dawn: It takes me a good month or two to just rein them in. 
Lisa: 
Um, can you tell me a little more of what you mean by that? 
Dawn: Well, you know, they come not knowing anything, not how to organize 
their backpacks, what forms to use, where the bathroom is (laughter), 
anything! 
Lisa: 
So, they have to be reined in to learn those things? 
Dawn: Exactly. I get them under control, herded up, and then we get onto the 
business of learning, reading and writing. 
In my summaries of observations and interviews such as these, I included 
comments about the pervasive discourse regarding young people. For these 
analyses, I paid particular attention to the content in Dawn’s talk, such as the 
need for organization, the imperative to discipline, and an ethos of business. 
As Dawn reviewed her talk, she became increasingly aware of her language 
choices that, in turn, prompted her interest in the relationship between her 
discourse and classroom interactions. She was alternately bothered by and 
defensive of her characterization of young people as overly hormone-driven. 
When she and I sat down to review the last excerpt, we had the following 
conversation: 


196  Lisa Patel Stevens
Dawn:  Geez. That seems kind of bad, doesn’t it? 
Lisa:  
What do you think? Is it bad to talk about kids that way? 
Dawn:  Well, it seems harmless enough and pretty accurate, if you watch them 
for a while, but what’s bugging me is that you think that there’s a link 
between how I teach and how I view them. 
Lisa:  
Yeah, I think so. 
Dawn:  So what’s the alternative? 
Lisa:  
Well, if you were teaching a group of adults, would you do things in 
the same way? 
Dawn:  No, but I wouldn’t have to. 
Lisa:  
Right. So. There seems to be a kind of link between seeing adolescents 
as kind of out of control and how you teach them. Does that make 
sense? 
Dawn:  It does, but the more I think about it, the more I’m sure that if I didn’t 
do it this way, it would be chaos. Just look at Brian [a seventh-grade 
Earth Science teacher down the hall from Dawn]. His kids are totally 
out of control. 
Lisa:  
And do you think that’s because he thinks about adolescents differ-
ently that you do? 
Dawn:  I think it’s because he doesn’t know how to control them. 
Through debriefing discussions such as this, Dawn and I figured out quickly that 
we could agree implicitly that her language and actions in her classroom com-
municated certain viewpoints, and this could be plausibly certain. However, we 
could also agree and disagree to varying extents, and from instant to instant, 
as to how appropriate and justified these viewpoints were for the benefit of the 
sixth graders and to what extent these viewpoints reflected, rejected, and/or 
transformed dominant ideologies about youth, schooling, and literacy. In this 
way, Dawn and I enjoyed a joint investigation into the highly complex and lay-
ered nature of discourses and explored multiple interpretations. We developed 
a “self-consciousness about the rootedness of discourse” (Fairclough, 1989, 
p. 167). In this sense, the one-page summaries and debriefing conversations 
never accomplished the goal of triangulating the analysis—a misapplied notion 
from the irreconcilable viewpoint of quantitative research. Instead these con-
versations served to textualize my analysis and make me answerable to Dawn’s 
practitioner-based responses to my analyses. The conversations also served to 
reconstruct the texts, breaking from a potentially nihilistic cycle in which texts 
are only deconstructed without reconstruction or revisioning of alternate texts. 
Sharing and talking about the discourse with Dawn also created space for dif-
ferent variations on our roles, more appropriately wrestling with and exploring 
various hybrid forms of representation and identity (Luke, 2002). 
Last, this example also points to the potentially transformative promise of 
CDA in educational settings. As Dawn and I used a shared metalanguage to 
discuss the flows between language and ideologies, Dawn showed an imperma-
nent awareness of the connections between some of her language choices and 


The Role of the Critical Discourse Analyst  197
the social relations in her classrooms. Although there is no empirical evidence 
in this study as to whether this resulted in change in Dawn’s practice, such an 
investigation might be too narrow to fully engage the interpretive and sym-
bolic analysis that a focus on discourse potentially holds (Fairclough, 1989). 
The use of CDA holds great promise as a mediational tactic to be used in edu-
cational settings, but should not be saddled with teleological transformative 
responsibilities because no unilateral and foregone connection exists between 
discourses and social worlds. Instead public intellectuals can look to CDA as a 
way to mediate their responsibilities to be an agent of social and political justice 
(Said, 1996), to help them to be answerable to their interlocutors and to engage 
in regular reflexivity about the responsibility and relevancy of their research. 
Because the use of CDA has largely occurred outside of direct contact with the 
participants, using this framework and methodology in educational settings 
with participants requires deep consideration of the analyst’s responsibilities. 
How then should critical discourse analysts proceed in working with research 
participants? From my experiences with Dawn and other teachers, I have come 
to believe that the answer to this lies within the explicit self-naming of the ana-
lyst’s perspectives and subjectivities (reflexivity) and, in a collaborative stance, 
one that allows for mediation and negotiation of power and knowledge from 
the onset by both the researcher and participant. This collaboration was marked 
by both participants being willing to be explicit about their beliefs and, in fact, 
staying in conversations where their beliefs were challenged and probed by the 
other person. Over the time of the research project, our collaboration opened 
the door to a shared inquiry into teaching and learning, and the discourse anal-
ysis was a deepened aspect of this pattern. In that we held shared ground of 
purpose. However, as my purpose in her classroom and with her shifted to one 
of more research colleague than teaching colleague, our exchanges reflected 
more areas of disconnect and more explicit negotiations of agency and power, 
reflected in language choices. These language choices also point to areas of 
answerability that are far from quickly resolved. 
The conversation we had about Dawn’s appropriation of a dominant dis-
course about adolescents made me, and probably Dawn, uncomfortable. At the 
time, I misjudged my discomfort to be from feeling that I needed to objectively 
justify my analysis. On reflection, I now believe the reason for my uneasiness 
was a nagging realization that I was perhaps revealing to Dawn an aspect of 
her discourse and ideology that served a real and possibly justified purpose in 
her identity kit as a teacher. I was hesitant that I was asking her to question an 
aspect of her ideology that she did not want to question—and what right did 
I have to do that? In those moments, I felt uncomfortably like I had some-
how stepped into the role of a psychoanalyst rather than a critical discourse 
analyst working in education. This slip, in essence, was one of answerability. 
I was working and researching from a stance where my research answerability 
was held accountable not by Dawn but by the doctoral committee that would 
approve my dissertation. From that realm of answerability, it was appropriate 
and expected for me to elucidate my findings of ideologies enacted through 


198  Lisa Patel Stevens
classroom practice. However, sharing research, let alone conducting research 
with participants, begs a wholly different answerability.
Often discourse analysts avoid this complication by working with the dis-
course of people far removed from themselves—that of politicians, advertisers, 
and others who do not participate in weekly interactions about the discourse 
analysis. However, Dawn and I faced this challenge of using her discourse as 
a refracted image of her beliefs and practices. In so doing, the analyses also 
engendered refractions of my role as a researcher, my beliefs about education 
which largely had been previously unspoken to Dawn, and my practices as a 
professional educator who valued and continues to value work with teachers 
in school settings. Just as I was cautious about exposing aspects of Dawn’s dis-
course and ideology to her, I was equally hesitant about superimposing a false 
sense of knowledge of what was acceptable to share with her and what was not. 
Because of Dawn’s confidence as a teacher and her experience as a teacher-
researcher, I could not arbitrarily decide which discourse analyses to share with 
her. She needed access to all of them, but she then also assumed the responsibil-
ity of determining what she wanted to further understand, what she wanted to 
question, and what she saw as inconsequential or inaccurate. 
The Possibilities of Critical Discourse Analysis to 
Enhance Learning 
The exploration of what theory of learning can be used as a lens to understand-
ing the interactions between a critical discourse analyst and participants in an 
educational setting must first be cautioned with who is doing the learning. As 
with our previous interactions, Dawn and I enjoyed a dialogic exchange (Freire, 
1970), in which roles of teacher and learner were blurred. Although I offered 
descriptions, interpretations, and analyses of her discourse, she texturized these 
reactions with reflections from her vantage point. Also at work in our interac-
tions was a theory of learning about language that differentiates between acqui-
sition and learning (Krashen, 1985; cited in Gee, 1996). Although Dawn had 
acquired primary and secondary discourses (Gee, 1996) as a teacher, depart-
ment chairperson, scientist, and middle school educator, our work together 
engendered a learning situation about language and ideologies. This is not to say 
that Dawn was learning a discourse. Rather, Dawn—through her interactions 
with a critical discourse analyst— was learning a metalanguage for discussing 
how her practices as a sixth-grade life science teacher shaped and were shaped 
by ideologies. This learning is similar to the aspects of critical literacy that are all 
but missing from traditional educational notions of reading and literacy found 
in the United States (Freebody & Luke, 1990). This overall lack of acknowledg-
ment of the highly political, historical, and social nature of language and its role 
in ideology is part of what made CDA seem at first to Dawn so foreign, and then 
so compelling once she was able to enter into interpretations. 
This type of inquiry is a good first step to making classroom talk a portal for 
analysis of ideologies and cultural practices in classrooms—one that could be 


The Role of the Critical Discourse Analyst  199
engaged to move beyond the traditionally stultifying ways in which practitioners 
are shaped and reinforced as rugged individualists with little to no time for reflec-
tion (Britzman, 1991; Lortie, 2002). CDA encourages educators to push beyond 
the surface layers of language and note the ideological work accomplished 
through language. In this way, researchers and teachers can further understand 
the ways in which certain cultural models of teaching and learning are repro-
duced and reinforced and other cultural models ignored. Also the use of the tools 
and social theories behind CDA by users such as teachers and students would 
serve the larger and much needed purpose of opening of CDA as a metalanguage 
to unpack and name the ways that language enacts ideologies (Luke, 2004). 
Engaging educators in this type of analysis is easily done and facilitated using 
nonidentified samples of discourse and language. However, engendering on 
this type of inquiry with a teacher’s own discourses requires an altogether dif-
ferent type of relationship. The exchanges between Dawn and me proved to 
be successful from the standpoint of achieving shared understandings and 
maintaining respect for divergent opinions because of the high level of trust 
and forthright conversations. This type of relationship must be cultivated and 
constantly remediated for the various hegemonic underpinnings of such an 
inquiry. Ample spaces of answerability and reflexivity must be co-negotiated by 
the discourse analyst and educator. In other words, all parties must be willing to 
claim their positions, speak from those positions, answer to others’ positions, 
and reflexively re-engage in those roles (Hanrahan, 2006). 
In our situation, Dawn and I achieved those spaces by eventually blurring 
the lines between who was doing analysis. As Dawn and I furthered our inter-
actions, she appropriated the language of discourse analysis and was able, at 
times, to coincide with my “read” of her discourse and at other times to chal-
lenge it. The process provided myself and Dawn with opportunities to learn 
about language, opening up spaces for all-too-rare instances of analytic and 
ideological awareness. 
Dawn and I engaged in many conversations in which we were refracting the 
discourses used in her classroom, used in teacher education, and used in the 
school and district. We were in essence looking back on captured moments in 
time. Rather than characterize these backward looks as reflective of either the 
participants or the language, it is more appropriate to term them refractive, 
accounting for the altered ways in which subjectivities are performed. 
This refraction, or negotiated reflection, is more closely attuned to reflexiv-
ity than more commonly understood notions of reflection found in the field of 
education. It is generally believed that reflection is an essential component of 
teachers’ professional development and is commonly defined as an individual 
reflecting on their unique practices and beliefs as an educator (Risko, Roskos, 
& Vukelich, 1999). However, this type of definition, focusing on the sole prac-
titioner and introspection, is contrary to the social situatedness of CDA and a 
dialogic understanding of interactions. Rather, as Chouliaraki and Fairclough 
(1999) discussed, CDA calls for a reckoning of historical and social position-
ing as crucial aspects and contexts of discourse, ideology, and habitus. The 


200  Lisa Patel Stevens
interactions between myself and Dawn demonstrate that in negotiating the 
various contexts, interpretations, and analyses, refractions of our positions, 
our interpretations, and our beliefs were explored. This notion of refraction 
accounts for the appropriately altered interpretations offered, negotiated, and 
rejected throughout our discussions. In the end, both Dawn and I commented 
several times how fruitful it would be for teachers to have the intellectual space 
and support to reflect on the ideologies enacted in their classrooms. The more 
common use of reflection in educational research hegemonically positions the 
lone practitioner reflecting in order to modify practices, not necessarily to bet-
ter understand ideologies at play in the classroom. In this sense, then, educa-
tional research, including CDA, must be answerable not just to maintaining 
teachers’ prescribed roles but to opening up spaces and providing tools for 
reflexive interrogation.
By situating the teacher-researcher interactions within the social fields of 
schooling and the academy, by using CDA as a tool to critical language and 
ideologies, and allowing for various refractions of representations, Dawn and 
I were able to move away from restrictive binaries that dominated content 
area literacy research: good/bad, what works/what doesn’t, teacher/researcher, 
and, of course, teacher/student. This also helped us move away from a poten-
tially nihilistic presence of CDA and research in a larger sense in classrooms. 
In numerous locations around the world, relationships between schools and 
universities are strained as teachers and administrators have felt the sting of a 
research article that has characterized their work in negative portrayals or have 
been seduced and then betrayed by researchers’ expressed interests (Newkirk, 
1996). Although a level of reflexivity in the researcher-participant collabora-
tion does not and should not guard against research and discourse analysis that 
shows damaging aspects of education, it should offer an opportunity for a dia-
logic process between researcher and participant. It points to a possible way for 
critical discourse analysts who work in educational settings to be answerable to 
their participants, not to produce synchronized interpretations, but to flesh out 
better differing interpretations. 
References 
Anfara, V., Brown, J., Mangione, T. (2002). Qualitative research on the stage: Making 
research more public. Educational Researcher, 31(7), 28–38.
Archer, M. S. (2007). Making our way through the world: Human reflexive and social 
mobility. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Bakhtin, M. M. (1990). Art and answerability: Early philosophical essays (M. Holquist & 
V. Liapunov, Eds. V. Liapunov, Trans.). Austin: University of Texas Press.
Bartolome, L. (1994). Beyond the methods fetish: Toward a humanizing pedagogy. Har-
vard Educational Review, 64(2), 173–194.
Blaiki, N. (1991). A critique of the use of triangulation in social research. Quality & 
Quantity, 25(2), 57–70.
Bourdieu (1991). Language and symbolic power (G. Raymond & M. Adamson, Trans.). 
Cambridge, UK: Polity Press.


The Role of the Critical Discourse Analyst  201
Britzman, D. P. (1991). Practice makes practice: A critical study of learning to teach. 
Albany, NY: State University of New York. 
Chouliaraki, L., & Fairclough, N. (1999). Discourse in late modernity: Rethinking critical 
discourse analysis. Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press. 
Dworin, J. E., & Bomer, R. (2008). What we all (supposedly) know about the poor: 
A critical discourse analysis of Ruby Payne’s “framework”. English Education, 40(2), 
101–121. 
Fairclough, N. (1989). Language and power. New York: Longman. 
Fairclough, N. (1992). Critical language awareness. New York: Longman. 
Finders, M. (1998). Raging hormones. Journal of Adolescent & Adult Literacy, 42, 
252–263. 
Foucault, M. 1999. Religion and Culture (J. R. Carrette (Ed.). Manchester: Manchester 
University Press. 
Freebody, P., & Luke, A. (1990). “Literacies” programs: Debates and demands in cul-
tural context. Prospect: The Australian Journal of TESOL, 5(5), 7–16. 
Freire, P. (1970). Pedagogy of the oppressed. New York: Continuum. 
Gee, J. P. (1996). Social linguistics and literacies: Ideology in discourses (2nd ed.). Bristol, 
PA: Taylor & Francis. 
Halliday, M. A. K. (1985). An introduction to functional grammar. London: Edward 
Arnold. 
Hanrahan, M. U. (2006). Highlighting hybridity: a critical discourse analysis of teacher 
talk in science classrooms. Science Education, 90, 8–43. 
Jones, T. M. (2009). Framing the framework: Discourses in Australia’s national values 
education policy. Educational Research for Policy and Practice, 8(1), 35–57.
Kadushin, M. SL, Hecht, S., Sassen, T., & Saxe, L. (2008). Triangulation and mixed 
methods design: Practicing what we preach in the evaluation of an Israel Experience 
Education Program. Field Methods, 20(1), 46–65.
Krashen, S. (1985). The input hypothesis: Issues and implications. London: Longman. 
Lesko, N. (2001). Act your age: A cultural construction of adolescence. New York: 
Heinemann.
Liasidou, A. (2008). Critical discourse analysis and inclusive educational policies: The 
power to exclude. Journal of Education Policy, 23(5), 483–500. 
Lortie, D. (2002). Schoolteacher: A sociological study. Chicago: University of Chicago 
Press.
Luke, A. (2002). Beyond science and ideology critique: Developments in critical dis-
course analysis. Annual Review of Applied Linguistics, 22, 96–110. 
Luke, A. (2004). Notes on the future of critical discourse analysis. Critical Discourse 
Studies, 1(1), 149–152.
Luke, A. (2008). Using Bourdieu to make policy: mobilizing community capital and 
literacy. In J. Albright & A. Luke (Eds.).  Pierre Bourdieu and Literacy Education. New 
York: Routledge. 
Luttrell, W. (2000). “Good enough” methods for ethnographic research. Harvard Edu-
cational Review, 70, 499–523. 
Merriam, S. B. (1998). Case study research in education: A qualitative approach. San Fran-
cisco, CA: Jossey-Bass. 
Newkirk, T. (1996). Seduction and betrayal in qualitative research. In P. Mortensen & G. 
E. Kirsch (Eds.), Ethics and Representation in Qualitative Studies of Literacy (pp. 3–16). 
Urbana, IL: National Council of Teachers of English. 
Risko, V., Roskos, K., & Vukelich, C. (1999). Making connections: Preservice teachers’ 


202  Lisa Patel Stevens
reflection processes and strategies. In T. Shanahan & F. V. Rodriguez-Brown (Eds.), 
48th Yearbook of the National Reading Conference. Chicago, IL: National Reading 
Conference. 
Rogers, R., & Mosley, M. (2008). A critical discourse analysis of racial literacy in teacher 
education. Linguistics and Education: An International Research Journal, 19(2), 
107–131. 
Said, E. W. (1996). Representations of the intellectual: The 1993 Reith Lectures. New York: 
Vintage Books. 
Sieg, E. (2008). Empowered positions? Listening to sexually experienced young women 
talking about sex, disappointments, and compromise. Health Education, 108(1), 
54–71. 
Spradley, J. P. (1980). Participant observation. Austin, TX: Holt, Rinehart & Winston. 
Stevens, L.P. (2003). Reading First: A critical policy analysis. The Reading Teacher, 56, 
662–668. 
Stevens, L. P. (2005). Renaming adolescence: Subjectivities in complex settings. In J. A. 
Vadeboncouer & L. P. Stevens (Eds.), Reconstructing the ‘adolescent’: Sign, symbol, and 
body. New York: Peter Lang. 
Stevens, L. P. (2009). Maps to interrupt a pathology: Immigrant populations and educa-
tion. Critical Inquiry in Language Studies, 6(1–2), 1–14.
Tuten, J. (2007). “There’s two sides to every story”: How parents negotiate report card 
discourse. Language Arts, 84(4), 314–324. 


Part III 
Multimodal Discourse 
Analysis




10 Discourse Analysis and 
 
Education: A Multimodal 
 
Social Semiotic Approach
 
Gunther Kress 
 
University of London 
Education and Discourse Analysis
Education is a social process. It is embedded in “the social” and, being social, it 
is the product of social agents, structures, processes, values, purposes, and con-
straints. In its forms and processes it reflects the society in which it exists—in 
all ways and with all its contradictions. Discourse analyses of different kinds 
provide means of “getting at” certain of the meanings which are constitutive of, 
embedded, and emergent in the semiotic entities and forms—the “texts”—that 
are produced in educational settings. These in their turn have (had) their part 
in shaping and constituting the practices, structures, shapes, values and pur-
poses of the institution and of those who are participants in its processes. 
Texts—as material objects—are in part constitutive of social institutions; 
they provide means of “reading” the interests and purposes of those involved in 
the making of texts in an institution; they reveal the meanings and the processes 
involved in their making. Texts are outcomes of processes initiated and per-
formed by social agents for social reasons; and they provide a means of getting 
insight into these processes and the purposes of social agents. In this chapter I 
treat discourse analysis as one means for elaborating tools to elucidate educa-
tional concepts, processes and forms, to help in shaping understandings of that 
institution, its participants, and their purposes. In the broadest terms, it is the 
aim of elaborating tools that shapes my approach to discourse analysis here.
“Education” goes well beyond conceptions of institutions defined by bricks 
and mortar; by timetables; by the organization of knowledge as curricula; by 
hierarchies of participants with designated roles; and by metrics of evaluation 
shaped by power. It is seen in terms of practices and of processes that take 
place outside of such sites and their practices, drawing in members of groups 
of all kinds and of all ages. Neither discourse nor text are sufficient, semioti-
cally speaking, to account for the manifold meanings of the social organiza-
tion of education. Other categories are essential: genre, for instance, as the 
category that points to the organization of social participants in the making 
of texts. That is, in realizing, “entexting,” the complexity of social/pedagogic 
environments of learning and teaching, discourse is just one, even if a central 
category. 


206  Gunther Kress
In the recent history of practice and theorization of education, “language” 
has played a—or better, perhaps the—central role in the core of educational 
concerns. It has been treated as the key to an understanding of learning and 
to ways of knowing; to forms of teaching; to kinds of assessment/evaluation. 
To treat “language” as central in this way was not, of course, the invention of 
education; rather it was the appearance, in this site, of a centuries’ long com-
monplace in “Western” thinking, which had treated language as the sine qua 
non of rationality as much as of “humanity,” as that means without which 
neither would exist, and as the means in which all—or very nearly all—of what 
was taken as definitive of rationality and humanity could find its expression. 
“Language” was taken as the means for the “realization”—making real and 
material—of “knowledge”; as the major route and vehicle for learning and 
knowing; as the provider—in the form of a “meta-language”—of means for 
reflection.
In this tradition, “language” came to be seen as the material means for the 
realization of the social phenomenon of discourse—whether in its Foucauldian 
sense as “institutionally produced “knowledge” (Fairclough, 1992; Foucault, 
1971; Gee, 1999; Kress, 1984/89) or in other approaches. It needs to be said that 
in the writings of Foucault discourse is a social rather than a linguistic category; 
for him, the social rather than the linguistic is the focus of attention. 
In education, discourse analysis has had a history of some 40 years (Cazden, 
John, & Hymes, 1972). It followed from two moves in the Humanities and the 
Social Sciences more widely. One was an acceptance of the (generally Marx-
ist-inspired) view that posits the intricate link of power and knowledge; and 
ideologically motivated attempts to “naturalize” that conjunction by various 
means (Bowles & Gintis, 1976; Kress & Hodge, 1979). Yet even where the link 
of power and knowledge was not foregrounded in these terms, it was seen as an 
effect of representation, encapsulated in Richard Rorty’s (1967) phrase “the lin-
guistic turn.” Both moves emphasized the “constructedness” of knowledge in 
all processes of representation. In education, both insights became an implicit 
assumption, curricularized in the notion of critique—critical reading (e.g., Gir-
oux, 1988; Illich, 1971).
In its more linguistically derived versions (e.g., Fairclough, 1989, 1992; Kress 
& Hodge, 1979; Kress, 1984/89), the history of discourse analysis has been beset 
by a problematic fuzziness around the homonym “discourse.” In much socio-
linguistic work of the 1960s, discourse was generally used as a term to describe 
regularities of various kinds in “extended stretches of speech or writing” above 
the level of the sentence (Wodak & Meyer, 2009). By and large, the major focus 
was on the link between environments of language use and features of the 
language used (Hymes, 1964; Labov, 1966, 1972); “the social” and its mean-
ings were central in such work. Others theorists (van Dijk & Kintsch, 1983; 
Wodak & Martin, 2003) were interested in finding regularities of a formal kind 
in “texts,” on an analogy with Chomskian conceptions of the organization 
of language as a psychologically/cognitively shaped and formally describable 
phenomenon (Chomsky, 1957, 1965). Such work tended to be referred to as 


A Multimodal Social Semiotic Approach  207
text-linguistics, and its accounts as text-grammar, by analogy with sentence-
linguistics and sentence-grammar; yet it too became, however vaguely, inter-
twined with “discourse analysis.”
Given that, the terms text and discourse could readily come to be used more 
or less interchangeably, as “extended stretches of speech or writing.” On the 
one hand, the term discourse could be used to refer to the (philosophical) 
approach of Foucault and its notion of discourse (Kress, 1984), while on the 
other hand there were the ([text-]linguistic) approaches of, for example, van 
Dijk, and of wider sociolinguistic approaches (e.g., Gumperz, 1982; Hymes, 
1964; Labov, 1966). There was as well a more strictly sociological use of the 
term, most prominently in the work of Habermas (1984). There, discourse is 
used as a category located between “the social” and “the communicational-
linguistic,” to refer to social action and to the linguistic means used to establish 
consensual knowledge in the interaction of social actors.
This proliferation of uses of the term has blurred its meaning. Discourse anal-
ysis could be a study of the appearance of sociological phenomena—discourse 
as institutionally shaped knowledge; discourse as the realization of social life; or 
discourse as social and semiotic means to achieve consensually produced under-
standing. In other cases, it could be the study of formal regularities discernible 
in “extended stretches of speech or writing,” as in text-linguistics. 
A word then, briefly, about the category text, to indicate how I use the term 
in this chapter. In the etymology of the word, text is the result of processes 
of “weaving” different “threads”—usually assumed to be (either of speech 
or) writing—into one coherent whole. In my use, these “threads” are many 
and materially diverse: gesture, speech, image—still or moving, writing, music 
as on a website or in a film. In that use, text may stand for a semiotic entity 
in two, three, or four dimensions, as when students in a science classroom 
make a 3D model of a plant cell; or when they perform/enact a play scripted 
by them (Franks, 1997; Franks & Jewitt, 2001). Texts are the result of semi-
otic work of design, production, and composition; and as such they can be 
“semiotic entities” of any kind, resulting in ensembles composed of different 
modes. 
Texts, socially made, with culturally available resources, realize the inter-
ests of their makers. Texts are (made) coherent, through the use of semiotic 
resources for establishing cohesion, internally among the textual elements and 
externally with elements of the environment in which texts occur (Bezemer & 
Kress, 2009; Halliday & Hasan, 1976; Kress & Bezemer, 2009). The principles 
of coherence are social in their origins and, being social, they “track” social 
changes—though social and semiotic pace may not necessarily be the same. 
Texts are material entities that exhibit conceptions of order of the group that 
has shaped the principles and uses them as a resource for establishing cohe-
sion and coherence. In texts, these social principles become material, manifest, 
visible, tangible. In traditional institutional education, the principles of coher-
ence held by one generation—teachers, let’s say—were dominant. Increasingly, 
with an ever-growing gap between the principles of students and those of their 


208  Gunther Kress
(generationally distant) teachers, these principles are likely to be ever more 
different. Given that power is differentially distributed between these two 
groups, that leads to serious problems. 
I have labored the point about “language” because discourse analysis has by 
and large assumed that language—usually as writing—is the material means 
for the realization of discourses. In its uses in education this has meant that 
discourse analysis offered, on the one hand, theoretical/conceptual tools for the 
“opening” of pedagogic spaces and practices; while in its normalized assump-
tions about the centrality of language it tended to maintain and reinforce yet 
again the problematically exclusionary focus on language as the means for 
making meaning—and learning. The one opened—crucial for education—a 
critically distancing perspective on the power-laden use of (forms of) speech 
and writing in socially discriminatory ways. The other has blocked a path to a 
full understanding of meaning and knowledge in relation to learning, teaching, 
evaluation/assessment, as well as of the shaping and the characteristics of envi-
ronments for learning more generally. 
Multimodal Social Semiotics and Education
A multimodal social semiotic approach provides a richer perspective on the 
many means involved in making meaning and learning; on forms and shapes of 
knowledge; on the many forms of evaluation and assessment; on the social rela-
tions evident in pedagogy; on the (self-)making of identity and, in that, on the 
means that are central in the recognition of the agency and of the many kinds of 
semiotic work of learners in learning.
Multimodal social semiotics has two aspects. Multimodality focuses on the 
material means for representation, the resources for making texts: that is, on 
modes. Social semiotics provides a theoretical frame for a focus on all aspects 
of meaning-making: on the agents who make signs and complexes of signs as 
texts; on the processes of meaning-making and on the theoretical entities that 
are involved in this—sign, text, genre, discourse, interest, as examples. These two 
aspects are entirely interconnected at all times and yet remain distinct. The edu-
cational consequences of a multimodal social semiotic approach derive from 
both aspects: differently, in line with their distinct foci. 
The term multimodality draws attention to the many material resources 
beyond speech and writing which societies have shaped and which cultures 
provide as means for making. Modes are socially made and culturally avail-
able material-semiotic resources for representation. Multimodality attends to 
the distinctive affordances of different modes. In itself, it is not a theory, even 
though its explicit challenge to the central “place” of language has profound 
implications for thinking about meaning, representation, communication. 
Multimodality poses a challenge to the long-held and still widely dominant 
notion that “language” is that resource for making meaning that makes pos-
sible the “expression” of all thoughts, experiences, feelings, values, attitudes; in 
short, the pillar that guarantees human rationality. 


A Multimodal Social Semiotic Approach  209
Social semiotics is a theory about meaning-making in processes of interaction 
as communication. To be specific, it is a theory about meaning-making as sign-
making with all the modes that are available in a culture, where sign-making is 
seen as the semiotic work of social agents. Social semiotics deals with the sign-
maker’s assessment of environments of communication, that is, with the rhe-
torical assessment of the complex of participants–occasion–objects involved, 
linked in practices shaped by relations of power. The theory includes attention 
to the means of dissemination, that is, to the media involved. At the center, at 
all times, is the interest of the sign-maker. The emphasis on sign-making rather 
than on sign-use is crucial: it asserts that signs are always newly made, out of the 
sign-maker’s assessment of the environment of communication, the resources 
available for making signs, and the interest of the sign-maker at the moment of 
making the sign. Signs are motivated conjunctions of form and meaning, the 
product of the sign-maker’s agency and interest.
For education, the theory provides a link between the (interest of) sign-
makers as learners, and an account—as a hypothesis—of their perspective on 
the world at the moment of making a sign. The social semiotic view of the 
sign is crucial for a theory of learning: it permits taking the sign as evidence 
and documentation of the interest of the sign-maker/learner. Interest names 
the effect—in the moment of making the sign—of the multiple and complex 
social formation of the sign-maker/learner, of her or his sense of their present 
social environment, and of the shaping of their meaning as a response to a prior 
prompt. 
In this view, a sign that does not conform to an assessor’s expectation can not, 
in the first instance, be treated as something “not properly understood,” as “mis-
understood,” or as “badly remembered” maybe. At the first step, a sign is always 
taken as documenting the learner’s principled engagement with what was (to 
be) learned and her or his response to that with the new sign. 
Assessors and learners are likely to have a quite different “take” on the cur-
ricular or pedagogic matter at issue; and in that context the assessor may well 
see the sign as an “inadequate,” “wrong,” “mistaken,” misguided sense of the 
matter. Yet with a focus on the centrality of the sign-makers/learners, the sign 
is seen as the result of their principled semiotic work. That opens a perspective 
to different principles and forms of assessment: principles and forms not based 
on metrics of “adequate comprehension” or “appropriate acquisition” but as 
documenting the characteristics and principles of the learner’s interest: which 
may reveal the learner’s engagement. 
Features of this kind make multimodal social semiotics relevant to central 
areas of education. As a theory it provides a dual focus: on the agency of the 
makers of signs in social environments and on the resources used in the making 
of signs. The theoretical and descriptive tools of social semiotics provide the 
means to see sign- and meaning-making as learning; and they allow learning to 
be seen as an instance of sign- and meaning-making. Multimodality provides 
the tools for the recognition of all the modes through which meaning has been 
made and learning has taken place.


210  Gunther Kress
Here is an example to exemplify some of the points made so far. In a science 
classroom for 13 to 14 year olds, the children are in the fourth lesson on cells. 
The teacher asks one of the children: “Susie, what can you tell me about a plant 
cell?” Susie says “Miss, a cell has a nucleus.” The teacher asks Susie to come to 
the front and draw on the whiteboard what she has just said. Susie takes a felt-
tip pen and draws something, as in Figure 10.1. 
In drawing the image, Susie is faced with some (implicit) questions that she 
had not faced in making her spoken comment. She has to decide what shape the 
cell (-wall) is; what the nucleus looks like; how large it is; whether it is a circle or 
a dot; and she has to make a decision as to where in the circle she needs to place 
the nucleus. The result of the decisions she has made are realized in the drawing 
of Figure 10.1. At times I have tried this example in teaching or in talks; some 
people feel that the nucleus ought to be in the center of the cell-shape—either 
because the word or the notion of “nucleus” suggests “centrality,” or for some 
other reason. Once having drawn the circular shape and placed the dot or circle, 
the maker of this sign has made an epistemological commitment: “this is what it 
is like, and this is the relation between the entities ‘cell(-wall)’ and ‘nucleus’ ”. 
A student who looks at a teacher’s drawing on the board or a drawing in a text-
book is entitled to take that as “the facts of the matter.” 
Epistemological commitment can not be avoided: a shape of some kind has to 
be drawn to indicate the cell-wall and the cell; a dot or a circle of some size has 
to be made as a representation of the nucleus; and the dot or circle had to be 
placed somewhere. Yet the spoken comment also represents an epistemological 
commitment: that there are two object-like things, a “cell” and a “nucleus,” that 
are joined in a relation of possession, “has.” The drawing entails no suggestion 
of possession; there the relation is one of spatial co-locations of a specific kind: 
proximate or distant, central or marginal. Epistemological commitment can 
not be avoided, no matter what the mode. It does vary in line with the affor-
dances of each mode, here in a contrast of speech and image—of lexis vs depic-
tion; of possession vs proximity or distance, of centrality or marginality; as a verb-
form vs spatial co-location; sequence (as temporal succession in speech or linearity 
in writing) vs simultaneity (of appearance and arrangement) of the entities. 
Figure 10.1 Cell with nucleus


A Multimodal Social Semiotic Approach  211
Both the signs were newly made. The drawing was new—and even though 
drawings of a similar kind will have been made before, nevertheless this draw-
ing is unique. The spoken utterance is also new (here reproduced in a mas-
sively reduced “transcription” into writing, where nothing remains of tone of 
voice, dialect-features, pace, rhythm, intonation, gender-features of the voice). 
Both drawing and spoken utterance are based on the interest of the student: 
in the one case, for instance, selecting “nucleus” as the salient feature. That is, 
both the spoken utterance and the drawing represent this student’s selection 
from a large variety of material encountered in the course of four lessons. Both 
signs represent selection, transformation and encapsulation of her knowledge, 
at that moment. In making the signs, she is making knowledge for herself and 
for others. Both signs declare: “this is what I know.” Quite likely she may know 
other things about cells as well, but at this moment, in response to the teacher’s 
prompt, out of her interest, she has chosen to condense what she regards as 
salient in this environment at this moment and present that as her knowledge 
in these two signs. They are signs of learning.
The two representations materialize (curricular) “knowledge” about this 
topic differently: ontologically, the two are different accounts of the world in 
focus. For learning and teaching, in the construction and presentation of a cur-
riculum for a specific group, this matters. Until “knowledge” is “made mate-
rial” in a specific mode, it has no “shape”: we cannot “get at it.” To me it is not 
at all clear what knowledge is before it is made material in a representation. In 
speech, knowledge is represented in a mode shaped by the underlying logic of 
sequence of elements in time; as image it is shaped by the logic of simultaneity 
of elements in space. Each logic, with the social shaping of each in long histories 
of social and semiotic work, imposes its ontology and epistemology on what is 
represented through the organization of elements in arrangements. 
To make a sign is to make knowledge. Knowledge is shaped in the use, by a 
social agent, of distinct representational affordances of specific modes at the 
point of making of the sign. Another student might have regarded cytoplasms 
as most significant; or he might have focused on the functions of the membrane 
of the cell; and in each case he could have written or drawn what he wanted to 
represent. In each case, from an enormous amount of “stuff” encountered over 
four lessons, selections have been made by the students; the selections indi-
cate the interest of the students at this moment. The modes used would be a 
response to the requirements of the moment—a response to “can you tell me?” 
or to “show me!” Just moments later, perhaps as the effect of the prompt of 
another student’s sign or a new prompt from the teacher, the student’s interest 
is likely to have changed.
Both the spoken utterance and the drawing represent learning: they are signs 
of learning (Kress, Jewitt, Ogborn, & Tsatsarelis, 2001). Whether in making the 
spoken sign or the image sign, the sign-maker has made knowledge. She has 
shaped something and now knows that something in a way she might not have 
known before or known in this way. In making the sign, she has augmented her 
knowledge: she has learned. Making signs, meaning, and knowledge all change 


212  Gunther Kress
the “inner” resources of the sign- and meaning-maker; in that process identity 
is constantly remade. 
Teachers need to know what students have learned. So the question arises 
how a teacher treats these signs of learning; how (s)he responds to them. If the 
result of decisions the student made are embedded and materialized in the 
drawing of Figure 10.1, is the teacher able and willing to recognize this sign as 
the outcome of “decisions”? Did he (in this case) have the means to recognize the 
semiotic work of the student and accord recognition to the student’s “decision”? 
And does he have the means to understand the principles—of interest, selec-
tion, representation—on which the sign is based? This goes directly to the mat-
ter of theories of learning, evaluation and assessment and of forms of either. 
A Brief Reflection: Discourse Analysis?
What kind of analysis have I engaged in with this small example? Is what I have 
been “doing discourse analysis” or have I “simply” elucidated various aspects 
of meaning in a small text? I have said nothing about discourse, whether in a 
Foucauldian or Habermasian or any other sense. I have not pointed to regulari-
ties of the social environments in which both the small texts have been made. 
I have said that both arise out of the interest of their maker and have assumed 
that they represent the student’s selection from a mass of materials that had 
been presented over the preceding three lessons, a selection made according to 
principles arising out of her interest. I have asserted that each sign presents a 
different epistemological commitment, shaped by the agency of the sign-maker 
using the affordances of the two modes (their material potentials for meaning; 
the social elaboration of certain—not all—of these potential over long periods 
of time; and the logics inherent in the materiality), which lead to significant 
differences in “knowledge,” in being made material. I have treated both signs as 
the result of semiotic work. Although I have not linked the epistemologies with 
distinct “discursive positions” it is nevertheless the case that in making recogni-
tion of semiotic work a major feature of analysis, I have assumed the principled 
semiotic work of selection of material and of modes for representation as a 
response to a prompt. All of these imply a social positioning by the maker of the 
sign, a social location that makes a difference. 
In other words, the assumption, which I have, so far, left implicit, is that a 
multimodal social semiotic approach is inherently and inevitably an instance 
of discourse analysis. It is socially positioned in pointing to the social origins 
of the social subjects as sign- and meaning-makers, to their agency, and to the 
present social embeddedness of their actions and their interest in the making 
of texts. That is, I have pointed to the fact that this sign-maker is embedded in 
discursive arrangements (in the Foucauldian sense) of specific communities—
here of the school. Her sign-making is shaped by the teacher’s prompt; it in turn 
is shaped by the institution of the school, with its multiplicity of discourses. If 
social positioning, social location, implies discursive positioning—as I assume 
it must—then this is in fact an instance of discourse analysis.


A Multimodal Social Semiotic Approach  213
So there is a brief description and analysis of two signs, with some traces of 
the semiotic work of selection, transformation and transduction pointed to, 
from which some hypotheses about meaning can be made. At this stage this is 
a sketch; it is partial. I have not attempted to describe the sign-maker’s present, 
wider social environment, nor her social “formation.” Had that been a ques-
tion—in a research project, say—it would be possible to explore these in relation 
to the example. Every description and every analysis is motivated by a question. 
Setting out that (research) question would give shape, coherence, and “point” to 
the analysis; it would turn it into an instance of a full discourse analysis.
Communication as Meaning-Making
“Education” is an instance of a social institution. In social semiotic multimodal 
theory, sign-, meaning- and knowledge-making are effects of communication 
in social environments, with their potentials and constraints: and so, there-
fore, are learning, teaching, curriculum, assessment/(e)valuation. Sign-making is 
one aspect of interaction as communication, whether with social others or with 
some aspect of the world. Without interaction (as communication) there is no 
meaning-making, no (change to) knowledge, no learning. That makes a theory 
of communication essential as the frame and model of a (multimodal social 
semiotic) theory of education. 
A brief sketch of a theory of communication presented here draws on two 
different educational sites, neither that of a school. One is an operating theatre 
(Figure 10.2), an example of interaction among a group of professionals engaged 
in joined practice; the other is from a project on museum “visitor studies” (Fig-
ures 10.3a and 10.3b), as an example of individuals interacting with a speciﬁ
 c 
environment. In both environments meaning is made and learning happens: 
each functions as a site of learning; each in a signiﬁ
 cantly different way.
Figure 10.2 shows an operating theatre; an operation is in its very early stage. 
A “scrub nurse” stands in the foreground; behind her, on the right, is the “lead 
surgeon” and opposite him the “assistant surgeon” (who is also a surgeon-in-
training). Behind them, separated by a screen, is the anesthetist; at the very 
back, barely visible on the right, is an “operating theatre technician.” That is, 
representatives of four professions, distinct yet entirely integrated, are present.
The event is, ﬁ
 rst and foremost, a clinical one of professional practice. At the 
same time, it is an environment in which learning (and teaching) are going on: 
the assistant surgeon is in the process of becoming a fully qualiﬁ
 ed surgeon. 
From a multimodal social semiotic perspective, the question is: “How does 
communication happen?” From a pedagogic perspective, among the questions 
posed are: “How does learning happen?” “What is being learned and how has it 
been taught?” and “How can we assess that learning?” 
Communication here is multimodal: by speech at times; by gaze; by actions—
passing an instrument, reaching out for an instrument; by touching. A gaze can 
be taken as a prompt and produce a spoken comment that can produce an action; 
a look at the screen by both surgeons can produce a guiding touch by the one 


214  Gunther Kress
of the other’s hand; an outstretched hand is met by an instrument being passed. 
Communication has happened when the attention of one of the participants has 
focused on some aspect of the interaction, and that has been taken by him or her as a 
prompt of some kind, and that prompt has been interpreted by that participant.
This sketch assumes (1) that communication always happens as a response 
to a prompt; and that communication has happened when there has been an 
interpretation; (2) the “shape”—the characteristics—of the prompt constitute 
the ground on which interpretation happens; and (3) communication is mul-
timodal. The interpreter and interpretation are central. The sketch asserts that 
both the characteristics of the ground and the interpretation of that ground 
as prompt are crucial in communication and in learning. It demands that all 
modes involved in communication are considered and attended to as poten-
tially equally significant in making meaning and leading to learning. The three 
assumptions, always taken together, provide the basis of both a plausible theory 
of communication and a plausible theory of learning (and teaching). 
To restate this in the specific frame of learning and assessment: learning hap-
pens in complex social environments; always in interaction with “the world”; 
often in interaction with (members of) distinct social groups and their distinct 
and related interests. The learner’s interest guides her or his attention; it frames (a 
part of) the environment; that becomes the ground for interpretation. In interac-
tion, members of groups communicate and make meaning, construct knowledge, 
and learn across boundaries of social difference. In all cases it is the individual’s 
Figure 10.2 Operating theatre


A Multimodal Social Semiotic Approach  215
interest that shapes and directs her or his attention and frames what becomes the 
prompt for engagement, interpretation, and learning. The (always) transformative 
(and/or transductive) interpretation of the prompt constitutes learning. 
In the environment of a formal institution of education, specific features 
appear: the ground is shaped according to the requirements of the institution, as 
a curriculum; the occasions of the learner’s engagement are formalized in various 
ways: through the organization of time, by the organization of knowledge as curricu-
lum, and shaped by notions of development, ability. Learning is assessed through 
metrics of achievement set by that institution. That is, what is to count as learning, 
and treated as learning, become subject to the power of the institution. 
Communicational (and therefore learning) environments are always modally 
complex; they consist of a plethora of semiotic phenomena. Any one of these can, 
potentially, be constructed as a prompt by the interpreter, whether in the operat-
ing theatre or in the science classroom as much as in so-called informal sites of 
learning: in visiting a website or, as in the next example, in a visit to a museum, or 
indeed in any instance of daily life. In such sites, what is constructed as a prompt is 
less directly and overtly shaped by external power; it depends more on the inter-
est of a participant, which directs her or his attention and shapes the ground. This 
“interested attention” frames an aspect of the communicational environment as 
a prompt; the characteristics and the “shape” of the prompt provide, guided by 
the interest of the “learner,” the basis on which the interpretation proceeds.
So far I have placed emphasis more on learning than on teaching, to signal 
two factors: the far-reaching social/political changes in power-relations in con-
temporary (anglophone) societies that have shifted attention to the agency of 
learners; and to insist that the agency of learners as interpreters has always been 
a factor, though kept invisible by theories of learning based on the exercise of 
power, however implicitly. 
Now (in many parts of the anglophone world at least) students in schools act 
according to a very different sense of their power, not as “acquirers” of knowl-
edge at the behest of authority, but in interpreting and transforming materi-
als presented to them as makers of knowledge. With hindsight it can be seen 
that past accounts that construed learning as acquisition were skewed views of 
human semiosis: both distorted and sustained through the exercise of power, 
in schools as elsewhere. That led to a constant damaging mis-recognition of 
the semiotic work of those who—knowingly or not—exercised their right to 
interpretation/transformation in ways that were neither legitimated nor rec-
ognized; that were “out of tune” with power and hence “invisible.” Those who 
did “interpret”/”transform” too far from permissible limits failed to “achieve,” 
in terms of assessments based on metrics of conformity rather than in terms of 
principles for the recognition of semiotic, transformative, interpretative work.
In any case, the presence of a teacher never guarantees learning; and by far the 
largest part of what anyone does learn is learned without the (overt) presence 
of a teacher. However, my argument is in no way either against the need for 
teachers or their importance, nor against schools as crucially important social 
and cultural sites. It is, rather, an argument for the development of apt tools 


216  Gunther Kress
for the recognition of agency in learning and for the recognition of the many 
modes through which learning becomes evident. Such tools will allow us to 
insist on the recognition of agency in social processes in institutional education 
and beyond; and provide resources for recognizing the means—the many modes 
used in making meaning and involved therefore in learning. The social semiotic 
aspect of the theory deals with the former; the multimodal with the latter. 
If communication is a response to a prompt, then the sign that follows on 
from the interpretation of a prompt is based on that prior interpretation. This 
sign is a sign of learning. It is based on the now changed resources of the sign-
maker, changed as a result of the prior interpretation. This has led to the aug-
mentation of the interpreter’s “inner” resources. That means that the newly 
made sign, being based on prior interpretation, points at the same time to what 
had been learned. This sign of learning moves the focus away, decisively, from 
the metaphor of acquisition, away from “metrics of achievement” based on the 
power of an institution, and toward a hypothesis about the principles of inter-
pretation/transformation that had been brought to bear in the sign-maker/
learner’s interpretation. Assessment that appropriately recognizes all semiotic 
work in all modes allows the elucidation of the principles that have led the 
learner to interpretation and to learning. 
An understanding of these principles provides a basis for a teacher’s next 
step in the shaping of a new ground. In turn, the new ground gives the learner 
means to recognize and understand the principles he or she had used in their 
earlier interpretation and in their making of the new sign. It gives learners the 
resources to reflect on their signs in relation to the principles inherent in the 
teacher’s new ground. By these means learners can be brought closer to the 
culture’s understanding of the matter in a number of steps. 
This approach gives recognition to the semiotic work of learners, to their 
principles, and uses these to construct a (series of) further prompt(s) that lead 
the learner to an understanding of the culture’s sense of the matter. In other 
words, attending to the learner’s principles is neither a question of “anything 
goes” nor one of “bend your understanding to the power of an institution.” 
Rather, it allows a teacher to use the learner’s principles to lead her or him to 
the meanings of the culture: not via imposed power but via the road of the 
learner’s principles. 
My second example shows learning in a so-called informal site of education. 
It comes from a research project on visitor studies, “The museum, the exhibi-
tion and the visitor” (funded by the Swedish National Science Foundation), 
conducted at the National History Museum in Stockholm, in an exhibition of 
Swedish pre-history, and at the Museum of London, in two exhibitions, “Lon-
don before London” and “Roman London.” 
In the project, one aim was to understand how visitors “made sense of” a 
specific exhibition in a museum. Visitors were invited to participate as couples 
(grandparent and grandchild, friends, married couples, etc.), in order to “cap-
ture,” at least in part, a sense of their interaction with a fellow visitor and with 
the exhibition. Participants were given small wearable voice-recorders; they 


A Multimodal Social Semiotic Approach  217
were videoed as they made their way through the exhibition; they were given 
a camera to take whatever images they wished. At the conclusion of their visit 
they were asked to “draw a map” that represented their sense of the exhibition 
and they were asked to participate in a brief interview about the visit, prompted 
by their “map.” All of these—video, photos, voice-recording, interview, and 
“map”—were seen as a possible means of documenting “signs of learning.”
Museums can not, usually, exercise the kind of power over their visitors that 
schools (attempt to) exercise over their students, whether in relation to com-
munication or to learning. So school-based forms of assessment are problem-
atic—which does not mean that they are not frequently used. “Assessment” of 
learning based on the principle of interpretation suggests itself as preferable. As 
an example, here are two maps made in each case by a member of two of the 
“couples.” Both are from the London component of the study, from the exhibi-
tion “London before London.”
Curators (as designer(s)) of an exhibition have speciﬁ
 c aims: they show objects, 
produce images, design reconstructions of the pre-history of a community or a 
place, and they do this by telling “stories,” by constructing “displays,” by showing 
videos. They have purposes—social or pedagogic, ideological, aesthetic, or others. 
These are rarely stated overtly in the exhibition, though in interviews with cura-
tors or curatorial teams it is clear that much discussion around these purposes 
precedes the construction of an exhibition: framed by policies of the museum, 
of governments, etc. Given the absence, usually, of overt, explicit accounts of 
the aims of such exhibitions, discourse analysis seems an ideal tool for gaining 
an understanding—as a hypothesis—of what meanings have been made by the 
Figure 10.3.A Map of a museum exhibition—Integrated Display


218  Gunther Kress
curator/designer; and what meanings visitors in their turn make from the exhibi-
tion. Or, seen from a pedagogic perspective, getting a sense of what the visitors 
might have learned in the course of their visit.
Semiotically speaking, an exhibition is a message; it provides a complex series 
of prompts for the visitors who come to engage with it. Pedagogically speaking, 
an exhibition (re)presents a “curriculum” for visitors seen as learners. In that 
context, the “maps” made by the visitors at the conclusion of their visit, can 
give some indication of which aspects of the overall design/message/curricu-
lum engaged the visitor’s interest and how; they function as signs of learning. 
Whether from the perspective of communication or of learning, the maps are of 
equal interest. They are not, of course, a full account of the meanings made by 
either of these two visitors (a young woman and an 11-year-old boy). They do 
give a clear sense of a difference in interest, hence of a difference in attention and 
framing, and of distinctly different interpretations of the same large environ-
ment, seen as a complex ground.
Most immediately, the two figures show a specific—and we might say, 
unusual—sense of what a “map” is or does, based on specific conceptions of 
what “mapping” means and what is to be mapped. In both cases the notion of 
“map” is a “conceptual”—rather than a “spatial”—one. Unlike the exhibition 
in Stockholm (see “maps,” Figures 10.4a and 10.4b), the exhibition in Lon-
Figure 10.3.B Map of a museum exhibition—Heathrow 


A Multimodal Social Semiotic Approach  219
Figure 10.4.A and 10.4 B Two visitor ‘maps’ from Stockholm


220  Gunther Kress
don was not arranged as distinctly separate spaces; rather, it occupied one large 
space (see Figure 10.5). 
A sign makes the sign-maker’s interest and interpretation material and evi-
dent. In that sense the maps can be taken as answers to an implicit question: 
What was my interest? In the case of one map (Figure 10.3a), that question 
seemingly was: What is my sense of that exhibition overall, given the interesting 
objects and displays I encountered? In the other case (Figure 10.3b) the ques-
tion, seemingly, was: What, for me, were (the) salient elements of this exhibi-
tion, and in what arrangement shall I present them? For the first map-maker, 
the map presents an integrated, coherent impression of the kind of life lived 
by neolithic people: significant objects, people, and practices in interrelation 
define the notion of “map.” “This is what life was like” seems to be mapped 
here. That is the interpretation of the exhibition overall for this visitor; it repre-
sents (an aspect) of the knowledge made and of what has been learned.
The “map” of Figure 10.3b is a conceptually ordered representation (Kress & 
van Leeuwen, 2006), as a presentation/display of elements regarded as salient 
by the map-maker. It has fewer elements than the previous map and the ele-
ments are not integrated into a tightly coherent display. That is not to say that 
this map does not “have” coherence: its principles of coherence need to be elu-
cidated in ways that they do not need to be in the map of Figure 10.3a. This 
map is organized by and presents a different interest: less focused on “what was 
Entrance
London before London
450,000 BC — AD 50
To
Roman London Gallery
1
2
3
4
1
2
3
4
5
8
9
6
7
5
6
8
9
7
10
10
PAIR II
Father
Daughter
Stops
MOVEMENT PATHS
Figure 10.5 Groundplan, exhibition ‘London before London’ with a trace of a couple’s 
visiting path


A Multimodal Social Semiotic Approach  221
the museum trying to show” and more on “what items were interesting to me.” 
This visitor too has made knowledge for himself; he too has learned.
Pedagogically motivated questions might be: “Has one visitor ‘failed’ in 
their experience of the exhibition? Or have both, perhaps?” or “Is one map 
better than the other?” Do we say that the map of Figure 10.3b is incoher-
ent? Or do we say—as a theory focused on the learner’s agency suggests—that 
the assessor’s task is to reflect on and attempt to uncover the principles of 
coherence employed by the makers of both maps? Such questions are moti-
vated by a focus on agency and sign-making. Attention to multimodal and 
social semiotic aspects would make us ask about the processes of selection, 
transformation and transduction that are apparent in the two maps. In the map 
of Figure 10.3b several three-dimensional objects—a mask, a model airplane, 
a stone knife—appear as images. That is the case with the map of Figure 10.3a: 
there three-dimensional objects are transducted to image (e.g., of the skull), 
diaramas/images are (re)presented/transformed as image, written descriptions 
are transducted to image. All these are selected, transformed and transducted, 
composed, and given coherence in an integrating (visual) genre of “display,” of 
“visual documentary.” 
If interest guides selection, attention, framing, interpretation, we need to ask 
about that “interest”: Who are the map-makers, what are their interests and 
what principles of selection, attention, seem to be evident in these maps? This 
is not the place for a detailed account, though it will help understand these 
two signs of learning to know that the first “map” was made by one of two 18-
year-old German women who were spending a week in London to get to know 
England; and that the other map was made by a 11-year-old boy from London 
who had come—reluctantly—with his mother for a “day of activities” (which 
did not eventuate) at the museum. His attention had been drawn by a model 
airplane at a display representing a neolithic campsite uncovered at the site of 
the present Heathrow airport, as well as by an African mask and some tools and 
weapons. 
The social semiotic part of the theory attends to uncovering the sign- and 
meaning-maker’s interest; to the semiotic work done and the principles used in 
selection, transformation, transduction, arrangement of modes. The multimodal 
aspect attends to the modal resources used and to their affordances. In descrip-
tion and analysis it is not easy to keep these apart, though to do so has heuris-
tic value, while conflating them produces blurring, imprecision, and categori-
cal confusion. Both aspects of the theory allow us to make inferences about 
environments of learning, about interest, attention, framing, prompt, ground, 
principles of composition, modes, transformation, transduction. 
All four maps/signs rest on an initial analysis (as selection). All signs, includ-
ing Figures 10.4a and 10.4b, are the outcome of design. In turning from analy-
sis to design, theoretical precision about the semiotic resources—e.g., kinds of 
ordering and arrangement, transformation and transduction—and the represen-
tational resources—the modes and their potentials—is an essential semiotic 
requirement for the designer/sign-maker.


222  Gunther Kress
Pedagogically, we can ask about environments of learning, learning, means 
for understanding, and documenting learning as apt theories of “assessment.” 
Both sign-makers have made knowledge for themselves; both have learned. The 
questions are whether and how that learning is given recognition; what might 
follow from that for theories of learning, teaching and communication gener-
ally, in this site as in all sites. On the face of it, the map of Figure 10.3a might be 
more readily accorded recognition in terms of learning (and design) than the 
map of 10.3b. Figure 10.4a is the most “map-like” of all four maps. Yet all are 
based on semiotic work of principled selection, design and composition. These 
are matters of power. Behind that are the questions: “How do we assess what 
learning there had been as a result of the engagement with this site?” and “What 
is accepted, by whom, as legitimate materials to be assessed?”
If signs—say, each one of the two maps here—are the result of their makers’ 
interest and are an apt reflection of that interest at the moment of the making of 
the sign, then the shape of the sign is an indication of what has been learned. We 
can see what has been selected; and if we know the exhibition we can see what 
has not been selected—where interest and attention have gone and where not. 
The maker of the sign has made the sign as an apt expression of the meaning to 
be represented and has used the “form” of existing sign-making material—sig-
nifiers—to do so. We can see the principles of ordering, arrangement and com-
position and make inferences about notions of coherence. For the recipient of 
the sign, therefore, the form of the sign is a resource for forming an hypothesis 
about the makers’ interest and about the principles that they brought to their 
engagement with the prompt and that led to the making of the sign—whether 
the experience of the visit to the museum exhibition, or the experience of a 
series of lessons in the classroom, or of any other environment and event.
That makes the form of the sign into a means of uncovering (principles 
of) learning. When the “recipient of the sign” is an “assessor,” the question 
becomes: “What are the means for assessment? What principles? What metric 
will he or she apply?” Will it be a metric oriented to authority—indicating the 
“distance” from what ought to have been learned, whether in terms of modes 
used, or in terms of conformity to the authority of the teacher/assessor? Or will 
it be a metric oriented to the learner’s interest and the principles the learner 
brought to the engagement with the curriculum? Will it be the metric of the 
curator as communicator or of the curator as pedagogue, or will it be a metric 
oriented to the visitor’s interest?
“Whose interest is dominant here, the curator’s or the visitor’s?” and “What 
metrics of assessment are to be used, and why?” Three of these “maps” do not 
conform to general understandings of the genre(s) of map. Lack or not of means 
of recognition, refusal or inability to recognize signs of learning, have effects 
on assessment. This might be because of mode (one “map” from the London 
study was in the form of a written critique of major aspects of the exhibition); 
or being regarded as generically inappropriate, that is, “these are nothing like 
a map”; or a lack of recognition of the semiotic work of the sign-maker more 
generally in some other way. 


A Multimodal Social Semiotic Approach  223
The matter of modes arises with the question of rhetoric and design. It goes to 
initial conceptions of the exhibition and from there to the overall “shaping” of 
the exhibition: it is evident in the selection of its objects; in the salience given to 
particular themes; and to the modes chosen in representing specific meanings: 
so for instance in the layout of the exhibition, in its lighting, in the use of written 
text or of image or of 3D objects. Are three-dimensional objects more salient, 
more “attractive,” more noticeable than written captions? Is movement more 
salient as a means of explanations than longer written accounts? Are painted 
scenes more engaging than three-dimensional tableaux? What effect does light-
ing have in creating affect and mood? Is the distance at which visitors are able 
to engage with objects, or whether they are able to touch an object, a significant 
matter? The question of affect has to be addressed in the case of the exhibition: 
the “wrong” affect will inhibit or detract the attention of visitors. But affect is 
equally significant in all sites of learning, institutional or not.
Emergent Issues: Design, Transcription, Simulation
In interaction as communication, texts always occur as ensembles of several 
modes, that is, as multimodal ensembles. The awareness of the possibility of 
choice of the means for representing, the awareness of the availability of many 
modes, inevitably leads to the question: “Which modes are best, here, in terms 
of my audience and in terms of the matter which is the focus of communica-
tion?” In other words, design moves into center-ground. In an era when the 
assumption had been that there is language, either as the only, or as the central, 
or as the major means of communication, that question did not arise—or at 
least not in the same way. It was of course the case that children’s books were 
heavily “illustrated,” as might be handbooks of various kinds, even though the 
very term “illustration” pointed to the marginal role of image in relation to 
writing (Barthes, 1968)
Design is the servant of rhetoric, which, as the “politics of communication” 
(Kress, 2010) names the process of assessing the conditions in the environment 
of communication: the salient characteristics of the audience, the matter to be 
communicated, and the relations of power that obtain in the communicational 
environment. Rhetoric draws on the resources of social semiotics, while design 
names the processes that give semiotic shape to the social, ideological, and 
political understandings produced by a rhetorical analysis.
A multimodal approach to educational issues directly raises—as I pointed out 
in the example of the cell—the questions of ontology and epistemology. In the 
shift from one mode to another mode, that is, in transduction, that issue is focal: 
socially, through a changing “address of the audience”; and epistemologically 
and ontologically, in the shaping of knowledge. In effect each mode offers its 
distinct “take” on the world, which can be seen as offering distinct “transcrip-
tions” of “the world,” and, in that, produce distinctly different “data.” By this 
means, multimodal ensembles offer the possibility of multiple transcriptions of a 
phenomenon, highlighting its different facets, in each case for specific reasons. 


224  Gunther Kress
Transcription has been a standard and central feature of education: whether 
in research—in producing “data”; or in learning and teaching—in shaping what 
is to be learned in a socially (e.g., realist images for young learners) and episte-
mologically (a diagram for the representation of the magnetic field of a bar mag-
net) apt form. With the issue of simulation, a related yet fundamentally different 
issue arises—increasingly so in fields of “professional learning” and practices. If 
transcription names the process of reducing the messiness of “the world” to the 
orderliness of “data” that can serve to answer a research question that has been 
posed, then simulation raises a very similar issue, though this time in relation to 
practices in which questions of knowing and knowledge come to the fore in terms 
of the explicitness or implicitness of “embodied” knowing/knowledge. 
Transcription proceeds usually by transduction: What exists in the world in 
one mode—speech, usually—is reproduced in another mode—writing, usually. 
In the process there is massive abstraction-as-selection: only that which serves 
as a means to answer the research question is transcribed. A similar process 
of abstraction-as-selection takes place in simulation. Here, however, what is 
selected—either for purposes of research or of learning and teaching—is repro-
duced (by and large) in the same mode: speech remains as speech, 3D objects 
(e.g., instruments, furniture, dress) remain as 3D tools. The process of simula-
tion of embodied knowing does, however, require that that which had been 
seen as implicit knowledge become explicit. Or, to express it in multimodally 
apt terms, that which was regarded as implicit because it was embodied but not 
spoken or written is nevertheless now shown to be explicit—embodied still, 
and yet modally explicit at the same time (Figure 10.6).
Figure 10.6 Simulation


A Multimodal Social Semiotic Approach  225
As a last, crucial remark, this raises the serious issue of meta-language: explic-
itness is possible without recourse to the modes of speech or writing. It becomes 
apparent that every resource for representation developed by a society—every 
mode—has the capacity to develop meta-forms, meta-level representations. 
Every mode has its meta-mode. That has the most far-reaching implications for 
education generally, for learning, teaching and for assessment; and for episte-
mology much more widely.
References
Barthes, R. (1968). “La mort de l’auteur” [The death of the author]. Manteia, vol. 5. 
Translated by S. Heath in R. Barthe (1977) Image, Music, Text. NY: Hill & Wang.
Bezemer, J. & G. Kress (2009). Visualizing English: A social semiotic history of a 
school subject. Visual Communication, 8, 247–262. Special Issue on Information 
Environments. 
Bowles, S., & Gintis, H. (1976). Schooling in capitalist America: Educational reform and 
the contradictions of economic life. New York: Basic Books.  
Cazden, C., John, V.P., & Hymes, D. (1972). Functions of language in the classroom. New 
York: Teachers College Press. 
Chomsky, N. A. (1957). Syntactic structures. The Hague: Mouton.
Chomsky, N. A. (1965). Aspects of the theory of syntax. Harvard, MA: MIT Press.
Fairclough, N. (1989). Language and power. London: Longman. 
Fairclough, N. (1992). Discourse and social change. Cambridge: Polity Press. 
Franks, A. (1997). Drama, desire and schooling. Changing English, 4(1), 131–148
Franks, A. & Jewitt, C. (2001). The meaning of action in learning and teaching. British 
Educational Research Journal, 27(2), 201–221. 
Foucault, M. (1971). Orders of discourse. Inaugural lecture delivered at the College de 
France. Social Science Information, 10(2), pp. 7–13. 
Gee, J. P. (1999). Introduction to discourse analysis. New York: Routledge. 
Giroux, H. (1988). Teachers as intellectuals: Towards a critical pedagogy of learning. Lon-
don: Bergin and Garvey. 
Gumperz, J. (1982). Discourse strategies. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press. 
Habermas, J. (1984). The theory of communicative action. Reason and the rationalization 
of society. Boston: Beacon Press. 
Halliday, M. A. K., & Hasan, R. (1976). Cohesion in English. London: Longman. 
Hymes, D. (Ed.). (1964). Language in culture and society: A reader in linguistics and 
anthropology. New York: Harper and Row, 
Illich, I. (1971). De-schooling society. London: Marion Boyars. 
Kress, G. R. (1984/1989). Linguistic processes in sociocultural practices. Geelong: Deakin 
University Press; Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
Kress, G. R. (2010). Multimodality. A social semiotic approach to contemporary communi-
cation. London: RoutledgeFalmer. 
Kress, G. R., & Hodge, R. (1979). Language as ideology. London: Routledge and Kegan 
Paul. 
Kress, G. R., & van Leeuwen, T. (1996/2006). Reading images: The grammar of graphic 
design. London: RoutledgeFalmer. 
Kress, G., Jewitt, C., Ogborn, J., & Tsatsarelis, C. (2001). Multimodal teaching and learn-
ing: The rhetorics of the science classroom. London: Continuum.


226  Gunther Kress
Kress, G., & Bezemer, J. (2009). Writing in a multimodal world of Representation. In R. 
Beard, D. Myhill, M. Nystrand & J. Riley (Eds.), SAGE Handbook of Writing Develop-
ment (pp. 167–181). London: Sage. 
Labov, W. (1966).The social stratification of English in New York City. Cambridge, UK: 
Cambridge University Press. 
Labov, W. (1972). Language in the inner city. Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania 
Press. 
Rorty, R. (1967).The linguistic turn: Essays in philosophical method. Chicago and Lon-
don: University of Chicago Press. 
van Dijk, T., & Kintsch, W. (1983). Strategies of discourse comprehension. London Aca-
demic Press. 
Wodak, R., & Martin, J. (2003). Re/reading the past: Critical and functional perspectives 
on time and value. Amsterdam: Benjamins Press. 
Wodak, R., & Meyer, M. (2009). Methods for critical discourse analysis. London: Sage 
Publications


11 Discourse in Activity and 
 
Activity as Discourse
 
Shawn Rowe
 
Oregon State University
A basic claim of Critical Discourse Analysis (CDA; Fairclough, 1989; Gee, 
1999) and dialogic approaches to conversation analysis (Linell, 1998) is that 
Discourse is constituted by both talk and actions working in concert.1 This may 
be stated in either a weak or strong version. Linell (1998) argued for a weak 
version, describing talk as a type of action that “includes accompanying para-
linguistic signals and embedding contexts” (p. 6). Gee (1999) made the case 
more strongly, drawing a distinction between discourse (with a small “d”) and 
Discourse (with a capital “D”). Discourse (with a capital “D”) includes both 
talk and action: 
To “pull off” an “X” doing “Y” (e.g., a Los Angeles Latino street-gang 
member warning another gang member off his territory, or a laboratory 
physicist convincing colleagues that a particular graph supports her ideas, 
or, for that matter, a laboratory physicist warning other laboratory physi-
cists off her research territory) it is not enough to get just the words “right,” 
though that is crucial. It is necessary, as well, to get one’s body, clothes, 
gestures, actions, interactions, ways with things, symbols, tools, technolo-
gies (be they guns or graphs), and values, attitudes, beliefs, and emotions 
“right,” as well, and all at the “right” places and times. 
 When “little d” discourse (language-in-use) is melded integrally with 
nonlanguage “stuff” to enact specific identities and activities, then, I say 
that “big D” Discourses are involved. (p. 7) 
Two things, however, are missing from analyses like Linell’s, Gee’s, and Fair-
clough’s. First, there is not generally a learning theory articulated in these kinds 
of discourse analyses. The result is that it is hard to describe just how people 
learn to recognize and use the right members’ resources (Fairclough, 1989) 
and nonlanguage stuff necessary for getting particular identities right. Second, 
activity as part of discourse is usually ignored in both transcribing talk and ana-
lyzing it. The result is that, although analysts refer to activity in their discussion 
of talk, close analysis of the nonlanguage stuff of Discourse is not carried out. 
The two solutions I offer are to make some of the connections between CDA 
and sociocultural approaches to learning (Rogoff, 1990, 1995; Wertsch, 1985, 


228  Shawn Rowe
1991, 1998) explicit and to demonstrate a way of transcribing and analyzing 
talk and activity simultaneously. 
Sociocultural Approaches to Learning and CDA 
There are many approaches to learning that fall under the heading of sociocul-
tural. What they all share are their roots in the work of Vygotsky (1978, 1981, 
1986). The particular sociocultural approach that I draw on here is that outlined 
by Wertsch (1985, 1991, 1998). This approach sees development and learning 
in terms of the appropriation and mastery of physical and psychological tools 
as part of participation in collective and individual activities (Vygotsky, 1978, 
1986; Wertsch, 1985) during which individuals engage in what Wertsch (1985) 
called strategic activity, appropriating collective problem-solving procedures 
and cultural tools as part of “mediated activity” (Wertsch, 1991, 1998). 
Traditionally, the primary, although by no means the only, tool of the col-
laborative problem solving that sociocultural theorists focus on is language. 
Although he did spend some time investigating other types of psychological tools, 
Vygotsky focused on language as the premier tool of psychological development. 
Language is ubiquitous to human activity— especially the kinds of group activi-
ties on which discourse analysts and sociocultural theorists focus. Yet it is cer-
tainly not the only semiotic system or mediational means at work in learning. 
As Gee argued earlier, learning to perform a given identity in any given activity 
is much more than getting the language right. From a sociocultural perspective, 
we can speak of all semiotic systems functioning as tools in the development of 
interpersonal communicative activity and individual cognitive activity. Taking 
into account how language shapes activity is important, but it is also important to 
find ways to talk about how the wider array of other semiotic systems operating as 
part of activity afford and constrain group learning activity as well as how activ-
ity shapes language use and interpersonal interactions. A sociocultural approach 
to learning and language in use thus addresses CDA’s concern with transfor-
mation by focusing on the ways in which members’ resources are privileged, 
appropriated, rejected, and deployed as part of participation in activity. 
Yet sociocultural approaches to learning have often failed to recognize 
questions of inequity and authority in the distribution of mediational means. 
They have failed to recognize, as Linell (1998) suggested, not only coopera-
tion, negotiation, and shared activity, but also fragmentation, complemen-
tarity, and struggle, which characterize much of interpersonal activity. Of 
particular importance in this regard is the idea that cultural tools, including 
language, are often unequally distributed throughout a group and a society. 
Critical approaches to discourse bring to a sociocultural approach to learning 
recognition of the ideological saturation of cultural tools and their potential 
for re-creating and/or subverting particular orders of Discourse (Fairclough, 
1989). A critical approach to language, psychology, and activity is a crucial, but 
often neglected, addition to any sociocultural project that seeks to highlight the 
structure and realization in everyday activities of the inequitable distribution 


Activity as Discourse  229
of power, authority, and valued cultural and physical resources that shape all 
social institutions. 
Discourse as Talk and Activity 
For a combined sociocultural and CDA analysis to work, however, the ana-
lyst must be able to describe not only language in use (the purview of 
Discourse analysis), but also activity (especially learning activity) as it develops 
(the purview of sociocultural analysis). Discourse and conversation analyses of 
all kinds generally relegate activity to the background of analysis, citing it solely 
as something that accompanies talk. Nevertheless, even those linguists who do 
not work directly with language in use (and language in use with Gee’s nonlan-
guage stuff) generally recognize that activity and talk are interrelated. The psy-
cholinguist Clark (1996), for instance, created a discourse continuum moving 
from activities that are mostly linguistic to those that are mostly nonlinguistic: 
1. 
telephone conversations, newspaper items, radio reports, novels 
2. 
face-to-face conversations, tabloid items, TV reports, science texts 
3. 
business transactions, plays, movies, coaching demonstrations, appren-
ticeship lessons, bridge games 
4. 
basketball games, tennis matches, two people moving furniture, making love 
5. 
playing a string quartet, waltzing, playing catch. (p. 50) 
Most analyses of language in use cover only a tiny part of this spectrum. Yet a 
great deal of activity, especially learning activity as Clark’s continuum suggests, 
occurs at the place where talk and action co-occur. Precisely because interlocu-
tors’ actions are such a strong part of establishing relevant contexts for making 
sense of utterances, they must be taken into account. 
Despite the importance of capturing the co-occurrence of talk and action to 
understand meaning making and learning, most transcription techniques used 
by discourse and conversation analysts completely ignore activity. At the most, 
the analyst adds some parenthetical information to disambiguate the referent of 
certain deictic expressions for the reader or to explain the result of some talk. 
For example, look at the following transcript from a science classroom taken 
from Lemke (1990): 
Transcript 1: Carbon 
27 Teacher: Ron? 
28 Ron: 
Boron? 
29 Teacher: That would be—That’d have uh . . . seven electrons. So you’d 
have 
30 to have one here, one here, one here, one here, one here . . . one 
31 here—Who said it? You? 
32 Student: 
Carbon. 
33 Teacher: What’s— 
34 Students: Carbon! Carbon! 


230  Shawn Rowe
35 Teacher: Carbon. Carbon. Here. Six electrons. And they can be anywhere 
within those—confining—orbitals. This is also from the notes 
from before. The term orbital refers to the average region trans-
versed [sic] by an electron. Electrons occupy orbitals that may 
differ in size, shape, or orientation. That’s—that’s from the other 
class, we might as well use it for review. (pp. 17–18, 20) 
Lemke explained that this is a conversation between a student and a teacher 
standing at the blackboard on which a chalk Atomic Orbital Diagram is drawn. 
As the teacher talks, he gestures at the diagram and a periodic table hung on 
the wall. The drawing and table are more than mere props of the teacher’s and 
students’ dialogue, and they are more than mnemonic devices for the students. 
At the least, they serve as part of preparing contexts (Lemke, 1990) within 
which particular questions and statements make sense. When students miss 
these preparations, they might not even understand what is expected of them 
as interlocutors, much less the science content of the talk (Lemke, 1990). The 
students are expected not only to learn to talk about atoms and their orbitals in 
the correct way, but also to recognize and use such diagrams and tables in the 
correct ways to perform adequate identities as science students. Because sci-
ence talk is a gateway to further education as well as career choices, such simple 
routines as this one are important as apprenticeship activities. 
When we employ turn taking as the unit of analysis and fail to include any 
description of the activity that co-occurs with the talk and contextualizes it as 
part of the transcript, some parts of the talk become virtually meaningless to 
the analyst (i.e., pointing out electrons—“one here” or referring to the dia-
gram “that’s from the other class”). If we are interested in how the mediational 
means (like diagrams), talk, and activity work together as a distributed system, 
with how both talk and action shape each other over the course of an activity, 
and thus with how people learn to use the linguistic and nonlinguistic stuff that 
makes up Discourse, then we need a different kind of transcript. 
Getting Talk and Activity Together for Analysis 
Transcript 2 (Rowe, 2002) is a different kind of representation: In this case, 
the participants are interacting with a particular kind of mediational means 
(a hands-on exhibit) in an interactive science museum. Such hands-on activi-
ties are common in U.S. science museums, and they are a large part of many 
science classrooms as well. This exhibit consists of a 2-meter inclined plane. 
The plane is made up of two sets of railings down which two wheels roll. 
Each wheel has an axle at its center. When the wheel is placed in the ramp, 
its axle is actually the part that rolls on the rails. In this way, the wheels spin 
around their axles as they move down the ramp. Each wheel is further equipped 
with three movable weights placed evenly around the axle. Each weight can be 
moved to one of three positions from close to the center of the wheel to close 
to the outer edge of the wheel. Adjusting the position of the weights affects the 


Activity as Discourse  231
movement of the wheels by distributing mass differently around the rotating 
axles. 
To try to understand how small groups of adults and children organize their 
activity around this exhibit and make meaning out of it, and how that does or 
does not contribute to the re-creation of particular orders of Discourse, it is 
necessary to see how activity contextualizes talk and vice versa. Thus, the tran-
script includes both talk and actions; further, it visually shows the relationships 
between utterances and actions, between utterances and other utterances, and 
between actions and other actions by including a person’s actions and utter-
ances in one box of the table. Each box contains two lines of text—the first is 
a transcription of talk, the second of action. This procedure allows the analyst 
to see how action and utterance are related to each other in creating contexts 
within which those actions and utterances have meanings. 
Transcript 2: Rolling 
1
2
3
B 
 
walking to right end of ramp; takes right wheel, carries to top Places 
wheel
M 
 
 
Approaches right top, puts hand on right wheel
B 
 
holding wheel with M 
Releases wheel
W 
 
 
approaches right top
M 1) You see how you can move these 
That makes it go faster or 
weights  
slower 
 
with B moves two weights takes  
Steps back from ramp one
 
hand off 
step
B 
 
walks to bottom, rolling wheel back up 
picks up wheel carries 
 
 
 
 
to top
W 2) Pick it up Sonny, carry it up 
3) Now if you put it in 
 
 
walks halfway down ramp follows B back to top 
M [unint] they say 
 
standing two steps away


232  Shawn Rowe
4
5
6
7
Adapted from Rowe (2002).
Inspired by Bakhtin’s (1979) concept of polyphony and a microgenetic approach 
to the development of activity (Rowe & Wertsch, 2002; Vygotsky, 1978), and to 
B 
 
places wheel 
adjusting weights
W a different place 
4) I think this one’s been 
 
 
leans over B holding wheel, touching weights
M That’s what affects the speed
 
pushes weight in place steps back 
steps back further
B 
5) I wanta move down that one
 
 
looks at M
W there a while [unint] change them
 
 
steps back
M That’s what affects the speed
 
 
steps up pushes weight in place
B 
 
Releases wheel Follows down hand on ramp leaning on ramp, 
 
walks to bottom, rolls 
W 
 
 
steps back farther 
leaves
M 
 
steps back 
steps back farther 
walks down
B 
 
wheel part way up, turns and walks away
W 
 
from top of ramp, talking to researcher
M 
 
ramp past B and toward different exhibit


Activity as Discourse  233
capture the relationships among actions and talk carried out by multiple agents 
as they develop over the course of an activity, I am employing a transcript that is 
read from left to right as a musical score is read. In this particular case, there are 
seven segments on the page representing just over 1 minute of activity and talk. 
When the reader reaches the end of one segment (the right-hand margin) he 
or she returns to the beginning of the next segment immediately below it (the 
left-hand margin). This transcript facilitates what Norris (2004) and others call 
a multimodal discourse analysis—one that is concerned with multiple modes 
of communication simultaneously, seeks to maintain their unity in analysis, 
and recognizes that 
language in use, whether this is in the form of spoken language or text is 
always and inevitably constructed across multiple modes of communica-
tion, including speech and gesture not just in spoken language but through 
such “contextual” phenomena as the use of the physical spaces in which we 
carry out our discursive actions or the design, papers, and typography of 
the documents within which our texts are presented. (Scollon and Levine, 
2002, pp. 1–2) 
Agents (B—a boy around 10 years old, M—a man in his late 40s, and W—a 
woman in her late 40s) are listed in order of their appearance at the exhibit. As 
new agents enter the setting, a new box or cell is added for them. Each box or 
cell contains two lines. The bottom line details the agents’ actions. Just above 
that in the same box is a line that details the agents’ talk. Boldface type sepa-
rates talk from action. Within this kind of microgenetic analysis of activity, it is 
important to capture the development of activity and talk across time (Wertsch, 
1991). However, because the actual time at which an action or utterance is 
begun and ended is less important than the relative position of that action or 
utterance with regard to other actions and utterances, the transcript is not bro-
ken down into equally spaced time units. Thus, the transcripts capture both 
talk and action as they develop over the course of an activity within a group. 
They also visually represent which actions and utterances are co-terminus and 
which are co-constructed. 
Any transcript is already an abstraction for a particular purpose, and one 
of the challenges of any transcription procedure is determining what level of 
detail should be included in the representation of both talk and actions. The 
level of detail is usually determined by the purposes of the analysis or the theo-
retical assumptions underlying it. In this case, for instance, not every action is 
described. There is no attempt to include individual movements such as “takes 
wheel with right hand” or “looks upward and to left.” Some analyses, such 
as those described by Norris (2005), do require this level of transcription 
detail. 
Yet there are also theoretical assumptions underlying the transcript, and I 
turn to some of those now because they are important for the claims I make 
about what is going on in the transcript. There are basically two claims that 


234  Shawn Rowe
arise from the dialogic and sociocultural approach to language and develop-
ment that I am integrating with a critical approach to discourse analysis: (a) the 
unit of analysis for language in use is the utterance, and (b) activities are often 
distributed among multiple agents. 
The Unit of Analysis for Language in Use is the Utterance 
Within a dialogic approach to language, the utterance (rather than the pho-
neme, morpheme, word, phrase, or sentence) is the basic element of language 
in use. Bakhtin (1986) rather loosely defined the utterance as “the change of 
speaking subjects” (p. 71). Because his model was dialogue between speakers, 
the “change of speaking subjects” that Bakhtin was interested in has some anal-
ogies to turn taking as it is described by conversation analysts (Linell, 1998). 
From the point of view of analyzing individual contributions to dialogue, the 
change of speaking subjects or turn taking is a natural unit of analysis. Yet such 
a unit becomes problematic when there are multiple speakers (and sometimes 
even in dyads) when, for instance, conversational partners complete each oth-
er’s sentences, speak simultaneously, or immediately latch one speaker’s words 
onto another’s without salient break. These examples represent the co-construc-
tion of dialogue by multiple participants. Unfortunately for the discourse ana-
lyst using turn taking as the basic unit of analysis, such cases are more the rule 
than the exception in some activities and among some groups. 
In such cases, and generally from the point of view of analyzing how dis-
course contributes to group activity, it makes more sense to treat any uninter-
rupted stretch of speaking activity as one utterance even if it is distributed among 
multiple speakers. For reasons that become clear later, I am interested in just 
those places where multiple speakers construct one utterance. I call these co-
constructed utterances. Thus, I define the utterance as an “uninterrupted stretch 
of speaking” and the co-constructed utterance as an “uninterrupted stretch of 
speaking activity involving more than one agent.” Not every utterance that 
includes more than one recognizable voice is co-constructed. As Bakhtin (1981, 
1986) noted, multiple voices almost always co-exist within one speaker’s utter-
ance. Such utterances are polyphonic or heteroglossic (Bakhtin, 1979), but 
are not co-constructed. My definition of co-constructed utterances tries to 
take account of utterances that might involve more than one speaking agent, 
but only one voice. Like the Greek Chorus who speak in one voice, these are 
potentially cases of co-construction that are not heteroglossic (Bakhtin, 1981, 
1986). 
In terms of the transcript, this means that when utterances are numbered for 
reference or coding, not every individual contribution is separately numbered. 
Rather, when two or more people co-construct an utterance, it is numbered 
and coded as one utterance. For example, utterance 3 (W: “Now if you put it 
in a different place”; M: “that’s what affects the speed”) is one utterance co-
constructed by two speakers (M and W). The two voices are latched without 
break. W begins the utterance with a statement that ends with rising intonation 


Activity as Discourse  235
(which could also be indicated in the transcript if the analysis required it), and 
M completes the utterance. 
Co-Constructed Talk and Situation Definitions 
In Transcript 2, utterances are co-constructed as part of explicitly formulat-
ing a situation definition for the activity. A situation definition is a statement 
about the context that specifies what we are doing at a given moment or what 
we take to be the background against which our utterances and actions are to be 
interpreted. Here is the first link between sociocultural approaches to learning 
activity and CDA. Not everyone in every situation has the authority to define 
the situation. That authority is negotiated on the ground as part of activity, but 
it may be couched in terms of talk about content. In Utterance 3, M and W seek 
and provide information about the way the exhibit works. They also work to 
define the situation in a particular way that explicates “what’s going on” at this 
given moment. In this case, “what’s going on” is something like MOVING THE 
WEIGHTS (Rowe, 2002).2 This way of defining the situation contrasts with, 
for example, what we may call RACING, where two participants roll the two 
wheels simultaneously as part of a competitive game to see which one will reach 
the bottom first. The co-constructed utterance works this way by indexing a 
particular context within which every other utterance and action has mean-
ing potential. Thus, such co-constructed utterances are part of establishing 
and maintaining intersubjectivity (Rommetviet, 1974)—that is, a temporarily 
shared version of the social background against which what we say and do can 
make sense to interlocutors. 
As the example in Transcript 1: Carbon suggests, learning to recognize and 
use such cues as these to understand the situation is not only part of learning to 
interpret what is said and what is expected of us as interlocutors, but also part 
of “pulling off” a particular social identity. It is the ability to manipulate par-
ticular members’ resources to be recognized as a particular kind of who doing 
what (Gee, 1999). In that sense, M and W are pulling off identities as the kind of 
people who go to museums and know what to do with exhibits there—that is, 
you do not simply play with them, you experiment and observe the results. 
Yet utterances alone do not make up the particular constellations of mem-
bers’ resources that make up particular Discourses. That brings us to the second 
theoretical claim underlying these transcripts. The transcripts show that co-
constructed utterances are combined with co-constructed actions. In concert, 
utterances and action define both the situation and the particular performing 
identities of the participating agents.
Activities are Often Distributed Among Multiple Agents 
For purposes of analysis, I have borrowed Gee’s (1999) three-part terminology 
of activity, subactivity, and action.3 An activity is a bounded sequence of doing 
something with a more or less recognizable beginning and end. In the case of 


236  Shawn Rowe
Transcript 2: Rolling, and from the point of view of the observer, the activity is 
something like “Doing an interactive museum exhibit.” Similarly, in the case of 
Transcript 1: Carbon, the activity is something like “Using a diagram to review 
a lesson” in the classroom. Both of these activities are in turn made up of par-
ticular subactivities that are shaped by the physical and social constraints and 
affordances of the exhibit (rather heavy wheels on an inclined plane) and the 
classroom (chalk of different colors; a diagram left over from a previous class) 
and of the setting (a free-of-charge, public museum, on the one hand, and a 
secondary school science classroom in a public school, on the other hand).
In Transcript 2: Rolling, there are several identifiable subactivities that have 
to do with the nature of the exhibit and setting. These include approaching the 
exhibit, reading the label, setting up a roll by moving the wheels to the top of 
the ramp, rolling the wheels, solving a variety of technical difficulties with the 
operation of the exhibit, adjusting the weights, and exiting the area. Some of 
these subactivities are mandatory (approaching, setting up a roll), whereas oth-
ers are optional (reading the label or rolling the wheel or adjusting the weights). 
Last, solving physical problems with the exhibit is mandatory when they occur, 
but might not be part of any given group’s activity. In addition, other subactivi-
ties are not necessarily part of the activity as dictated by its physical nature, but 
are elements of how people interact as they use the exhibit and shape the way 
the activity is socially distributed. These include things like establishing partici-
pation, directing activity, or explaining the activity. 
These subactivities are in turn made up of particular actions. Any number or 
type of actions can be used as part of setting up or explaining the activity. For 
example, as part of setting up, sometimes a participant simply drags the wheel 
from the bottom of the ramp to the top before releasing it. Another person 
might set up by lifting the wheel out of the ramp and carrying it to the top and 
placing it in the ramp. Still another person might bring the wheel to the top, 
place it in the ramp, and then roll it backward slightly to reorient the weights. 
Each of these actions can be coded, but for my purposes here the categories 
I use in Transcript 2 generally belong to the level of subactivities rather than 
actions or activities. This level of detail, again, is determined by the questions 
to be addressed. 
Co-Constructed Activity and Situation Definitions 
For my analysis of activity, I treat the activity as analogous to utterances. Thus, 
one subactivity or one action is any uninterrupted stretch of physical activity. 
It is immediately obvious that an action, subactivity, or activity can be distrib-
uted among multiple agents. Two students who work together to assemble a 
balance beam for an in-class experiment are in this sense engaged in one sub-
activity with roughly identifiable boundaries (a beginning and an end). More 
important for the current discussion, an action or subactivity may be begun by 
one participant and completed by another. Two students—one of whom picks 
up weights of different sizes and hands them to another student who places 


Activity as Discourse  237
them on the balance beam— may complete the subactivity of putting weights 
on the balance beam, which in turn may be part of several activities (measur-
ing the unknown weight of another object, calibrating the balance) and may 
be made up of multiple actions (getting attention, putting the weight in one’s 
hand, grasping the weight, etc.). 
In the case of Transcript 2, there are two co-constructed subactivities. The 
first occurs at the beginning of the activity in Segment 1. B has approached the 
exhibit and taken one of the wheels to the top of the ramp. Before he can do 
anything else, M approaches, places his hand on the wheel, and says, “You see 
how you can move these weights” (Utterance 1) and moves two of the weights 
while the boy holds the wheel. M thus takes authority early on in the activity for 
defining it in a certain way—not only by what he says, but also by what he does. 
He and B co-construct the subactivity of moving the weights, and the activity 
is thus defined as MOVING THE WEIGHTS rather than simply ROLLING 
THE WHEEL or RACING. The second case of co-constructed activity further 
reinforces this situation definition. In Segments 4 and 5, B, W, and M all co-
construct the activity of moving the weights. This group (as do many of the 
groups who use this exhibit—see Rowe [2002] for more discussion) co-con-
structs activities at just those points where they are defining the activity as a 
particular type (Segment 1) or when they are trying to solve a physical problem 
(how to move the weights in Segments 4 and 5).
Learning as the Appropriation of Mediational Means for Meaning 
Making 
By extending this analysis in more detail, we can address the critique that appli-
cations of CDA do not routinely attend to learning. Bringing together a socio-
cultural approach to learning activity, a dialogic approach to language in use, 
and a critical analysis of discourse, we can define learning as the appropria-
tion of culturally valued mediational means or members’ resources as part of 
participation in active, distributed meaning making. The key to understanding 
learning thus defined is analyzing how the appropriation of mediational means 
occurs across time and in interaction (or does not occur).
In Transcript 2, the three participants are at the exhibit for 1 minute and 17 
seconds. As soon as B brings the wheel to the top of the ramp, M approaches. 
Having read the label, he puts his hands on the wheel with B. In his first utter-
ance, M draws B’s attention to the weights and explains the activity in terms 
of the situation definition MOVING THE WEIGHTS. The second half of this 
utterance is actually addressed to both B and W (who has joined them) and 
positions M as the interpreter of authority by presenting the situation defi-
nition as part of what “they say.” He and B then co-construct the activity of 
adjusting the weights, and he steps away from the exhibit. W, however, steps 
in (physically and verbally) immediately, directing B’s activity and behavior 
through a direct address (Utterance 2) and by physically approaching him. 
In this utterance and action, she contributes to the situation definition by 


238  Shawn Rowe
addressing what it is not. It is not about ROLLING THE WHEEL (up or down 
the ramp), but about MOVING THE WEIGHTS, which she further makes clear 
in her part of Utterance 3. This utterance has the form of a statement, but is said 
with rising intonation that seeks a completion as a question or clarification of 
“what’s going on.” All three of them then participate in adjusting the weights. 
W initiates the adjusting by leaning over B, touching the weights, and seeming 
to explain their difficulty in moving them in Utterance 4. B then enlists M’s 
aid with an utterance (5) and look, and W steps back. After M helps adjust the 
weights, W and M both move back further, allowing B to finish the subactivity. 
At the end of the next roll of the wheel, B again begins to roll the wheel back up 
the ramp before following M to a different exhibit. 
In this short time, these three participants do quite a bit of work (both physi-
cally and in terms of what they say) to shape the situation definition. This is not 
PLAY, RACING, or ROLLING THE WHEELS, although the last seems to be 
B’s preferred activity. Rather W and M define the situation as MOVING THE 
WEIGHTS to affect the speed. M and W’s situation definition is cast in terms 
of a preferred or privileged way to do the exhibit, associated with the author-
ity of the museum (i.e., with what “they say” about it). As already noted, they 
employ co-constructed subactivities and utterances to articulate the situation 
definition. 
Note also how carefully M and W monitor and control B’s actions. As soon 
as B places the wheel for the first time, M establishes his participation (and 
authority for defining the situation) by placing his hand on the wheel and 
adjusting the weights while drawing attention to the weights as the salient fea-
ture of the wheels and what you can do with them (make it go faster or slower) 
as the salient activity. He does not, however, attribute this to his own knowl-
edge or observations, but to the authority of the museum. The second time B 
places the wheel, he has just been admonished for “breaking frame” by rolling 
instead of carrying the wheel back up to the top. As soon as he places the wheel, 
W establishes her participation in a more direct way than her Utterances 2 and 
3 do by placing her hands on the wheel and trying to adjust the weights while 
talking about what happens when you do move them (“put it in a different 
place”). Thus, W and M do a lot of (literally) hands-on work to define what it 
is they are all three doing and how they should do it. 
Once B’s participation is established and a correct or preferred way of doing 
the exhibit is assured, they physically and verbally leave the activity up to B. This 
is consistent with teaching and learning or apprenticeship (Rogoff, 1990, 1995) 
activities of all kinds, where one participant who is positioned as an expert scaf-
folds the participation of another participant who is positioned as a novice. The 
expert gradually transfers authority for doing the activity to the novice, who 
appropriates the tools, procedures, and goals of the activity or rejects them. 
In this case, although B is the first to approach the exhibit, M takes control 
immediately of the situation, and W enters the scene at just the point where 
B seems to be taking too much authority (ROLLING THE WHEEL back up 
the ramp instead of conforming to the situation definition of MOVING THE 


Activity as Discourse  239
WEIGHTS). Eventually, both M and W remove themselves from the activity: a 
full transfer of authority over the doing of the exhibit to B. In this case, he does 
not pursue it for long, but seems to have his own definition for what’s going on 
as he begins again ROLLING THE WHEEL back up the ramp just before exit-
ing. He thus rejects the situation definition of MOVING THE WEIGHTS once 
authority for doing the activity has been physically and verbally transferred to 
him. He does not seem to have appropriated the meaning of the situation as 
defined by the adults. 
As a result of all this work, one situation definition predominates. There 
is little chance for an alternative situation definition to be activated. Rather, 
the adults work hard to limit the possible situation definitions by presenting 
their preferred one (which is in fact their perception of the museum’s “official” 
design) as authoritative and by working to direct the child’s participation in a 
way that is appropriate to the situation thus defined. Once the child seems to 
have appropriated that situation definition, the adults relinquish verbal and 
physical control over directing the activity and eventually exit the exhibit area. 
Yet the child then turns to a different kind of activity for a short period. He 
has rejected the preferred way of contextualizing the activity by rejecting the 
resources handed to him by his parents. 
Appropriating Discourses, the Bigger Picture 
In the case presented in Transcript 1: Carbon, it is clear that a particular, privi-
leged school Discourse is being negotiated and enforced by both the teacher 
and students (and that is in fact part of what Lemke goes on to discuss). Yet 
the same kind of thing is happening in Transcript 2: Rolling, too. In the case 
presented in Transcript 2, a particular way of interacting with the exhibit is 
privileged and deployed by M and W as part of organizing their own activity 
and directing B’s participation in it. Yet their privileging this particular situa-
tion definition has implications beyond their own, local activity. In the science 
museum, this particular way of interacting with the exhibit is associated with 
a socially privileged Discourse—that of science. The exhibit label presents this 
activity as being about “The Scientific Method” and what scientists do. M and 
W reproduce at the level of this one group’s interactions this wider social privi-
leging of a particular order of discourse (Fairclough, 1989) or social language 
(Bakhtin, 1981)—that of the scientist. And yet, it seems as if B is, indeed, taking 
up an authentic scientist identity, as (once he is left on his own) he is interact-
ing with the materials to explore and satisfy his own interests and questions in 
the same ways that scientists learn by trial and error. His mother and father, 
on the other hand, seem more interested in interacting with the exhibit (and 
teaching their son to interact) in the way they believe they are supposed to; their 
practices model the identity of a science student in school who learns by being 
directed to do things in certain ways. 
Looking just at the talk, however, does not give the analyst many clues as 
to how this Discourse is privileged, how much work M and W do to privilege 


240  Shawn Rowe
it, or how B appropriates or rejects it. What participants say and do are equal 
parts of understanding how they create a situation definition that privileges or 
rejects particular social languages and orders of Discourse. The microgenetic 
analysis of Discourse as it is developed in both talk and action simultaneously 
that I demonstrate here allows us to analyze the privileging, appropriating, and 
rejecting of particular members’ resources and mediational means as part of 
activity. This sort of microgenetic analysis of course does not demonstrate how 
or if participants appropriate these social languages in a really deep sense so 
that they become part of their everyday performances of identity. That requires 
analysis of the same agents’ participation in a wide variety of interactions over 
time to see whether and how they appropriate and deploy privileged and non-
privileged ways of acting and speaking. It also does not demonstrate how cer-
tain ways of speaking and acting and those who use them come to be privileged 
or nonprivileged. That is precisely what CDA offers to sociocultural approaches 
to learning: analysis of the histories, social affordances, and constraints of the 
particular Discourses people appropriate and reject as part of learning. 
Notes
1 In some senses, these are three different traditions in analyzing spoken and written 
texts with different histories, units of analysis, and purposes of analysis. In other 
senses, they have a great deal in common. Despite differences in their analytical styles 
and focal points of analysis, Gee and Fairclough both departed from traditional dis-
course analysis because of their insistence on the ideological saturation of the ele-
ments of language (a tradition that stems from Marxist and deconstructivist literary 
analysis and systemic-functional linguistics [SFL]). This makes their work consistent 
with Linell’s, which seeks to anchor conversation analysis in a dialogic or Bakhtinian 
approach to language in use that takes account of the ideological nature of all ele-
ments of language and the dialogic structure of all language in use. Scollon and Wong 
Scollon (2004) make a similar case in their accounts of mediated discourse and nexus 
analysis.
2 Throughout the rest of the chapter, SITUATION DEFINITIONS are presented in 
ALL CAPS.
3 These categories are consistent with those of activity theory–activity, actions, and 
operations (Leont’ev, 1978), stemming from Vygotsky’s work. They are also consis-
tent with the lower-level activities, higher-level activities, and practices described in 
Norris’ (2004) work.
References 
Bakhtin, M. M. (1979). Problemy poetiki Dostoevskovo [Problems of Dostoevsky’s poet-
ics]. Moskva: Sovetskaya Rossiya. 
Bakhtin, M. M. (1981). The dialogic imagination: Four essays by M. M. Bakhtin (C. Emer-
son & M. Holquist, Trans. M. Holquist, Ed.). Austin: University of Texas Press. 
Bakhtin, M. M. (1986). Speech genres and other late essays (V. W. McGee, Trans. C. 
Emerson & M. Holquist, Eds.). Austin: University of Texas Press. 
Clark, H. (1996). Using language. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press. 
Fairclough, N. (1989). Language and power. London: Longman. 


Activity as Discourse  241
Gee, J. P. (1999). An introduction to discourse analysis: Theory and method. New York: 
Routledge. 
Lemke, J. L. (1990). Talking science: Language, learning and values. Westport, CT: 
Ablex. 
Linell, P. (1998). Approaching dialogue: Talk, interaction, and contexts in dialogical per-
spectives. Amsterdam: John Benjamins. 
Norris, S. (2004). Analyzing multimodal interaction: A methodological framework. Lon-
don: Routledge. 
Norris, S. (2005). Habitus, social identity, the perception of male domination—and 
agency? In S. Norris, and R. Jones (Eds.), Discourse in action (pp. 183–197). London: 
Routledge. 
Rogoff, B. (1990). Apprenticeship in thinking: Cognitive development in social context. 
Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press. 
Rogoff, B. (1995). Observing sociocultural activity on three planes: Participatory appro-
priation, guided participation, and apprenticeship. In J. V. Wertsch, P. del Rio, & A. 
Alvarez (Eds.), Sociocultural studies of mind (pp. 139–164). Cambridge, UK: Cam-
bridge University Press. 
Rommetviet, R. (1974). On message structure: A framework for the study of language and 
communication. Chichester, UK: Wiley. 
Rowe, S. (2002). Activity and discourse in museums: A dialogic perspective on meaning 
making. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, Washington University in St. Louis. 
Rowe, S., & Wertsch, J. (2002). Vygotsky’s model of cognitive development. In U. Gos-
wami (Ed.), Blackwell handbook of childhood cognitive development (pp. 538–554). 
London: Blackwell. 
Scollon, R., & Levine, P. (2002). Multimodal discourse analysis as the confluence of dis-
course and technology. In P. Levine and R. Scollon (Eds.). Discourse and technology: 
Multimodal discourse analysis. (pp. 1–6). Washington DC: Georgetown University 
Press. 
Scollon, R., & Wong Scollon, S. (2004). Nexus analysis: Discourse and the emerging inter-
net. London: Routledge. 
Vygotsky, L. S. (1978). Mind in society: The development of higher psychological processes 
(M. Cole et al., Eds.). Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. 
Vygotsky, L. S. (1981). The instrumental method in psychology. In J. V. Wertsch 
(Ed.), The concept of activity in Soviet psychology (pp. 134–143). Armonk, NY: M. E. 
Sharpe. 
Vygotsky, L. S. (1986). Thought and language (A. Kozulin, Trans.). Cambridge, MA: 
MIT Press. 
Wertsch, J. V. (1985). Culture, communication and cognition: Vygotskyan perspectives. 
New York: Cambridge University Press. 
Wertsch, J. V. (1991). Voices of the mind: A sociocultural approach to mediated action. 
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. 
Wertsch, J. V. (1998). Mind as action. New York: Oxford University Press.


12 Mapping Modes in Children’s 
 
Play and Design: An Action-
 
oriented Approach to Critical
 
Multimodal Analysis 
 
Karen E. Wohlwend 
 
Indiana University 
Amid the bustle of play activities in the housekeeping corner of one kindergarten 
classroom, Daniel empties the cabinet under the sink in the child-sized kitchen. He 
removes the white plastic tub that represents the sink and inspects the remaining 
square hole. Next, he grabs two forks, crawls inside the cabinet, and flips over on his 
back. Stretching out his legs, he begins to poke the undersides of the metal faucets 
with the once-forks-now-wrenches. “I’m fixing the sink!” he announced to Ayeesha 
who peers down at him through the hole in the countertop. Immediately, she picks 
up a nearby fork and reaches down through the sink opening to help him fix the 
imaginary pipes. 
And so, a fork becomes a wrench. As children represent the world through 
their play, writing, drawing, and construction, they simply and flexibly use 
whatever “comes to hand” and seems apt for their particular message. Kress 
(2003) suggests that children as players and designers strategically emphasize 
salient features of objects to represent essential aspects of the surrounding 
reality: Daniel emphasized the lever function of a fork and exploited its poten-
tial as a stand-in for a wrench by simply using it to pry at the metal faucets, 
a transformation bolstered by his sink-fixing supine position and a strip of 
language, “I’m fixing the sink!” From this four-word utterance, a twisting ges-
ture, and two legs poking out of a sink cabinet context, Ayeesha immediately 
recognized the fork as a wrench and took up her own fork/wrench without 
an explicit explanation. Ayeesha and Daniel along with Mitchell, Jack, and 
Stephen, whom you will meet later in this chapter, were students in a kin-
dergarten classroom that I studied for one school year. In their classroom, I 
examined how the children’s play and design1 activity transformed materials 
in ways that shaped their classroom participation and peer power relations. 
While Ayeesha and Daniel used play to transform plastic forks for their imagi-
nary plumbing scenario, other children used design to transform art materials 
into paper toys. Mitchell, Jack, and Stephen regularly sat together at the kin-
dergarten art table where they experimented with new ways of handling tools 
such as scissors and tape and engaged in friendly competitions such as who 
was the best “draw-er” or who knew the “hardest” math facts. Multimodal 


Mapping Modes in Children’s Play and Design  243
analysis of the boys’ activity at the art table reveals how making a SpongeBob 
SquarePants puppet allowed Mitchell to demonstrate his status as a 6-year-old 
design expert to his tablemates.
Multimodal Analysis
Recently, the field of critical discourse studies has expanded to include “nonver-
bal (semiotic, multimodal, visual) aspects of interaction and communication” 
(Wodak & Meyer, 2009, p. 2). Similarly, definitions of literacy have expanded 
to include embodied and visual ways of producing signs as multimodal litera-
cies comprising physical actions with bodies, objects, and images that represent 
and interpret ideas (Kress, 1997; Siegel, 2006; Wohlwend, 2008). Van Leeuwen 
(2008) argues that actions are made meaningful and social through verbal lan-
guage. Using a multimodal approach to critical discourse analysis, he analyzes 
texts and objects through grammars and linguistic structures to see how they 
represent social actors and their activity, particularly how represented actions, 
reactions, and interactions constitute power relations. 
In this chapter I take a different tack, using multimodal analysis to understand 
how actions are made meaningful and social in situ rather than in representa-
tion, looking at interaction among modes, semiotic practices, and discourses in 
glocalized contexts. I examine instances of classroom activity to see how modes 
shape children’s literacy learning and participation in early childhood class-
rooms. Analyzing gaze as a mode reveals the meanings of the ways that students 
look at classroom materials and at each other, as well as the ways that they 
are surveilled by the teacher and by the researcher. Gaze turned upon people 
produces subjectivities, shared gaze among people produces social space, and 
a research gaze turns subjects into objects of inquiry. In this research, I drew 
upon the mode of gaze as a way of revealing which modes were most appar-
ent in a classroom literacy event (e.g., gaze, print, and book-handling during a 
reading lesson) and how the foregrounding of particular modes enforced a set 
of power relations (teacher/student; reader/nonreader) legitimated by prevail-
ing educational discourses. 
Multimodal analysis involves isolating, examining, and explaining an 
aspect of lived experience to understand how actors exploit available semiotic 
resources to represent meanings, carry out social practices, and realize power 
relations.2 Norris (2004) identifies a range of modes: 
• 
auditory (e.g., speech, music, and sound-effect) 
• 
visual (e.g., print, image, and gaze)
• 
action (e.g., gesture, posture, movement, facial expression, touch, and 
manipulation of objects including mediated actions with books, writing 
tools, or art materials) 
• 
environmental (e.g., built environment including dress, layout [of things 
like furniture in a classroom or street signs at an intersection], proxemics 
[near/far relationships of bodies and things]) 


244  Karen E. Wohlwend
Multimodal analysis emerged as a move away from linguistic analyses that start 
with transcripts of speech or printed texts. This shift in focus offered fresh per-
spectives that included modes such as gesture or image, extending discourse 
studies in education that have primarily featured linguistic “methods of data 
collection and analysis that ‘strip away’ the multimodal features of contexts 
and practices. The question of how multimodal representational and commu-
nicational resources shape and reshape education does not arise or is not fore-
grounded” (Jewitt, 2006, p. 2). Multimodal analysis draws upon social semiot-
ics to conduct critical readings that uncover power relations in the strategic 
arrangement of elements in images, artifacts, and texts. Moving beyond textual 
analysis, Norris (2004) offers methods for multimodal interactional analysis 
that capture and analyze the tangle of interrelated modal relationships within 
a segment of lived experience. Although this approach provides rich depiction 
of experience, it does not critically interrogate interactions for power relations 
and discourses. A critical multimodal analysis of interaction must examine how 
power circulates among the embodied actions and modal interactions within 
a moment of lived experience. A critical lens looks deeper and wider, beyond 
the here-and-now activity, to uncover who decides which actions and modes 
matter most in a particular event. 
The critical multimodal analysis in this chapter considers how particular 
social practices foreground some modes over others and how this foreground-
ing reflects power relations; that is, certain modes “count” more than others 
when using a social practice that is valued in a particular context. For exam-
ple, print literacy practices (reading, writing) are privileged in school settings 
and foreground visual modes (gaze, print) for accessing textual information 
through primarily paper media (Kress, 1997). In contrast, play practices (pre-
tended pipe-fixing) foreground action modes (gesture, posture, movement, 
and manipulation of objects) while design practices (drawing, constructing) 
foreground visual modes (gaze, image) as well as action modes (handling 
objects such as paintbrushes, markers, scissors, and art materials). 
Drawing upon studies in multimodality (Jewitt, 2006; Jewitt & Kress, 2003; 
Kress & van Leeuwen, 1996; Norris, 2004, 2006) and mediated action (Scol-
lon, 2001; Scollon & Scollon, 2004), I use an activity model (Engeström, 
1999; Leont’ev, 1977; Vygotsky, 1978) to coordinate three theories that sup-
port action-oriented multimodal analysis: social semiotics (Jewitt, 2006; 
Kress, 1997, 2003), mediated discourse (Norris & Jones, 2005; Scollon, 2001; 
Wertsch, 1991) and practice theory (Bourdieu, 1977). This critical multimodal 
analysis examines the sign-making and discursive positioning accomplished 
nonverbally as well as verbally, with particular attention to embodied action 
and handling of materials in classrooms. It blends social semiotics with activ-
ity theory (Jewitt, 2006) to provide a lens that interprets child-made products 
as signs motivated by available semiotic resources and that situates children’s 
sign-making within rules, roles, and power relations in learning communi-
ties and discourses of schooling. Signs are vestiges of the modes and mediated 
actions that produced them and reflect each designer’s habitus (Bourdieu, 


Mapping Modes in Children’s Play and Design  245
1977), internalized dispositions and practices engrained in childhood. Thus, a 
mode- and action-oriented—rather than language-oriented—analysis exam-
ines learning as mediated, motivated, and situated activity.
Learning as Mediated, Motivated, and Situated Activity
In a multimodal view of education, learning mediates, and is mediated by, 
material resources and other social actors according to cultural practices and 
discursive histories. Learning produces, and is produced by, expanded reper-
toires of resources for sign-making and increased participation in classroom 
apprenticeships organized by shared expectations and histories. A multimodal 
perspective recognizes young children as designers who talk, act, and create 
texts, images, and artifacts as intentional messages and who make strategic 
use of available materials, social spaces, school cultures, and global discourses 
(Dyson, 2003; Kress, 1997, 2003; Rowe, 2008; Siegel, Kontovourki, Schmier, & 
Enriquez, 2008; Wohlwend, 2007). Of course, this multimodal perspective on 
early literacy is itself a discourse (Wohlwend, 2009a). From this perspective, 
literacies are diverse sets of interrelated semiotic practices for producing and 
interpreting texts (e.g., reading, writing, play, design) and learning is signaled 
by changes in participation that are valued and recognized according to prevail-
ing discourses within a community of practice (Lave & Wenger, 1991). 
Mediated Actions and Social Practices
In Vygotsky’s (1935/1978) sociocultural orientation to learning, mediation is the 
key to guided participation and learning within apprenticeships (Lave & Wenger, 
1991; Rogoff, 1995). Mediation is literally action with media, or tools that make 
the meanings in the cultural and material world more accessible and compre-
hensible (Wertsch, 1991). In an apprenticeship model, children learn ways of 
“doing and being” (Gee, 1999) by collaborating with peers or teachers who help 
them interpret signs and symbols to represent meanings that make sense within 
the cultural context. Children learn by participating in semiotic practices (e. g., 
drawing, coloring, pretending) with physical instruments (e. g., pencil, markers, 
forks, puppets) and media (e.g., paper, toy sink, puppet stage) for crafting mes-
sages. The signs created by attaching shared meanings to these material objects 
are products of mediated actions. The term mediated action (Wertsch, 1991) 
recognizes that sign-making actions do not occur as isolated decontextualized 
behaviors, but rather as purposeful manipulation that meaningfully modifies 
materials and situations. Mediated actions make up social practices, categories of 
clustered mediated actions that have locally contextualized meanings (Scollon, 
2001). For example, loudly tapping a plastic fork is a mediated action; whether it 
is interpreted as making music, fixing the sink, or abusing classroom toys depends 
upon which social practices are attached to the action, based upon the actor’s 
intended meaning as well as the resources, rules, discourses, and roles that con-
figure a local classroom community (Figure 12.1).


246  Karen E. Wohlwend
Motivated by Material Affordances and Designer Interest
The agency, economy, and materiality of playful design in the pipe-fixing pre-
tense illustrates children’s flexible approach to shared meaning-making, in and 
out of classroom events (Kress, 1997, 2003). The temporary and fluid nature of 
play allowed Daniel to pivot the fork’s conventional function as eating utensil 
and recontextualize it to fit his changing purposes (Vygotsky, 1935/1978). Two 
forks turned into wrenches for loosening a pipe in this excerpt, but a few min-
utes later the forks were transformed again, this time into spatulas for flipping 
imaginary pancakes after the sink was fixed. “The real point about this vora-
cious appetite for semiotic recycling is the child’s ever-searching eye, guided by 
a precise sense of design, both for material and for shape” (Kress, 1997, p. 104). 
According to social semiotic theory (Hodge & Kress, 1988; Kress, 1997), signs 
are motivated by physical properties of the particular materials at hand; that is, 
the material properties of an object influence how well it will act as a signifier to 
best represent a signified meaning. 
Signs are conveyed in (and through) modes. “Mode is used to refer to a 
regularised organised set of resources for meaning-making, including, image, 
gaze, gesture, movement, music, speech and sound-effect. Modes are broadly 
understood to be the effect of the work of culture in shaping material into 
resources for representation” (Kress, 2003, p. 1). Each mode and medium more 
aptly facilitates certain meanings over others by offering specific affordances. 
For example, drawing uses a visual mode and organizes space in a way that 
affords analytical classification or image displays that prompt “This is a . . .” 
Available Semiotic Resources
(Modes, Materials, Mediation)
Interest &
Appropriation
Mediated Action
Social Practice
Transformation
Histories of
Social
Participation 
Histories of
Material Use
and Access
Shared
Cultural
Meanings
Rules
Habitus
Community of Practice
Discourses
Roles
Apprenticeship Relations
Social Actor
Object
Sign
(Artifact,
Performance)
Figure 12.1 An Activity Model of Mediated Action and Social Practice


Mapping Modes in Children’s Play and Design  247
captioning. Talking uses verbal and auditory modes and organizes time in a 
way that affords sequential narratives of changing action over time (Kress, 
2009). When a sign is conveyed through several modes, the combination of 
modes amplifies and complicates its meaning. Children, less accustomed than 
adults to cultural expectations for “proper” uses of materials, strategically com-
bine modes to intensify meanings (Kress, 2003). For example, masking tape 
is often used by adults in schools for attaching materials to painted walls. But 
Mitchell discovered alternative ways to use masking tape, including sticking it 
to his hair to amuse his friends, while creating a SpongeBob paper sack pup-
pet. Children extend the semantic potential of their designs by transduction, 
fast-paced blending of forms into the best available mode: cutting out drawings 
to create a two-dimensional shape or taping papers to construct three-dimen-
sional toys (Kress, 1997).
In social semiotics, (Hodge & Kress, 1988), signs are motivated by the sign-
maker’s social interest as well as the immediate semiotic resources. In this case, 
the sign wrench was motivated by Daniel’s interest in performing adult roles 
and in recruiting Ayeesha to support his play scenario as well as the physical 
aptness of the fork’s shape for imitating a wrench. Pahl and Rowsell (2007) 
argue that a designer’s interest is also shaped by habitus (Bourdieu, 1977). 
More than a social purpose that guides the selection of semiotic resources, 
interest taps into a storehouse of histories of identities, practices, and disposi-
tions that become sedimented into an artifact during its production. Pahl’s 
ethnographic research analyzed children’s artifacts for layers of identities, 
social practices, and dispositions learned at home and school. For one child, 
making a bird from tissue paper layered his knowledge of chickens on his fam-
ily’s farm in rural Turkey, a pet name that his mother had for him, a teacher’s 
reading of The Ugly Duckling, and a prior bird-making craft activity at school. 
His handmade bird bore traces of these histories as well as the immediate prac-
tices used to fabricate the tissue paper craft. This reconceptualization of arti-
facts as identity texts recognizes children’s designs—drawings, crafts, and art 
projects—as literacy objects that can be read as layered assemblages of mean-
ings, modes, practices, histories, and discourses. For example, Daniel’s fork-
turned-wrench enhanced his immediate performance of plumbing pretense 
but also drew upon a “do-it-yourself” discourse and knowledge of pipe-fixing 
practices in his habitus developed through prior histories with adults engaged 
in household repairs. 
Modes manifest interest when certain ways of combining voice, gaze, and 
handling objects are expected and tacitly valued in the designer’s habitus. 
Examination of uses of particular modes in valued practices can reveal how 
combinations of actions, talk, gesture, etc. create naturalized ways of partici-
pating that automatically elicit cooperation of others (Scollon, 2001). In this 
case, posture, talk, and the mediated action of tapping on metal faucets with 
plastic forks prompted Ayeesha to recognize this instance of socio-dramatic 
play as pretended sink repair and to join in the with a fork/wrench of her 
own. 


248  Karen E. Wohlwend
Situated in Classroom Social Relationships and Global 
Discourses of Childhood
It is not enough to access, use, and exploit multimodal resources; it is also 
necessary to get one’s performance and use of materials recognized as a valid 
way of belonging within discourses that shape classroom apprenticeships and 
school cultures. Discourses are socially expected patterns of “using language, 
other symbolic expressions, and ‘artifacts,’ of thinking, feeling, believing, 
valuing, and acting that can be used to identify oneself as a member” in a 
global community (Gee, 1996, p. 131). Educational discourses in early child-
hood classrooms include skills mastery, developmentally appropriate practice, 
and in some classrooms, multimodality (Wohlwend, 2009a). The discourses 
and practices associated with skills mastery (NCLB, 2002) stress the necessity 
of meeting skill benchmarks and standardized testing targets. The discourses 
and practices associated with developmentally appropriate practice (c.f., Bre-
dekamp & Copple, 1997) stress children’s need for exploration and learner-
directed curricula. The discourses and practices associated with multimodal 
approaches to learning (Kress, 2003) stress emerging technologies and learner 
strategic design (Table 12.1). 
Of course, these discursive perspectives overlap and blur in lived classrooms 
where administrative mandates focus on skills mastery, early childhood teach-
ers advocate for developmentally appropriate practice, and children bring 
popular media to school in SpongeBob backpacks. Conflicting and competing 
discourses can also produce tensions at the classroom level such as tensions 
between developmentally appropriate and skills mastery perspectives. Early 
childhood professional organizations circulate developmentally appropriate 
discourses and practices through teacher education literature that promotes an 
active, play-based, child-centered curriculum (Paley, 2004). Early childhood 
teachers are expected to nurture the whole child—intellectually, emotionally, 
physically, socially—by providing plentiful opportunities to play in a stimulat-
ing environment that prompts children to engage in exploration. In contrast, 
federal and state governments circulate skills mastery discourses and practices 
through accountability mandates, achievement benchmarks, and annual stan-
dardized testing (Albright & Luke, 2008). However, this approach exemplifies 
developmentally “inappropriate practice” (Bredekamp & Copple, 1997, p. 72), 
a term used to critique lessons that push young children prematurely into the 
paper-and-pencil seatwork of formal schooling.
Each educational perspective favors particular modes for sign-making. The 
modes that are privileged in curricular activity serve as tangible markers that 
reveal the educational discourses circulating in a particular classroom. For 
example, a skills mastery perspective privileges print media and verbal modes 
(e.g., naming letters in flashcard drills, filling in math equation worksheets). 
The model of developmentally appropriate practice privileges action modes 
(e.g., focusing on the processes of play and exploration in dabbing paint on 
paper rather than the finished painting). A multimodal perspective on young 


Mapping Modes in Children’s Play and Design  249
children’s learning privileges multimedia and visual and action modes (e.g., art 
projects, play performances, computer interaction). In this way, multimodal 
signs are situated in tensions among multiple discourses associated with their 
constituent modes.
The conflation and intersection of Discourses become modalities in texts, 
which, alongside practices, provide a formative picture of the meaning 
makers—not only their pathway into literacy but also how they make 
meaning in certain contexts and engage in practice. 
(Pahl & Rowsell, 2007, p. 392)
In the kindergarten in this chapter, children’s multimodal activity drew from, 
and was interpreted according to, educational discourses that made particular 
modes and media available and determined whether multimodal interaction 
constituted valued school practices. 
Methods for Analyzing Multimodal Interaction
During three school years, I observed, photographed, and analyzed the physical 
environment and play activity in eight classrooms in three schools that were 
recommended by knowledgeable informants (principals, professors, teacher 
Table 12.1 A Few Educational Perspectives on Early Childhood Learning
Perspective 
Discourses and How They  
Practices that Count as 
Valued
 
Circulate  
Learning  
Modes
Skills Mastery  
Circulated through  
Remembering and 
Print
 
government mandates for  
reproducing correct
 
accountability and  
responses on
 
standardization that require standardized tests and
 
demonstrations of skill 
school tasks to meet
 
competency and displays 
benchmarks and rubric
 
of content knowledge 
criteria 
Developmental Circulated through  
Repeated hypothesizing 
Action
 
developmentally  
in a natural progression
 
appropriate models that  
toward conventional
 
value learner-directed  
forms
 
exploration and children’s  
 
intention to create social  
 
messages
Multimodal 
Circulated through social  
Reading and producing 
Interacting
 
semiotics view of  
signs that strategically  
multiple
 
sign-making as motivated  
combine varied modes 
modes: 
 
by the aptness of available  
in multimedia: drawings, image, 
 
resources and the child’s  
music, play, popular 
print, 
 
social interest  
media, and digital forms 
sound, 
 
 
 
action, etc.


250  Karen E. Wohlwend
mentors). I conducted pilot studies in two of the kindergarten classrooms 
to develop a sense of each teacher’s learning environment, to strengthen my 
ability to conduct ﬁ
 eldwork in these sites, and to work through technologi-
cal issues in video- and audio-recording. I conducted preliminary critical dis-
course analysis to explore interpretations of children’s work and play by hav-
ing teachers view, categorize, and discuss videotaped instances of classroom 
activity. Next, I returned to this set of data and compared these kindergarten 
classrooms to generate speciﬁ
 c criteria and identify one classroom for more 
intensive study. I analyzed the ethnographic data using classroom environment 
surveys (Loughlin & Martin, 1987; Wolfersberger, Reutzel, Sudweeks, & Faw-
son, 2004) to examine the physical products, tools, and material objects actu-
ally used by the children in the selected classrooms, looking particularly for 
evidence of child-directed design and play. 
After locating a play-rich site, I visited the selected classroom approximately 
once a week during the school year. The kindergarten with one teacher and 
18 students was located in a K-6 public school in a university community in 
a rural midwestern state. Visits lasted from 2 to 3 hours, primarily during the 
mornings during play-integrated periods. The 5- and 6-year-old children in 
this class read, wrote, drew, colored, cut, pasted, and played throughout the 
morning-long literacy block. Following shared reading of big books and poetry 
charts, children worked on self-selected projects during three consecutive 45-
minute activity periods—literacy choices, writers’ workshop, and choice time 
centers—separated by short class meetings to share projects and, always, to lis-
ten to a story.
While Daniel and Ayeesha most often chose to play school in the class meet-
ing area or enact family scenes in the housekeeping corner, another group of 
children chose to draw pictures and construct paper toys or projects at the art 
table. Mitchell, Jack, Stephen, and four other boys regularly chose to sit together 
to “make stuff”, creating two-dimensional images of sports events, team logos, 
and popular culture characters and three-dimensional objects by folding, cut-
ting, and gluing paper, cardboard, fabric scraps, yarn, and a variety of recycled 
materials. All the boys in this group were blonde, wore T-shirts in the local uni-
versity’s colors, played soccer together at recess, and talked about team sports 
as they coached each other on art projects. I coded this group as “Just Guys” 
because they often denied that the puppets, paper airplanes, or light sabers that 
they produced held a particular meaning, characterizing their products as “just a 
design” and their practices as “just drawin’ somethin’” or “just playin’ around.” 
However, as the multimodal analysis in the next section suggests, the boys did 
more than “play around”: their play and design replaced teacher mediation 
with exploratory play and peer competition, created a school-sanctioned space 
for engaging popular media, and maintained a hierarchy of design mentoring 
relationships among the boys in this play group.3 When Just Guys did attach 
meanings to their creations, they often drew favorite popular culture characters 
such as Ninja Turtles, Spiderman, Darth Vader, or SpongeBob SquarePants as 
they coached each other on art projects. 


Mapping Modes in Children’s Play and Design  251
Data Collection 
Analysis of multimodal interaction required copious data collection using 
video technology supplemented by ethnographic methods and multiple filters 
to locate key instances of play and design for microanalysis (for a discussion of 
video data collection for multimodal analysis, see Jewitt, 2006). As a partici-
pant-observer, I observed and videotaped children as they played, participating 
in projects as necessary in a classroom where children looked to adults for help. 
I documented my observations through a mix of data sources including field-
notes, digital photographs, audiotapes, videotapes, classroom maps, and lists of 
the constantly changing collection of children’s books and print on the walls of 
the classroom. I also consulted my collection of teacher/researcher emails, par-
ent newsletters, and notes from informal interviews with the classroom teacher. 
A digital research portfolio housed data from all these sources along with orga-
nizational spreadsheets that cataloged data and documented analysis decisions 
and coding revisions. This electronic portfolio consisted of folders of electronic 
data, diagrams of coding schemes, expanded fieldnotes, an audio research 
journal, and coding reports and spreadsheets. The computerized nature of this 
portfolio also provided a mechanism for organizing digital data from the study 
such as audio files of children at play and JPEG photographs of student work 
that I photographed and immediately returned to the children. One spread-
sheet chronicled coding progress and evolution, creating a record of the ratio-
nale behind each coding revision, tracking choices I had made that affected 
patterns in the analysis and making my assumptions visible and traceable. An 
overarching organizational spreadsheet in the portfolio cataloged data sources 
as well as data summaries for each session. The research portfolio became the 
place to deposit emerging theories, to look up previous interpretations, and to 
question assumptions against developing data patterns. 
Data Analysis
Issues of Transcription
One of the challenges in multimodal analysis is recording the variety of modes 
that can interact within a single event, including auditory modes (spoken 
language, music), visual modes (gaze, print, image), action modes (posture, 
facial expression, object handling, gesture, touch) and environmental modes 
(proxemics [near/far relationships], layout). Researchers have responded to 
this challenge in a variety of ways, including action-enhanced transcripts and 
timelines (Ochs, 1999; Nelson, Hull, & Roche-Smith, 2008) and speech- and 
action-enhanced images (Norris, 2004).
Action-Enhanced Transcripts
Discourse analysts have developed a variety of transcription formats to include 
action and context (Bloome, Carter, Christian, Otto, & Shuart-Faris, 2004). 


252  Karen E. Wohlwend
One approach uses a matrix in which each row represents a turn of talk, with 
description of action and context in the ﬁ
 rst column followed by transcribed 
speech in the second column (Ochs, 1999). Another approach captures video 
data using a timeline format similar to ﬁ
 lm-editing software with separate 
synchronous strips for different modes: one strip contains still video images 
(frames) captured at speciﬁ
 ed intervals, one strip contains transcribed audio 
for each frame, and another strip contains pertinent information from tran-
scribed interviews with participants (Nelson, Hull, & Roche-Smith, 2008, p. 
428). Frame interval transcription chunks activity into slices of uniform time 
slots that correspond with utterances (transcribed turns of talk) represented 
by freeze frames of video. A video is a representation of both time and space 
(Kress, 2009): a linear text that can be examined as a sequence of frames with 
spatially related actors and objects. Each frame depicts a slice of time-space and 
changes in spatial position across frames produce (a representation of) action. 
Matrix and frame interval transcription enables linear sequential readings in 
action-enhanced formats that mimic the linearity of spoken language, sup-
porting analysis that assumes action and space are made meaningful and social 
through verbal language.
Speech- and Action-Enhanced Images
However, spatial relationships, action and environmental modes do not map 
neatly onto utterances or time interval segments. Norris (2004) addresses this 
issue by representing activity through a multiple frame image that captures 
changes in actions or posture with transcribed speech ﬂ
 owing across frames 
and movement, posture, and gesture depicted through directional arrows. This 
method privileges movement across spatial arrangements over changes in ver-
bal sequences, reﬂ
 ecting an analytic assumption that meanings are also com-
municated spatially by proximity, direction, and relationships between actors, 
objects, and nonverbal modes. 
Mapping Modal Relationships
I argue that analytic tools that use linear transcription formats privilege tem-
porality and are based on a logic of change over time that underlies a view 
of sequential orderly learning. This chapter explores alternative formats that 
privilege spatiality, mapping the interplay of semiotic resources within social 
spaces to support a view of learning as complex coordination of repertoires 
of semiotic resources and participatory relationships. Semiotic resources and 
participatory relationships can be mapped by examining how modes segment 
spaces (boundaries), vary in visibility (perspectives, foregrounding and back-
grounding), and interact as modal density (complexity and intensity) (Norris, 
2004; Scollon, 2001, Scollon & Scollon, 2003; Wohlwend, 2009b). Analysis of 
interaction among modes uncovers the ways that social interactions unfold in 
a nonlinear fashion, involving complex and simultaneous coordination. Even 


Mapping Modes in Children’s Play and Design  253
in practices where a particular mode dominates, backgrounded modes produce 
resonances and tensions with the foregrounded mode in ways that complicate 
seemingly straightforward interactions. “Instead of viewing social actors as 
performing one-thing-at-a-time, this framework demonstrates that individu-
als perform many [mediated] actions simultaneously by attending to them to 
different degrees” (Norris, 2006, p. 402). 
Mapping the interplay of modes uncovers power relations and social effects 
visible at the level of modes. Modal density explains how the relationships 
among modes produce social effects through modal intensity or complexity 
(Norris, 2004). A mode has modal intensity when it is highly foregrounded in 
an event (e.g., the mode of speech when pretending to talk on the telephone in 
the play kitchen). Modal complexity occurs when a mode is intricately inter-
twined with other modes (e.g., talking to a friend while lying inside a kitchen 
cabinet and tapping on a faucet with a fork when pretending to fix the sink 
requires coordinating multiple verbal, action, and visual modes). Norris (2006) 
closely examines events to determine modal density, suggesting that practices 
that are modally dense are more socially relevant because they require actors 
to coordinate resources and attention while carrying out an activity. In this 
chapter, I adapt Norris’ transcription methods and concept of modal density 
to critically examine power relations constructed through children’s manipula-
tion of modes in the process of designing a paper sack puppet. In the follow-
ing excerpt, Mitchell draws and colors with markers and cuts strips of tape 
to construct a SpongeBob hand puppet. This puppet-making activity required 
Mitchell to coordinate multiple modes; the mode of object handling was espe-
cially dense with multiple mediated actions (drawing, coloring, cutting, affix-
ing) with varied media (paper, markers, scissors, masking tape). As Mitchell 
made a SpongeBob paper puppet, he exercised his own social interest in draw-
ing a favorite media character while dodging school expectations for written 
work. Multimodal analysis of the vignette shows how Mitchell juggled multiple 
modes to produce the puppet but also to navigate tensions among schooling 
discourses and to cordon off social space for his popular culture interests. 
Constructing Space and SpongeBob
Mitchell, Stephen, and Jack are seated at their favorite spots at the art table, 
which is almost completely covered with papers that spill out of Mitchell’s 
writing folder. A large makeshift screen, improvised from a cardboard shadow 
puppet theater, blocks off the end of the table to Mitchell’s right. Stephen sits 
behind this screen, completing letter recognition tasks under the watchful 
eye of Mrs. Hansen, the teacher’s aide who monitors and assists him. The 
screen and individual aide are new additions to the art table: accommoda-
tions prescribed by a resource teacher to reduce distractions and keep Stephen 
“on task.” The three boys are accustomed to helping each other design and 
construct their art projects and, from time to time, Stephen and Mitchell peek 
around the screen to comment on each other’s work. Jack, who sits across the 


254  Karen E. Wohlwend
table from Mitchell, carefully fills a blank sheet of paper with columns of addi-
tion equations, but stops now and then to comment on the SpongeBob puppet 
that Mitchell is making. 
Mitchell positions a pair of scissors in one hand, using his chest to steady the 
scissors as he puts his fingers in the grips. Cradling a roll of masking tape under 
his arm, he takes his fingers out of the grips of the scissors and uses both hands 
to open the blades with a jerk. Mitchell repositions his fingers in the scissors, 
unwinds about 5 inches of tape, clips off a 3-inch piece of tape, and sets the 
scissors on the table. The tape curls and twists back on itself and Mitchell 
cannot straighten out the tape strip. Mitchell attaches a sticky-side-out tape 
loop to the left top corner of the paper on the table in front of him, flattening 
it down with his fingers.
This was the first of nine cutting actions as Mitchell tried out multiple tech-
niques for clipping off strips of masking tape in the process of constructing a 
SpongeBob sack puppet. Mitchell spent 15 minutes cutting and affixing strips of 
tape, as he experimented to discover the properties of adhesive materials while 
creating a SpongeBob “practice puppet—just for fun,” which he characterized 
as a test case for a real puppet that he might make at some future time. Before 
he finished his practice puppet, Mitchell tried out multiple techniques for cut-
ting tape strips as he developed his ability to operate tape and scissors. He also 
experimented with the material affordances of masking tape: he discovered its 
water-resistance, which protected the paper from the red water-based marker, 
and its ability to adhere well to various surfaces, including his own hair. 
Not surprisingly, handling scissors was the most prominent action in Mitch-
ell’s puppet design activity; cutting strips of tape by manipulating the scissors 
and masking tape roll took most of Mitchell’s time and attention (Figure 12.2 
and Table 12.2). The dominance of cutting actions produced modal intensity, 
demonstrating the importance that Mitchell attached to this activity, albeit his 
claim that he was just “playing around”.
The entire episode lasted 14 minutes and 5 seconds, beginning at 11:26:38 in 
the first frame in Figure 12.3 and ending at 11:40:43 in the last frame in Figure 
12.3. Cutting tape took 6 minutes and 55 seconds, or 49% of the total time; 
drawing took 18%; coloring took 17%; smudging took 5%; and peeling tape 
took 9% (Table 12.3). Although cutting consumed the most time, it was not 
the only mediated action in Mitchell’s handling of objects. Making the pup-
pet required coordination of multiple mediated actions with many art tools: 
sticking, smoothing, and peeling tape; drawing, coloring, and smudging with 
markers on paper (Figure 12.3). 
Mapping Modal Density
Close examination shows that object handling was most relevant in this activ-
ity. The modal intensity of this mode in the puppet-making activity increased 


Mapping Modes in Children’s Play and Design  255
Gaze
Talk
Image
Layout
Movement
Gesture
Object Handling
(Mediated Actions)
Proxemics
Figure 12.2 Modal Density: Object Handling as Dominant Mediate Action
Table 12.2 Description of Cutting Mediated Actions in Context
Mediated Action Description of Action in Context 
Cut 1 (Top left  
Mitchell unwinds about 5 inches of tape and clips off a 3-inch piece
image in Fig. 1) 
of tape, and sets the scissors on the table. The tape curls and twists 
 
back on itself and Mitchell cannot straighten out the tape strip. 
 
Mitchell attaches a sticky-side-out tape loop to the left top corner of 
 
the paper on the table in front of him, flattening it down with his 
 
fingers.
Cut 2 
Mitchell turns the wheel of tape, finds the end, and peels back another 
 
3-inch strip of tape. This time, Mitchell cuts the tape strip close to 
 
place where the tape leaves the roll. Mitchell attaches the tape 
 
sticky-side-down to his paper below the tape loop and smooths the 
 
piece of tape with his hands so that it lies flat on the paper. 
Cut 3 
Mitchell unrolls another strip of tape, this time placing the tape roll 
 
between his knees to steady the tape as he pulls back a 2-inch strip 
 
and clips it off, but it twists and sticks to the scissors. 
Cut 4 
Mitchell uses his newly invented method of holding the tape roll 
 
between his knees to cut another piece of tape. This time he pins 
 
down the tape with his thumb so that it doesn’t tangle. Holding the 
 
scissors in his right hand, Mitchell pulls tape away from roll with his 
 
left hand. He suspends the roll by the strip of tape. Mitchell lifts the 
 
tape and tries to cut the tape with the scissor blades perpendicular to 
 
the tape edges but the blades of the scissors pinch the sticky edges 
 
of the tape together. Mitchell pulls the scissors back so that the edges 
 
unstick, causing the tape roll to twist back and forth. Mitchell stands 


256  Karen E. Wohlwend
 
up and holds the tape edge in one hand with the tape roll hanging 
 
free. He cuts the tape but this time, positions the blades parallel to 
 
the tape surface, allowing a clean cut. The tape roll drops upright on 
 
the table with a plop. Mitchell smiles and sings a wordless tune, the 
 
Star Wars theme, “ERRerr- err-err-ERRRRRR-err. ERR-err-err-
 
ERRRRRR-err,” as he smooths the final piece of tape on the paper, 
 
attaching a second column of tape to his paper. 
Attempted Cut 5 Mitchell picks up the tape again and unwinds the longest piece of 
 
tape yet, about 7 inches. The end of the tape immediately curls back 
 
upon itself and Mitchell tries to untangle it. He announces, “I always 
 
draw. Even I play on my computer.” Mitchell holds up tape and 
 
watches as the roll swings and twirls. He bends his head forward 
 
against the exposed sticky side of the tape strip. The tape adheres to 
 
his hair from his crown to his hairline. The tape roll bounces against 
 
his forehead and Mitchell smiles. He picks up the scissors to cut the 
 
tape against his forehead, changes his mind and begins pulling off 
 
the tape. The tape pulls at his hair as he removes it. “Ow. Ow, ow, 
 
ow, ow, ow.” 
Cut 6 
Pulling the tape completely free, Mitchell sits up, glances at the 
 
nearby teacher associate, looks at me and grins, “A:::h-ow::::.” Still 
 
holding the scissors, Mitchell inspects the tape strip that he just 
 
pulled off his hair. He explains, “I wanted it to do that. ‘Cause you 
 
know why? I wanted to get a scissors rip.” Mitchell puts the tape 
 
close to his head speculatively, “Hey, I need to do that again.” 
 
Mitchell wraps the tape around his wrist. It sticks tightly and the 
 
remaining tape strip and tape roll dangle from his arm. Mitchell tugs
 
on the roll. “Now I’ll do it on my arm. It doesn’t even hurt.” The 
 
tape pops free and Mitchell holds the roll in his hand. “Ya know 
 
that, why?” Mitchell attaches the tape to the table edge; now the 
 
teacher associate steadies the roll of tap as he clips off a short piece 
 
of tape. Next, Mitchell takes a 4-inch piece of tape and attaches one 
 
end to the left column of tape on his paper. He repositions it several 
 
times before smoothing it on top of the existing column. “I’m gonna 
 
see—Aw:::::::” 
Cut 7 
He clips another strip of tape by resting the roll vertically on the 
 
table, holding the tape strip in one hand and cutting with the other. 
 
Mitchell attaches the strip of tape horizontally across the two 
 
columns, creating an “H” out of masking tape. 
Cut 8 
Mitchell picks up the tape roll and wedges it between his chest and 
 
the table ledge. He pulls out an inch of tape and sticks it to the back 
 
of his left hand which rests on the top of the roll of tape. He holds 
 
the scissors in his right hand. “I’m putting it on my lit-tle hand.” He 
 
positions his right hand in the scissors, then removes his hand to use 
 
both hands to open the blades. He tries cutting at a perpendicular 
 
angle again but stops short before he closes the scissor blades. 
Cut 9 
Mitchell picks up the tape roll by the leading tape strip. Holding it 
 
above the table, he cuts at an angle parallel to the tape surface and 
 
snips off the tape, letting the tape roll fall to the table. “Cut! 
 
Phew!”


Mapping Modes in Children’s Play and Design  257
Figure 12.3 Modal Complexity: Coordinating Various Mediated Actions to Make a 
Puppet
as Mitchell attended closely to managing scissors as he learned to cut and place 
the sticky tape. Mitchell’s coordination of multiple mediated actions created 
modal complexity as his mediated actions interacted with other modes such 
as gaze, speech, movement, and posture: as Mitchell gazed at his drawing of 
the SpongeBob image, he chatted with others, moved around the table to get 
materials, and changed posture as he stood up, bent over to pick up the tape, 
and leaned back in his chair. 
Table 12.3 Description of Various Mediated Actions in Context in Puppet Construction
Mediated Action Description of Action in Context
Drawing 
Having finished cutting the tape, Mitchell concentrates on drawing 
eyes and a mouth on the puppet. 
Coloring  
Mitchell colors SpongeBob with a yellow watercolor marker and then 
experiments, using a red watercolor marker to cover the tape’s water-
resistant surface.
Smudging 
Mitchell drags an index finger across the wet watercolor, and inspects 
the pinkish smudge that results. Mitchell continues to smudge the 
tape until the entire surface of the tape is pink instead of red. “I’m 
just playing around. I’m just pre- I’m just play, playing around so, so 
I could draw SpongeBob.”
Peeling 
Mitchell discovers the masking function of the tape as he peels a cor-
ner of the tape away from the puppet leaving a white space where 
the reddish tape had been. He continues to peel off tape, holding the 
puppet down with his left hand while peeling with his right. A passing 
child asks, “Why you ripping that off?” “Because, so, so I will want to 
know what it looks like. Who:::a. I [xxx] go looking ‘at good. Hey!”
Sticking 
As flickering lights signal cleanup, Mitchell shakes tape off his finger 
onto the table. “Get here. Ack.” He peels the last piece off the puppet 
but it catches the edge of the paper and starts to rip the paper. Short 
on time, he decides to stop, leaving the last piece of tape on the top 
right corner still attached. “That’s ok. I’ll just leave it.”


258  Karen E. Wohlwend
Figure 12.2 shows a mapping of modes within the production of the Sponge-
Bob puppet. The number of overlapping circles indicates the modal complexity 
of the event, and the size of an individual circle represents each mode’s modal 
intensity. The large size and central placement of the action mode of object 
handling indicates its high modal intensity and its foregrounding during pup-
pet construction; in other words, Mitchell’s attention was highly focused on 
cutting masking tape. The large number of circles surrounding the object han-
dling mode indicates the modal complexity of this event: Mitchell coordinated 
multiple modes as he combined practices: making an artifact, gazing at the 
puppet-in-progress, maintaining close proximity to other people at the table, 
navigating the layout of built environment to find more art supplies, chang-
ing his posture by standing and sitting at the table, and talking—all the while 
coordinating the mediated actions of cutting, coloring, and affixing tape. Each 
mode will be considered briefly in this section, followed by a closer look that 
coordinates multiple modes in the next section. 
Image/Artifact
The character that Mitchell chose for his puppet was SpongeBob SquarePants, 
a popular character with the Just Guys group and the main character on an ani-
mated television program that airs on the Nickelodeon cable network. The pro-
gram features anomalies in the underwater adventures of SpongeBob, a cheer-
ful, energetic sea sponge (who has the bright color and boxy shape of a yellow 
kitchen sponge). Mitchell exploited the rectangular shape of the paper bag pup-
pet by coloring to the edge, pressing hard on a fresh marker to create a saturated 
yellow color (Figure 12.4). When Jack pointed out (twice) that SpongeBob’s 
spots should be green, Mitchell ignored him and continued to color black dots 
on the yellow sponge. He colored the H-shaped masking tape suspenders red, 
dressing the character to represent a worker’s overalls (varied occupational 
garb is a typical motif in SpongeBob licensed merchandise). But later, he peeled 
almost all the tape off, fascinated by the masking property of the tape.
Proxemics, Posture, Movement, Gesture, and Layout of Built Environment
Positioning of children, materials, and physical space influenced the children’s 
interaction and reflected peer relationships and educational discourses. Jack 
worked on math problems as he sat across from Mitchell at the art table, and 
the boys maintained close proximity. Although the boys worked separately on 
unrelated projects, their history of collaborative mediation and their proximity 
allowed peer critique and mentoring. Proximity enabled shared gaze and talk, 
gesturing to each other’s work, and created a bounded social space that limited 
access to their boys-only play group. Consistent with a developmentally appro-
priate perspective on early childhood education, children chose where to sit, 
decided which materials to use, and moved freely around the room. Mitchell 
stood as much as he sat, moving around the table, and around the room, getting 


Mapping Modes in Children’s Play and Design  259
paper and markers. Consistent with a multimodal approach to learning, the 
table’s location next to the paper shelf allowed easy access to a rich supply of 
art materials including bins of markers, tapes, scissors, and papers. Free access 
to plentiful supplies manifested learner agency in both educational discourses.4 
Most prominent in the physical layout, however, was the cardboard screen that 
isolated Stephen. The screen, combined with the close proximity and gaze of 
a supervising adult, concretized the practices associated with a skills mastery 
perspective by enforcing “on-task behavior”: disrupting his proximity to other 
children at the table with the goal of limiting his gaze and talk and directing his 
attention to letter recognition skills tasks. 
Gaze
Mitchell and Jack primarily focused on their own papers, but when they occa-
sionally glanced at each other’s project, they evaluated its quality. For example, 
Jack looked critically at Mitchell’s puppet for its accuracy in depicting the correct 
colors of the SpongeBob character. Mitchell also showed his completed puppet 
to Mrs. Hansen, and she watched him cut the tape strips. The screen prevented 
Stephen from gazing at others’ work and thus decreased his opportunities for 
collaboration and peer mediation. Despite this visual barrier, Mitchell did look 
behind the screen to coach Stephen on identifying the letter G (by singing the 
alphabet and stopping on the letter G). Stephen also stepped out from behind 
the screen once to comment on Mitchell’s puppet. 
Figure 12.4 Mitchell’s Finished SpongeBob puppet


260  Karen E. Wohlwend
It is important to note that my perspective as researcher determined the 
camera’s perspective and the research gaze: where I aimed my camera created a 
frame of activity with a particular point of view and a foregrounded segment of 
space. Mitchell’s gaze as subject is foregrounded here as a window into what he 
knows but it is my backgrounded gaze as the researcher that produces a know-
able subject (Foucault, 1995).
Talk and Singing
As noted in the previous sections, collaborative talk and singing accompanied 
Mitchell’s puppet-making. Using the phrase “just for practice,” Mitchell cre-
ated a space to explicitly “play around” and explore design tools as he created 
a practice puppet. The phrase “just for practice” suggests an aimlessness that 
protected his space from instructional oversight by nearby adults (teacher asso-
ciate, researcher). An artifact created for practice is disposable, risk-free, and 
invites experimentation with techniques. Even so, Jack critiqued Mitchell’s ren-
dering of SpongeBob. The following instance was typical of the tension in Just 
Guys’ competitive project critique and cooperative peer scaffolding.
JACK [looking at Mitchell’s paper bag covered with masking tape H]: That 
doesn’t look like SpongeBob. He has green dots.
MITCHELL: [singing as he begins drawing SpongeBob’s eyes] SpooongeBob.
JACK [louder]: He has green dots.
MITCHELL: Black to me. [while searching through basket for black marker]
JACK: Hey, did you know 30 + 20? 20 minus 10 is 10. Get it? 10 plus 10 is 20. If 
you take away 10, 10. Get it?
MITCHELL: If you take away 10, and then there will be 10!
JACK: It’s funny, isn’t it?
MITCHELL: If you did a 10, then there will be 10. [slapping hand with marker 
for emphasis.] Get it?
JACK: Now, I got it.
This snippet of talk links to larger patterns of competition and cooperation 
among boys in this group. The Just Guys’ ongoing peer coaching strength-
ened their group cohesion by acting and talking a space into being; that is, by 
discursively creating a place in the classroom for playing and designing their 
own projects. Jack’s critique, “That doesn’t look like SpongeBob. He has green 
dots,” was typical of the evaluative comparisons the boys made in informal 
competition to determine who was “best draw-er.” Mitchell’s response, “Black 
to me,” asserted his authority as designer to alter the color. Mitchell maintained 
his status as an expert designer among this group of boys by demonstrations of 
his skill with tools and claims of original designs (“I comed at this idea myself”). 
However, as this conversation reveals, their talk also supported Jack’s writing 
of addition problems, allowed both boys to voice their emerging expertise with 
two-digit addition, and furthered the goals consistent with a skills mastery 


Mapping Modes in Children’s Play and Design  261
perspective in the midst of activity closely aligned with multimodal and devel-
opmental perspectives. Clearly, Mitchell and Jack were interested in getting 
recognized as good students as well as good designers.
Linking Modal Density to Semiotic Repertoires and 
Discursive Participation 
Semiotic Repertoires Layered in a SpongeBob Puppet
Mitchell expanded his repertoire of semiotic resources as he manipulated 
modes and honed his design practices to make this puppet. The SpongeBob 
puppet was a modally dense artifact that acted as a durable text that repre-
sented the character’s meanings (Brandt & Clinton, 2002) but it also concret-
ized modes associated with Mitchell’s design practices. Modal layers in the 
puppet sedimented verbal histories (remembered and invented storylines and 
dialogue for the SpongeBob character), its tactile and visual properties (smooth 
paper, bright colors, hand-sized structure), its past and future tool uses (prior 
designed use as a paper sack transformed into potential use as a hand puppet, 
realized uses of tape, scissors, and markers), mediated actions (object handling 
that increased Mitchell‘s cutting and taping knowledge and skill development), 
and its designer’s social interest (making a “practice” puppet that enabled a 
temporary, transitional, “not real” state that legitimated playing around). The 
sedimented modes and the quality of the artifact’s design provided tangible 
evidence of Mitchell’s design skill that turned a paper puppet into a concrete 
marker of his identity as a master designer among the Just Guys. The layers in 
the puppet marked Mitchell’s identity as an innovator and explorer, as a master 
kindergarten designer with advanced cutting and taping skills, as a peer men-
tor who would teach these skills to other kindergartners, as a fan of a cartoon 
series that features humor and parody of adults, and as a SpongeBob character 
animator and puppeteer. In more ways than one, it was a sign of his learning 
(Kress, this volume).
Participation in Classroom Apprenticeships and Discourses of Schooling
In this classroom context, social positions reflected a hierarchy of power rela-
tions based on the children’s relative design and academic skills within the 
classroom apprenticeship and within peer culture. In the classroom, design 
skills constituted cultural capital valued in kindergarten curricula and school 
habitus as evidence of fine motor skills, neatly crafted products, and an abil-
ity to work independently. Among Just Guys, Mitchell occupied a position 
as an innovative designer and an active mentor who often helped other boys 
copy one of his designs; in contrast, Jack was a competent designer who usually 
worked alone and critiqued but rarely coached other children. Whether Just 
Guys created or copied designs, they used design practices for social purposes, 
developing and honing skills in order to compete and be recognized as group 


262  Karen E. Wohlwend
members. Due to school-mandated structures like the visual screen, Stephen 
had far fewer opportunities to develop design skills, limiting his participation 
in the Just Guys group. Indeed, the accommodations intended to help him to 
master skills curb his development of a more robust semiotic repertoire and his 
access to peer coaching.
In this kindergarten, developmental and multimodal perspectives ensured 
that playful exploration was valued and encouraged; however, in many time-
crunched classrooms where skill mastery discourse dominates in this stan-
dards-driven era, playing around with design is discouraged or penalized 
as off-task behavior. In such classrooms, play and design only occur in the 
cracks and crevices of the daily schedule, outside teacher surveillance. When 
one discourse overwhelms others, critical multimodal analysis can reveal who 
is disadvantaged and how this is accomplished through a gesture, a look, or 
the arrangement of furniture. A reconceptualization of learning as expansion 
of semiotic repertoires and discursive participation recognizes that children 
engage complicated mixes of meanings, modes, and practices through ordi-
nary classroom materials and projects–even those created just for practice. 
Learning repertoires—including play and design practices—flexibly employ 
semiotic resources for their cultural meanings, physical properties, and design 
affordances to represent ideas but also to negotiate overlapping educational 
discourses and navigate classroom social spaces. Whether played or designed, 
the complexity of children’s interactions with plastic forks, paper sack pup-
pets, and other multimodal texts suggests the need for multimodal analysis 
that closely examines artifacts in their sites of production and interpretation 
in order to read these sites for their layered assemblages of meanings, modes, 
practices, histories, and discourses.
The critical multimodal analysis described in this chapter offers a way to 
focus on particular aspects of the seemingly aimless and often chaotic activity 
of children’s play and tease out discourses circulating in the background. This 
action-oriented approach to multimodal analysis differs from other approaches 
in three ways: 1) Many forms of social semiotic multimodal analysis focus on 
readings of images and artifacts for strategic uses of modes; critical multimodal 
analysis focuses on the unfolding of interactions in contexts. This is especially 
helpful when studying young children’s play that is fleeting and gestural or their 
designs that fluidly morph from one idea to the next. 2) Some social semiotic 
analyses focus primarily on one mode in terms of its modal grammars (e.g., 
reading images in terms of visual grammar and the layout of design elements); 
critical multimodal analysis focuses on multiple modes and the ways they 
interact to produce tensions, blurrings, and resonances. Early childhood class-
rooms are often busy, noisy, and wonderfully messy sites of modal interaction. 
3) Finally, some forms of interactional analysis unpack modes to provide rich 
descriptions of communicative practices; critical multimodal analysis unpacks 
modes to reveal how modal interaction maps onto discursively maintained 
power relations. In this way, tacit power relations that shape daily classroom 
activity are made visible and available for deconstruction. 


Mapping Modes in Children’s Play and Design  263
Critical multimodal analysis of the modes in the SpongeBob episode 
revealed the ways that power relations and discourses kept Mitchell at the 
center and Stephen at the periphery of the classroom community. Mitchell 
was able to negotiate tensions between multimodal and developmental per-
spectives that enabled his design exploration and a skills mastery perspective 
that kept Stephen “on task” but prevented collaboration with the other boys. 
These tensions between educational discourses in early childhood classrooms 
are long-standing and deeply ingrained. Early childhood teachers find them-
selves squeezed “between a rock and a hard place” (Goldstein, 1997) when 
their efforts to encourage multimodal learning in developmentally appro-
priate ways conflict with administrative mandates for scripted lessons, skills 
benchmarks, and testing targets. Faced with these dilemmas, teachers often 
feel personally responsible and question their own teaching ability rather than 
turning the lens back to question which institutions and groups benefit by 
competing educational discourses and practices. Elsewhere, I have argued that 
such dilemmas signal critical sites for teacher choice and agency that afford 
strategic shifts toward resistance and critique (Wohlwend, 2009a). A clear 
understanding of tensions across multiple perspectives could help teachers 
to see discourses as resources and to act strategically with greater awareness. 
Critical multimodal analysis provides a way for early childhood teachers to see 
how the tangible everyday aspects of familiar classroom activity matter; how 
playing plumber in the housekeeping corner or cutting tape for a paper sack 
puppet link to discourses and power relations that operate in the background; 
and how making small changes in the arrangement of furniture, in the avail-
ability of modes and media, and in daily classroom interactions could make a 
big difference in children’s opportunities to learn.
Notes
1 For the purposes of teasing out practices and supporting mediated actions for close 
analysis in this study, I used the term design to refer to practices that produce images 
and artifacts and the term writing to refer to practices that produce printed or hand-
written text. However, in lived lives, the boundaries are blurred as texts, images, and 
artifacts all constitute multimodal texts. I also intend my use of the term design to be 
consistent with social semiotic deﬁ
 nitions (Kress, 1997; New London Group, 1996) 
in which (D)esign refers to planful action that appropriates conventions and recon-
ﬁ
 gures power relations.
2 It is important to remember that although modes are useful heuristics, lived experi-
ence is inextricably multimodal (Norris, 2004) and messy in ways that analysis and 
discourse can only approximate. Modes are grouped loosely here to suggest a range of 
experience but modes are not discrete units. Rather, they overlap multiple categories. 
In Norris’s scheme, print is a “disembodied” mode that could be categorized as an 
environmental mode and also as a visual one.
3 The boys’ design cooperation and competition also produced gender exclusion and 
peer group cohesion. A discussion that situates this group in gender and sports fan 
discourses is the focus of another article (Wohlwend, 2008).
4 This analysis focuses on three educational discourses, overlooking the multiple 
discourses that circulate in any given place. For example, the plentiful and easily 


264  Karen E. Wohlwend
accessible supplies also convey an expectation to liberally consume material goods 
consistent with discourses of neoliberal consumerism. Further, the boys-only group 
drew upon discourses of masculinity and gendered models of sports fandom that 
played out in tensions between competition and cooperation as well as inclusive and 
exclusive peer group relations (See Wohlwend, 2008).
References
Albright, J., & Luke, A. (Eds.). (2008). Pierre Bourdieu and literacy education. New York: 
Routledge.
Bloome, D., Carter, S. P., Christian, B. M., Otto, S., & Shuart-Faris, N. (2004). Discourse 
analysis and the study of classroom language and literacy events: A microethnographic 
perspective. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Bourdieu, P. (1977). Outline of a theory of practice. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge Uni-
versity Press.
Brandt, D., & Clinton, K. (2002). Limits of the local: Expanding perspectives on literacy 
as a social practice. Journal of Literacy Research, 34(3), 337–356.
Bredekamp, S., & Copple, C. (Eds.). (1997). Developmentally appropriate practice in 
early childhood programs. Washington, DC: National Association for the Education 
of Young Children.
Dyson, A. H. (2003). The brothers and sisters learn to write: Popular literacies in childhood 
and school cultures. New York: Teachers College Press.
Engeström, Y. (1999). Activity theory and individual and social transformation. In Y. 
Engeström, R. Miettinen, & R.-L. Punamäki (Eds.), Perspectives on activity theory 
(Learning in doing: Social, cognitive and computational perspectives) (pp. 19–38). Cam-
bridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Foucault, M. (1995). Discipline and punish: The birth of the prison. New York: Random 
House.
Gee, J. P. (1996). Social linguistics and literacies: Ideology in discourses (2nd ed.). London: 
RoutledgeFalmer.
Gee, J. P. (1999). An introduction to discourse analysis: Theory and method. London: 
Routledge.
Goldstein, L. S. (1997). Between a rock and a hard place in the primary grades: The 
challenge of providing developmentally appropriate early childhood education in an 
elementary school setting. Early Childhood Research Quarterly, 12(1), 3–27.
Hodge, R., & Kress, G. (1988). Social semiotics. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University 
Press.
Jewitt, C. (2006). Technology, literacy and learning: A multimodal approach. London: 
Routledge.
Jewitt, C., & Kress, G. (Eds.). (2003). Multimodal literacy. New York: Peter Lang.
Kress, G. (1997). Before writing: Rethinking the paths to literacy. London: 
Routledge.
Kress, G. (2003). Perspectives on making meaning: The differential principles and 
means of adults and children. In N. Hall, J. Larson & J. Marsh (Eds.), Handbook of 
Early Childhood Literacy (pp. 154–166). London: Sage.
Kress, G. (2009). What is mode? In C. Jewitt (Ed.), The Routledge handbook of multi-
modal analysis (pp. 54–67). London: Sage.
Kress, G., & van Leeuwen, T. (1996). Reading images: The grammar of visual design. 
London: Routledge.


Mapping Modes in Children’s Play and Design  265
Lave, J., & Wenger, E. (1991). Situated learning: Legitimate peripheral participation. 
Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Leont’ev, A. N. (1977). Activity and consciousness, philosophy in the USSR, problems of 
dialectical materialism. Moscow: Progress Publishers.
Loughlin, C. E., & Martin, M. D. (1987). Supporting literacy: Developing effective learning 
environments. New York: Teachers College Press.
NCLB [No child left behind]: Closing the achievement gap in America’s public schools. 
(2002). U.S. Department of Education. Retrieved October 7, 2010, from http://www.
ed.gov/nclb/overview/welcome/closing/index.html
Nelson, M. E., Hull, G. A., & Roche-Smith, J. (2008). Taking, and mistaking, the show 
on the road: Challenges of multimedia self-presentation. Written Communication, 
25(4), 415–440.
New London Group. (1996). A pedagogy of multiliteracies: Designing social futures. 
Harvard Educational Review, 66(1), 60–93.
Norris, S. (2004). Analyzing multimodal Interaction: A methodological framework. Lon-
don: Routledge.
Norris, S. (2006). Multiparty interaction: A multimodal perspective on relevance. Dis-
course Studies, 8(3), 401–421.
Norris, S., & Jones, R. H. (2005). Discourse in action: Introducing mediated discourse 
analysis. London: Routledge.
Ochs, E. (1999). Transcription as theory. In A. Jaworski & N. Coupland (Eds.), The dis-
course reader (pp. 168–182). London: Routledge.
Pahl, K. & Rowsell, J. (2007). Sedimented identities in texts: Instances of practice. Read-
ing Research Quarterly, 42(3), 388–404.
Paley, V. G. (2004). A child’s work: The importance of fantasy play. Chicago: University of 
Chicago Press.
Rogoff, B. (1995). Observing sociocultural activity on three planes: participatory appro-
priation, guided participation, and apprenticeship. In J. V. Wertsch, P. del Rio & A. 
Alvarez (Eds.), Sociocultural studies of mind (pp. 139–164). Boston, MA: Cambridge 
University Press.
Rowe, D. W. (2008). Social contracts for writing: Negotiating shared understandings 
about text in the preschool years. Reading Research Quarterly, 43(1), 66–95.
Scollon, R. (2001). Mediated discourse: The nexus of practice. London: Routledge.
Scollon, R., & Scollon, S. W. (2003). Discourses in place. New York: Routledge.
 Scollon, R., & Scollon, S. W. (2004). Nexus analysis: Discourse and the emerging Internet. 
New York: Routledge.
Siegel, M. (2006). Rereading the signs: Multimodal transformations in the field of lit-
eracy research. Language Arts, 84(1), 65–77.
Siegel, M., Kontovourki, S., Schmier, S., & Enriquez, G. (2008). Literacy in motion: A case 
study of a shape-shifting kindergartener. Language Arts, 86(2), 89–98.
van Leeuwen, T. (2008). Discourse and practice: New tools for critical discourse analysis. 
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Vygotsky, L. (1935/1978). Mind in society (A. Luria, M. Lopez-Morillas, & M. Cole, 
Trans.). Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Wertsch, J. V. (1991). Voices of the mind: A sociocultural approach to mediated action. 
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Wodak, R., & Meyer, M. (2009). Critical discourse analysis: History, agenda, theory and 
methodology. In R. Wodak & M. Meyer (Eds.), Methods of critical discourse analysis 
(2nd ed., pp. 1–33). London: Sage.


266  Karen E. Wohlwend
Wohlwend, K. E. (2007). Kindergarten as nexus of practice: A mediated discourse analy-
sis of reading, writing, play, and design practices in an early literacy apprenticeship. 
Unpublished doctoral dissertation, University of Iowa, Iowa City.
Wohlwend, K. E. (2008). Play as a literacy of possibilities: Expanding meanings in prac-
tices, materials, and spaces. Language Arts, 86(2), 127–136.
Wohlwend, K. E. (2009a). Dilemmas and discourses of learning to write: Assessment as 
a contested site. Language Arts, 86(5), 341–351.
Wohlwend, K. E. (2009b). Mapping multimodal literacy practices through mediated 
discourse analysis: Identity revision in “What Not To Wear.” In K. M. Leander, D. W. 
Rowe, R. Jimenez, D. Compton, D. K. Dickinson, Y. Kim, & V. Risko (Eds.), 58th Year-
book of the National Reading Conference (pp. 66–81). San Antonio, TX: National Read-
ing Conference.
Wolfersberger, M. E., Reutzel, D. R., Sudweeks, R., & Fawson, P. C. (2004). Develop-
ing and validating the Classroom Literacy Environmental Profile (CLEP): A tool for 
examining the “print richness” of early childhood and elementary classrooms. Journal 
of Literacy Research, 36(1), 83–144.


13 The Discourses of Education 
 
Management Organizations: 
 
A Political Design
 
Mónica Pini
 
Universidad Nacional de 
 
General San Martín, Argentina
Introduction
Ten years ago, Business Week dedicated its February 10, 2000, issue to “For 
Profit Schools” with reports from Massachusetts, Michigan, Philadelphia, and 
Arizona (Symonds, 2000; Symonds, Palmer, Lindorff, & McCann, 2000). An 
article in Business Week affirmed: “The advent of the knowledge economy, 
combined with mounting dissatisfaction with the dismal state of many pub-
lic schools, is creating vast openings for for-profit companies” (Symonds, 
2000, p. 35). Business Week’s focus on the business of education foreshadowed 
the growing trend of privatizing public education through allocating public 
resources to private markets. The most well-known privatization initiatives are 
voucher programs, charter schools, and educational management organiza-
tions (EMOs). Voucher programs provide dollars directly to families so that 
they may select a religious or private school of their choice. Charter schools 
became public-private hybrids since they are publicly funded and privately 
managed, increasingly through EMOs. EMOs administer and manage schools 
for a profit. Because of the strong support given to charters and to partnerships 
with business from both political parties, the number of for-profit EMOs and 
the number of states in which EMOs are operating has increased over the past 
10 years. Besides, lately, “while the actual number of companies has remained 
relatively stable . . . many of the large and medium-sized EMOs are expand-
ing into new service areas, such as supplemental education services” (Molnar, 
Miron, & Urschel, 2009). 
The growing phenomenon of EMOs sparked my interest because EMOs are 
changing the essential nature of public education in the United States. Addi-
tionally, the politics and policies of education in the United States constitute 
one of the bases for anticipating the school reform trends in Latin America. The 
increase of educational corporate management in the United States marks a 
world trend, because corporate strategies originate in the “advanced” countries 
and subsequently are transferred to “developing countries” (Stocker, Waitzkin, 
& Iriart, 1999; Torres & Puiggrós 1997). For these reasons, I designed a study 
This chapter is based on my book: Escuelas charter y empresas: un discurso que vende, Buenos Aires: 
Miño y Davila, 2003.


268  Mónica Pini
that examined the websites of major EMOs to analyze the ways in which they 
represented themselves (Pini, 2000). In this chapter, I return to my analysis, 10 
years later, asking: How do EMOs design their images, build relations and attract 
consumers and, in turn, shape what is understood and experienced as public 
education? Along the way, I reflect on the changes that have occurred in the web-
sites, although a comparison across time is not the major focus of this chapter. 
The Discourses of Privatization 
The “manufactured crisis” (Berliner & Biddle, 1995) of public education that 
EMOs have exploited is representative of the attack on public institutions in 
general. In this context, and especially in light of the social problems that urban 
schools face, the promise of privatization appeared in many cases to be a magic 
solution. However, privatization masks the real for-profit nature of EMO 
activities, silences the contradictions involved in for-profit enterprises operat-
ing public services, and plays down the tensions between quality education for 
all and efficiency.
Educational management organization (EMO) is the name coined by the 
investment community to name the for-profit, private companies that manage 
schools. Businesspeople and investors have viewed education as an open field 
in which to expand their opportunities. “They think that the technological and 
political problems confronting education today are similar to those faced by 
the health-care industry twenty years ago [health maintenance organizations 
(HMOs) were the answer], and they are proposing a similar solution: privatiza-
tion” (Furtwengler, 1998, p. 45). With nearly 50 million students (K-12), and 
an estimated $543 billion a year in revenues (NCES, 2010; $300 billion in 1999), 
education is big business in the United States, which is why business maga-
zines and newspapers publish more information and show more interest in this 
phenomenon than educational journals. For EMOs, education is just like any 
other industry: to make a profit they have to attract consumers and lower costs. 
As an “education analyst” tells Business Week: “The major competitor is the 
government,” because “education is the last big bastion of the economy largely 
controlled by the government” (Symonds, 2000, p. 35). 
As with public health management in the 1980s and 1990s (Stocker et al., 
1999), privatization of schools involves the corporate management of schools. 
In fact, Molnar (1996) has documented that corporate involvement in the 
schools actually started in the 1980s. He points out that the publication of A 
Nation at Risk in 1983 (U.S. Department of Education) raised interest in priva-
tization because of the catastrophic diagnosis it promoted with respect to public 
education. Molnar describes the origin and development of those corporations 
that ﬁ
 rst identiﬁ
 ed public schools as a good investment for venture capital. 
He also explores the connection between these corporations and conservative 
politicians and foundations. 
I view the corporate management of public education in a double sense: as 
a phenomenon in itself and as a vehicle to understand the larger ideological 


The Discourses of EMOs  269
context in which corporate practices develop. Corporate discourses are per-
suasive because they influence people’s perceptions of reality, what Gramsci 
(1977) called their “common sense.” Private companies present themselves 
as being able to offer that which education has seemingly lost: 1) in manage-
rial terms, high quality and efficiency; and 2) in political terms, credibility and 
legitimacy.
Different forms of privatization, some of them hidden (Burch, 2009), lead to 
the expansion of the market at the expense of social equity, but what has grown 
in education is far from a “free market.”1 One example of the ideological misuse 
of the notion of “freedom” is market advocates’ off-repeated slogan that “a free 
market will bring democracy to all,” omitting the fact that the means to acquire 
goods is not equally distributed in society. 
Charter schools are politically more palatable to the public than school 
vouchers, because they are public, avoid the state-church controversy, claim 
to address student needs, and provide schools with waivers from district rules. 
Given the flexibility and, at times, ambiguity of state laws (Pini, 2000) that have 
been created in part through corporate lobbying (Molnar, 1996), charter regu-
lations are viewed as favorable to for-profit schools in several states. According 
to Symonds (2000), the charter school movement has fueled for-profits, and 
even if most charters are non-profit, the for-profit operators have gained mar-
ket share and grown rapidly.
EMOs represent the corporate culture that functions politically and peda-
gogically to produce consumers instead of citizens. Given this agenda, it is 
worthwhile to reﬂ
 ect on the kind of public education EMOs promote. Two 
competing conceptions of education and society are at the root of the struggle 
for public schools: the view of education as either a public or private good and 
the view of society as either comprising participating citizens in a political sys-
tem or producers and passive consumers in a market system (Anderson, 1998; 
Labaree, 1997).
Education is an arena of controversy in the United States as opposing politi-
cal groups struggle over the meaning of such issues as local decision-making, 
student evaluation through standards and testing, school accountability, and 
parental school choice. In this study, I employ the “quasi-Gramscian view” 
of Fraser (1989) who argues that “struggles over cultural meanings and social 
identities are struggles for cultural hegemony, that is, for the power to construct 
authoritative definitions of social situations and legitimate interpretations of 
social needs” (p. 6). 
The consequences of market-oriented discourse-practices are policies that 
lead to more inequality and segregation (Cobb & Glass, 1999; Frankenberg, 
Siegel-Hawley, & Wang, 2010; Miron, Urschel, Mathis, & Tornquist, 2010; 
Wong & Shen with Novacek, 2001). Research on educational reform in other 
developed countries also suggests that those who most beneﬁ
 t from market 
models are the people who already have choices (Gewirtz, Ball, & Bowe, 1995; 
Patrinos & Ariasingam, 1998; Whitty, Power, & Halpin, 1998). Public schools 
are an essential part of the public sphere that is basic to democracy. Although 


270  Mónica Pini
the boundary between public and private is not always clearly delimited (Buen-
ﬁ
 l Burgos, 1997; Fraser, 1989), by “public” I mean the common terrain that 
constitutes a national community in spite of social antagonisms. The deﬁ
 ning 
characteristic of “public” is universal access to institutions or services without 
discrimination, including the enforcement of administrative regulations that 
support equal access. 
Research Design and Methodology
In this study, I examine the appropriation and representation of public educa-
tion through a critical discourse analysis of the EMOs’ websites and associated 
texts. My analytic method is based on critical discourse analysis (Chouliaraki 
& Fairclough, 1999; Fairclough, 1989, 1995; Mouffe, 1993; Torfing, 1999; van 
Dijk 1985, 1997; Vermehren, 1997), and multimodal analysis (Jewitt & Kress, 
2003; Kress & Van Leeuwen, 1996; Kress, Leite-García & Van Leeuwen, 1997) 
including some elements of what Foucault has termed genealogy (Anderson & 
Grinberg, 1998; Foucault, 1995; Grinberg & Saavedra, 2000). Given the com-
plexity of this analysis and the insufficient development of specific categories 
to analyze multimodal advertising-educational texts, social semiotics was espe-
cially useful because, from its perspective, language and image work together to 
transmit information (Kress et al., 1997). I use the tools that discourse analysis 
provides to deconstruct “marketization” and “corporatization” of education 
as regimes of truth and as an attempt to symbolically colonize the “public.” 
Critical discourse analysis is one of the best tools we have for identifying power 
relationships and ideology in and behind discursive practices.
I have divided the analysis into two levels. The first level is concerned with 
providing a detailed description and analysis of the visual and verbal features 
of the companies’ websites. I chose to analyze the EMOs’ websites because they 
are the principal vehicles through which the companies advertise. The online 
information is detailed, extended, and continuously updated. From the per-
spective of social semiotics every design is a discourse, because designs involve 
communicative competences and strategies. According to Kress and van Leeu-
wen (1996), the concept of design is midway between content and expression; 
it is the conceptual side of expression and the expressive side of conception. For 
these authors, designs are the (use of) semiotic resources in all modes and com-
binations of semiotic modes. But designs also add something new in that they 
change socially constructed knowledge into social (inter-) action. Figurative 
designs are used to satisfy or seduce the public. In this sense they have a rhetori-
cal function, because a defining characteristic of rhetoric is persuasion. 
The second and deeper level of my analysis involves the interpretation and 
explanation of EMOs’ discourse-practices in their social contexts. According 
to Cherriholmes (1988), “no firm, stable, clear, unequivocal distinction can 
be drawn between discourse and practice . . . Discourse, a more or less orderly 
exchange of ideas, is a particular kind of practice, and practice is, at least in 
part, discursive meanings flow back and forth from what is said to what is 


The Discourses of EMOs  271
done, from ourselves to the world” (pp. 8–9). Discourse-practices involve both 
textual and iconic semiotic designs. Paraphrasing Cherriholmes, interpreting 
texts and images in the websites as discourse-practices implies moving from 
what is written/showed to what is not written/showed and back again, “from 
what is present to what is absent, from statements to their historical setting” 
(p. 8). Written language is only one element in the discourse, and it has to be 
read together with all the other semiotic modes, because producers of texts are 
making greater and more deliberate use of a range of representational and com-
municational modes which co-occur within the text (Kress, Leite-García, & van 
Leeuwen, 1997). The intertextuality of discourses and practices with the previ-
ous written and social texts that corporate discourse draws on establishes which 
presuppositions or assumptions are taken for granted and constitutes the social 
and educational world of the EMOs.
Since the EMOs’ institutional communication is a kind of “marketing” (see 
below), I analyzed them as a form of advertising. Following Fairclough (1989), 
the use of vocabulary and imagery in discourse conforms to familiar advertising 
strategies that are usually used by companies to build relations, images, and con-
sumers. Building relations involves personalizing the communication and/or the 
product, but owing to the impersonal and mediated conditions of advertising 
discourse, companies use synthetic personalization, a “compensatory tendency 
to give the impression of treating each of the people ‘handled’ en masse as an 
individual” (p. 62). Companies build images as an ideological construct through 
visual and verbal cues and through association between the characteristics of the 
product and a lifestyle. Allusions such as “world-class” education and “a new 
kind of public school” (see below) are closely related to positive values, and they 
are social representations of success and transformation. The idea of building 
consumers has to do with characterizing the consumers and making the prod-
uct fit their needs or creating the needs according to presupposed values, what 
Fairclough calls naturalized common sense. In the case of education, it is a com-
munity of parents preoccupied with their children’s education and future, as 
well as administrators and policy makers. EMOs provide consistent and attrac-
tive models for consumer needs, values, and behavior. Companies build images, 
relations and consumers through particular discursive strategies, such as:
• 
Rhetorical function of design and vocabulary; rhetoric is a means to influ-
ence the public in general or somebody in particular through forms of dis-
course: 1) that are not subject to objective verification, and 2) in which no 
threat of violence or harm is involved. It aspires to make something more 
attractive (Sexe, 2001);
• 
Synthetic personalization; mostly achieved through conversational styles 
and the use of personal pronouns, and emotional situations intended to 
appeal to people (Fairclough, 1989); 
• 
Presenting ideas as universal, what Barthes calls exnomination2 and Fair-
clough naturalization;
• 
Pretending neutrality and objectivity;


272  Mónica Pini
• 
Appealing to emotions and the trustworthy character of the companies to 
mask defective reasoning; 
• 
Argumentation techniques; discourses by necessity state certain proposi-
tions intended to justify the author’s claims (Van Eemeren, Grootendorst, 
Jackson, & Jacobs, 1997); 
• 
Persuasion techniques; the three classic necessary conditions for persua-
sion to be successful are: 1) appealing to people’s emotions, 2) giving a 
good impression of the author of the discourse, or 3) proving the truth of 
the statements made (Harré, 1985);
• 
Silences, negations and presuppositions, interpreted through intertextual-
ity, a property related to the dialogic and the historical character of the texts 
(Fairclough, 1989). 
These discursive strategies serve on the one hand to create an attractive image 
of EMOs and on the other hand to produce negative definitions of “traditional 
public schools”:3 herein lies their ideological thrust. Some of the above catego-
ries apply as well to the analysis of corporations’ discourse-practices.
Once I selected the EMOs and exhaustively read the pages and other infor-
mation about the companies, I started coding data in various ways. I made a 
table with information about their size and location. In a second table I com-
pared webpage designs according to a series of categories I considered relevant 
since I did not find more precise literature on this kind of analysis (see Table 
13.2). I also compared companies’ homepages, the first view offered to the web-
reader/audience. Once I established the range of discursive strategies through 
phrases, words, visual and textual design, etc., I prepared classification tables for 
each company containing the various dimensions that contributed to build 
image, relations, and consumers. Last, I contrasted and compared the data 
within and between companies, as well as consulting research studies, reports, 
and laws. 
The Sample of Companies
I focus on the texts released by four of the biggest for-proﬁ
 t educational manage-
ment organizations that manage American public schools. The sample is purpose-
ful, theoretically oriented, and includes the companies that have been marketed 
in public education for more than 10 years (Pini, 2001, 2003; Molnar et al., 2009). 
They are: Edison (http://www.edisonlearning.com/), The Leona Group, L.L.C. 
(http://www.leonagroup.com/), Mosaica Education (http://mosaicaeducation.
com/), and National Heritage Academies (http://heritageacademies.com/). 
Data consist of selected corporate texts, primarily EMO webpages and other 
relevant documents. Secondary sources such as state charter school laws and 
enrollment figures helped to provide a socio-historical context. I begin by iden-
tifying the companies, the number of schools that each of them operates, their 
enrollment, and in which states their schools are located, to give an idea of 
the scale and distribution of the organization and operations. After this brief 


The Discourses of EMOs  273
background, I examine the information that each EMO gives about itself, 
describing the design of each company’s presentation. 
Table 13.1 summarizes some of the information about these companies pro-
vided by the Eleventh Report on EMOs (Molnar et al., 2009). The last line of 
Table 13.1 shows speciﬁ
 c public information that companies provide about 
themselves, retrieved online.
In my previous research (Pini, 2001), Michigan was the only state where all 
four companies operated public schools, and several other companies operated 
schools there as well. Nowadays three of them also operate in Colorado and Indi-
ana, and all of them manage many schools in Ohio. EMOs generally choose states 
that have “strong” charter school laws. This means that there is a high expendi-
tures per student, few caps on the number of charter schools that can exist, and 
an environment that is politically friendly to charter schools (Pini, 2001, 2003).
The Visual and Textual Design of the Websites 
The content of the EMOs’ webpages is only part of their effectiveness. Visual 
and textual stimuli are powerful tools that attract and convince parents to send 
Table 13.1 Number of Schools, States, and Enrollment of the Selected Companies
 
Edison Learning 
The Leona  
Mosaica 
National
 
 
Group, L. L. C. 
Education 
Heritage
 
 
 
 
Academies
Number of  
62 in 16 states 
67 schools in 6 
33 schools 
57 schools in 6
schools and  
 
states 
in 8 states  
states
states 
 
 
 
States where 
CA, CO, GA, IA, IL, AZ, FL, IN, LA, 
AZ, CA,  
CO, IN, MI, 
they operate 
IN, LA, MD, MI,  
MI, OH 
CO, GA,  
NC, NY, OH
 
MN, MO,NV, NY,  
 
DC, IL, MI, 
 
OH, PA, WI 
 
OH, PA
Enrollment 
37,574 
18,577 
10,163 
36,737
What  
In the 2008–2009 
Currently,  
Mosaica 
This passion
EMOs say 
school year,   
more than 
currently 
has taken us
 
Edison Learning  
20,000 students 
serves 
from one
 
will serve over  
are enrolled in 
more than 
school in 1995
 
350,000 students  
nearly 70 Leona 
11,000 
to partnerships
 
in 24 states and the  
Group schools  
students in 
with boards at
 
United Kingdom,  
in Arizona,  
over 40 
61 schools in
 
through 120 school  
Florida, Indiana, elementary 
six states,
 
partnerships and in  Michigan, and 
and middle 
serving over
 
programs that are  
Ohio. 
school 
38,000
 
provided in  
 
programs in students
 
hundreds of 
 
seven states 
and families.
 
additional buildings.  
and the 
 
 
 
District of 
 
 
 
Columbia.


274  Mónica Pini
their children to the school. EMOs are constantly applying and recreating strat-
egies borrowed from the advertising business. Sophistication of designs, qual-
ity and quantity of pages, sections, links, drawings, pictures, and videos vary 
among the companies sites. It is important to note that all of the companies 
have more sophisticated designs than they had 10 years ago. Edison, for exam-
ple, had two interconnected sites in 2009: Edison Schools and Edison Learning. 
Since February 8, 2010, Edison Learning is the only webpage that opens, and 
Table 13.2 Main Features of EMOs Webpages
Features 
Edison 
Leona Group 
Mosaica 
National 
 
Learning 
 
 
Heritage
 
 
 
 
Academies
Design & 
Light blue and 
Dark blue, gray, 
Blue and red 
Green on white.
Colors 
white. Link 
and orange on 
on white 
Links on light
 
to its blog. 
white background. 
background. 
gray and sand.
Sections 
About us;  
Home; Our 
Home; About 
About NHA; 
 
Our offerings; 
Services; Our 
Mosaica;  
Our Schools;
 
Proven Results; 
Schools; Our 
Career; 
Parents; 
 
Resource room; 
Philosophy; 
Contact us; 
Students;
 
News and events; About Us; 
School Locator; 
Careers;
 
Join our team; 
Career with us; 
Our Pillars; 
Home;
 
Contact us 
Contact Us 
Success Stories; 
Contact Us;
 
 
 
Vendors;  
Apply Now
 
 
 
Paragon 
Type of 
Colloquial, 
Colloquial, 
Formal, clear. 
Colloquial,
Language appealing in the 
appealing in the 
Pointing out 
using the first
 
front page,  
front page, more 
leadership, 
person of the
 
more formal in 
formal in the 
innovation and 
plural. Focus
 
the rest. Short 
rest. Short texts. 
success. Using 
on quality,
 
texts. Using the 
Using the third 
the third 
success and
 
third person 
person singular. 
person singular. 
moral.
 
singular. 
 
 
Videos 
None 
Owner and 
None 
Short
 
 
staff testimony 
 
institutional 
 
 
 
 
documentary 
 
 
 
 
emphasis on 
 
 
 
 
personalized 
 
 
 
 
education
Pictures 
Beautiful big  
Big changing 
Changing 
Seven big
 
picture.  
pictures on 
pictures on top 
changing
 
Graphics 
top and smaller 
distributed in an 
pictures on
 
 
ones distributed 
informal way. 
top, each one
 
 
on page. 
 
appearing with
 
 
 
 
a different 
 
 
 
 
movement 
 
 
 
 
design and a 
 
 
 
 
different text 
 
 
 
 
on the right.


The Discourses of EMOs  275
it is not possible to access the old one. Table 13.2 presents a synthesis of the 
features that I will briefly describe for each of the EMO websites below: design, 
sections, number of pages, language, video, and pictures.
Edison
At the top of Edison’s front page (http://www.edisonlearning.com/), on the 
left corner, was the company trademark Edison Schools® and the phrase “A 
World-class Education for Every Child.” The structure was rectangular in ver-
tical position, with links to the sections on the left margin and on the superior 
margin, under a two-part block of images. The images showed, from left to 
right, a picture with students and teachers at work, and a picture after a ﬂ
 eeting 
sign “The faces of Edison,” with another box on the left, a ﬂ
 ower with the leg-
end “Click photo to play.” The pictures change with each link, and the picture 
on the right becomes a video where someone—principal, teacher, student—
speaks well about Edison Schools.
The language was formal, repetitive, and presented in short texts. The design 
and the language suggested a high level of expertise in the work of design. There 
were many sections (see Table 13. 2) with a high quantity and variety of links. It 
was the longest and most complete website of all the companies I analyzed. 
A picture showed African American teachers and African American students 
in class and, on the left, the video with teachers talking enthusiastically. Another 
picture showed three diverse students. When one clicked on the link “Char-
ter Schools,” the new site opened, showing a beautiful picture of an African 
American girl in the center, and another student, a boy, less visible, in the back. 
Diversity is one of Edison’s stated principles, promoted through the pictures 
that accompany the texts. The webpage of Edison Learning, the new one, shows 
similar diversity, with diverse students smiling and working in a friendly envi-
ronment, just like Edison used to show in the 2000 site (Edison Schools, 2000; 
Edison Schools, 2001). One difference is that the language is less formal, using 
the inclusive pronoun “we” to personalize communication. Instead of texts 
that depict abundant technological resources, nowadays Edison presents texts 
that talk more about schools’ designs and developing leaders (Edison Learning, 
2010). The current site no longer includes a link for investors but does include 
a new link called “Resources for Academics.” 


276  Mónica Pini
body used in science class and an African American or Latino child writing 
on the blackboard; another working on his desk; a group of students gradu-
ating; more groups of racially diverse students enjoying seemingly friendly 
relationships; and a blond child with a young teacher (Leona Group, 2010). 
The elements included in the pictures portray diversity, students at work, and 
enjoyment of learning. In spite of the intended diversity, all the teachers on the 
front page are White.
The language is colloquial, appealing, and personalized in the front page, 
using the first person singular and plural; more formal in the rest of the doc-
ument. On the right margin we find at the top four links: Leona Corporate, 
Arizona Region, Florida Region, and Midwest Region, each one going to more 
sections. Below it is a searcher for schools that ask for the zip code, a link to sub-
scribe for news and updates, a picture-video of Dr. Bill Coats, without telling 
who is he, as if he does not need any introduction, and finally a series of news 
items with small pictures. 
Mosaica
Mosaica’s website has a simple design. Its logo is an icon of a Greek academia 
(http://mosaicaeducation.com/). Its colors are blue and red on white back-
ground. It has changing pictures on the top of the front page, distributed in 
an informal way. The pictures show diverse students and various elements for 
class work (pencils, notebook, blackboard). 
A big icon represents “the pillars” (of Mosaica). The front page is simple and 
divided in three columns. The left column has the links for the different sec-
tions; the middle one, the most visible, shows a brief text under the title “Open-
ing portals of opportunities,” and news under it; the right column is dedicated 
to Paragon, Mosaica’s Curriculum, under the title “Propelled by Paragon,” and 
in the bottom, PARAGON™ “A World of Ideas That Makes a World of Differ-
ence.” PARAGON is also one important section that links to the front page and 
it is the only section that has images in its six subsections (Mosaica Education, 
2010). 
The language is formal, clear, and professional, pointing out leadership, 
innovation, and success, using the third person singular. This site has more text 
and fewer images compared to the others, and no videos. Mosaica chose a more 
academic-political style. Private management of public schools and Mosaica’s 
educational model are the priorities revealed by this company’s website. 
National Heritage Academies
The National Heritage Academies website uses green color on white back-
ground (http://heritageacademies.com/). Its design is much more dynamic and 
less formal than it was 10 years ago. The links on the top of the front page are 
light grey and the last two on the right top corner (Contact Us and Apply Now) 
are sand colored. It has seven big changing pictures on top, each one appearing 


The Discourses of EMOs  277
with a different movement design and a different text on the right side (Figure 
13.1). Its language is colloquial, using the first person the plural and the focus is 
on quality, success and moral. The eight sections have links to one another and 
to pages within sections. 
The larger pictures show racially diverse students smiling and working in 
class, particularly African American students with White teachers (National 
Heritage Academies, 2010). The scenes in the pictures appear to have been 
carefully selected by Heritage to reinforce the text content: diversity (although 
there are no African American teachers), motivated students, satisﬁ
 ed parents, 
order, values, personalized attention and teaching, and a comfortable learning 
environment. 
On the left, under the title “See what makes NHA unique,” a picture that 
shows a student going into the school becomes a short institutional documen-
tary with an emphasis on personalized education. The picture includes also a 
welcome sign with the name of the girl/boy who is the protagonist of the video. 
Parent testimonials can be seen also in video with the name of each one: Pat 
Schemmel, Sandra Mathews. There are also signed texts by parents talking about 
their sons’ and daughters’ good experiences at school. One of them emphasizes 
that it is great education for free: “All of our priorities for our daughters offered 
at no cost!” There are also students’ testimonies presented with a picture on a 
blackboard where each of them has written and drawn his/her thoughts and 
feelings about the school and the teacher with chalk.
Common Elements in the Design of the Sites
The pages described above have several elements in common. All of them have 
introductions to themselves, lists and locators of schools operated by the com-
panies, and detailed descriptions of their schools, curriculum, organization, 
management, and services, careers, or job openings. Two of them have added 
videos with testimonies and most of them have links to the webpage of each 
school. 
A section about “Careers” is more important now than it was 10 years before. 
It has this title in NHA and Mosaica website, “Join our team” in Edison, and 
“Career with us” in The Leona Group. They show not just the description of 
positions available at each school or at the company headquarters, but a com-
plete description of benefits and professional development for the best teachers 
and employees. All the EMO webpages have “Contact Us” as a separate section, 
and some, like Edison, offer information for business development. All of them 
have a section for news in which they emphasize new schools, company growth 
or success, and student improvement.
The use of “inclusive” pronoums like “we” and “our,” by all the companies 
but Mosaica, is designed to communicate a sense of the company being a part of 
local communities, sharing the dreams and interests of parents and educators.
Beyond the information mentioned above, two of the companies, Mosaica 
and Heritage, have a section devoted to answering frequently asked questions 


278  Mónica Pini
related to charter schools. Here one can see examples of what Fairclough (1995) 
calls “the promotional function of informative language” (p. 150). He argues 
that there is an ambivalence in many contemporary texts in which it is not clear 
whether the meaning or the effect of the text is primary. While all of the EMOs 
use informative language to promote their goals, Mosaica is the only one that 
has a special section that overtly expresses its ideological position on public 
education reform. In the next section I shall demonstrate how EMOs build an 
ideal image of themselves through their discourses.
The School of Your Dreams
To begin thinking about the public images of the private corporate managers 
of public schools, I analyzed the marketing discourse of the selected EMOs, 
describing the techniques they use to construct an ideal image in order to attract 
consumers. EMOs do this like any other company, but as with food products, it 
is crucial to know if the advertising reflects the quality of the product. Merely 
from the names EMOs have chosen to give themselves, one can see the use of 
a highly suggestive symbolism. The companies’ names in themselves deserve 
attention, because they anticipate most of the ideas transmitted through the 
respective texts. The ideas of light (Edison), strength (Leona), knowledge (Edi-
son), success through diversity (Mosaica), and American values (Heritage) 
advance the self-images developed by private educational companies. Some of 
the EMOs emphasize experience, others excellence, and others “difference” or 
“opportunity.” All the companies stress the “public” character of the schools 
they manage or aspire to manage, and all of them advertise that they operate 
charter schools. As in my previous analysis, Leona is the one that emphasizes 
that there is no tuition for parents, “tuition-free public schools.” NHA expresses 
the same idea through a parent testimony, “at no cost!” and through the second 
item of “Your questions answered”: “How much is tuition? We do not charge 
tuition. NHA is a free, state-funded, public school open to all students.” Just 
one of the EMOs (Mosaica) mentions its profit in the sections for consumers 
(in the third answer of FAQs). Edison cancelled the sections for investors that 
it used to have.
Advertising used to be more explicit than now about the competition between 
EMOs and “traditional” public schools; nowadays most of them emphasize the 
presentation of the best possible image to school board members, parents, stu-
dents, and teachers who may apply for a job. Mosaica is more explicit about its 
ideas related to the failure of public schools as the reason to develop Mosaica, 
dedicating the two first answers to the questions “Why was Mosaica Education 
conceived?” and “Are Mosaica schools more efficient than traditional public 
schools?” in “About Mosaica, FAQs.
They have an incentive to show that they are unique and better than the 
other EMOs that compete for public money. Earlier, I have written (Pini, 2001, 
2003) that the attention to a great image had three other purposes. The first one 
was the struggle for social legitimacy accomplished through: a) emphasizing 


The Discourses of EMOs  279
the “public” character of the schools they manage (charter), b) advocating edu-
cation for all children, and c) showing excellence in achievement and com-
mitment. All of these elements serve to elude the suspicions and criticisms 
awakened by the idea of private profit made from public money. The second 
goal is the race for partnerships (schools and districts). The third goal, related 
to the first two, is the construction of a new common sense based on market 
principles and favoring corporate power in order to change the definition of 
“public.”
Introducing Themselves: The Ideal Virtual Image
Although there are some discernible differences in EMOs’ identity and focus, 
the general message remains the same: private companies are able to educate 
better than traditional public institutions. These for-proﬁ
 t companies manag-
ing public education transmit a central idea—that they are excellent, different, 
enhanced. They achieve this through the evocative images and rhetoric of their 
presentation. On Edison’s frontpage (2010), the most visible text on the left 
says, “We share your passion for learning. For achievement. For giving every 
child a world class education,” and the name of that page is “Working together 
for student success.” The Leona Group, L.L.C. (2010), deﬁ
 nes itself as “A new 
kind of public school” and, also at the frontpage, it starts personalizing its iden-
tity: 
Who is Leona? 
I am a teacher, highly qualiﬁ
 ed and innovative.
I am a student, excelling in a structured and caring environment. 
I am a parent, supported, welcomed and involved. 
I am a leader, passionate about improving education in urban areas.
I am a free public charter school, innovative, accountable and achieving.
I AM THE LEONA GROUP.
Mosaica Education (2010) says: “Opening Portals of Opportunities.” National 
Heritage Academies (2010) declares “Our purpose: Challenging each child to 
achieve . . . Our vision: To better educate more children.”
Yet those concerned with education may ask the questions: Different from 
what? New and better in what ways? What kind of opportunities and for whom? 
One can find the EMOs’ answers in the same texts by paying attention to what 
they imply: different from traditional public schools; new in contrast to the 
traditional (meaning public school) curriculum; enhanced management and 
teaching compared to public schools; good for children, parents, community, 
teachers, and a country “damaged” by “failing” public education. 
Metaphors play a very important role in communication. As Postman 
(1985) wrote, “Our media are our metaphors. Our metaphors create the con-
tent of our culture” (Postman, 1985, p. 15). The metaphors used by EMOs are 
strong and attractive, but the image they present contradicts their practices: 


280  Mónica Pini
the masked interest in profit, connections with powerful conservative interests, 
and the similarity with other “successful” corporate forms of appropriating 
public goods such as health maintenance organizations (HMOs). 
Edison Learning
Edison is the oldest of the EMOs I examined. It uses language derived from the 
world of business to introduce itself, touting its expertise, philosophy, prod-
ucts, and expansion:
EdisonLearning works with educators and communities to improve public 
schools and boost student performance . . . Our expertise and the value we 
bring to clients results from over 17 years’ experience not only servicing but 
operating public schools in collaboration with districts, boards, and other 
authorities with whom we partner . . . These governing principles inform 
all of our products and enable our success, whether a sixty-hour Learning 
Force™ tutoring program, an Alliance™ school improvement engagement, 
or a fully operational school design . . . In the 2008–2009 school year, Edi-
sonLearning will serve over 350,000 students in 24 states and the United 
Kingdom, through 120 school partnerships and in programs that are pro-
vided in hundreds of additional buildings. With our educator partners, we 
provide an extensive portfolio of academic services that inspires students 
to think, learn, and succeed. (Edison Learning, 2010)
Edison’s introduction contains allusions to the company experience, and it 
makes clear that it has to offer something different, the mechanism of opera-
tion (contracts), and whom its clientele comprises (local school districts and 
charter boards). 
The story behind Edison is the following: Chris Whittle (Edison founder) 
made a career of making a proﬁ
 t from education. He founded Edison Project 
“to capture some voucher money by designing a conservative and technologi-
cally advanced school that could be franchised across the country” (Spring, 
1997, p. 62). This would allow him to get capital to create a large number of 
private schools for economic proﬁ
 t. His strategy is to save money by reducing 
bureaucracy and teachers and by increasing voluntary work by parents and stu-
dents (Weiss, 1999). When the voucher plans did not pass, he looked for other 
forms of public support through charter schools, starting in Massachusetts and 
Colorado, whose governors contacted Benno Schmidt, Chairman of the Edison 
Board of Directors at that time. 
Whittle also was the owner of Channel One, another proﬁ
 table enterprise 
in the form of an educational tool (Molnar, 1996). Some observers are amazed 
that Whittle tries to attract minorities to his schools because he was instru-
mental in promoting the publication of The Disuniting of America by Arthur 
Schlesinger. According to Spring (1997), Whittle sent free copies of this attack 
on multicultural education to business leaders. Perhaps it is not so surprising, 


The Discourses of EMOs  281
since Schlesinger’s book is pro-assimilation of minorities. This can be consid-
ered consistent with Whittle’s “diverse” Edison Schools, in spite of the racially 
diverse pictures on the website. 
Chris Whittle, Benno C. Schmidt, Jr., and John Chubb, who have headed 
Edison, are advocates for the privatization of public education and, in some 
cases, for principles that place democracy at risk (Chubb & Moe, 1990). Whittle 
offered Benno C. Schmidt Jr., former president of Yale University, an annual 
salary of about one million dollars to head Edison Project (Spring, 1997). Names 
of company chairs have disappeared from the new website. The old one (Edison 
Schools, 2000) had a list of “people behind Edison” that included Reverend Floyd 
Flake, a former Democratic U.S. representative from New York (Walsh, 2001b), 
President of Edison Charter Schools,4 but omitted the name of one of the con-
sultants on the project, Chester Finn, Jr., of the conservative Hudson Institute, a 
former U.S. Department of Education assistant secretary under William Bennett 
(Reagan administration), co-author with Bennett of The Educated Child, presi-
dent of the Thomas B. Fordham Foundation, and member of the board of a new 
Bennett venture, K-12. He was also a member of the transition advisory team for 
the Department of Education during the presidential campaign of George W. 
Bush and has a long career as a scholar backed by a network of foundations that 
advocate right-wing causes (Robelen, 2001; Spring, 1997; Walsh, 2001a). 
Now, under the title “Who we are,” Edison (2010) personalizes itself in a 
more democratic way, through naming members, the use of strongly symbolic 
terms like “people” and “promise,” and pointing to positive emotions like pas-
sion, joy, enthusiasm, energy, associated with supreme goals: improve learning 
at public schools (fulfill the promise), and improve the world: 
Who we are.
 Teacher. Triathlete. Principal. Pilot. District Administrator. Volunteer. 
 EdisonLearning is staffed by passionate professionals whose joyful 
enthusiasm for student learning is matched only by their relentless pursuit 
of it. The shared energy between our employees and our partners is fueled 
by a common goal: to fulﬁ
 ll the promise of public education, and to make 
the world a better place. 
 At EdisonLearning, it is people who make the greatest difference in the 
learning and lives of students.
Besides, Edison claims a “comprehensive” school design, professional expertise, 
and commitment to students learning. “Our offerings. School design: Whole-
school solutions that helps educators and communities open new schools or 
improve the performance of existing ones.” 
The Leona Group
As I showed before, The Leona Group (2010) introduces itself by personalizing 
its identity at the frontpage, where there are other two paragraphs titled: “What 
we believe” and “What we offer.” Under the first we read: 


282  Mónica Pini
Every child can learn, regardless of ethnicity, economic or educational 
disadvantage. Every child deserves quality choice in free public education. 
These founding beliefs drive The Leona Group’s commitment to excellence 
in elementary, middle and high school classrooms across the country.
Leona is the company announcing from the beginning of the webpage that its 
schools are free, that there is no tuition for parents, as an important positive 
argument for choosing it, and it explicitly advocates choice in the service of 
better educational quality at national level. 
Leona claims that they can offer quality in education in spite of children’s 
social, racial, or educational conditions. This is a reminder of the unequal ser-
vices provided to students in urban and suburban schools, one of the conspicu-
ous problems with the public school system (Kozol, 1991; Spring, 2001; Tyack 
& Cuban, 1995). Leona also promotes parental involvement, another concern 
raised frequently about public schools. In the following quotation, the mention 
of “community” reinforces the idea that Leona supports local agency: 
Each Leona Group charter school offers a unique, tuition-free option tai-
lored to the needs of the community, students and parents it serves—espe-
cially urban communities where the need for choice is greatest. Through 
comprehensive support services, we partner with schools in key areas to 
ensure both short and long term success. (Leona Group, 2010). 
This site has a highly elaborated pedagogical discourse, pointing almost to every 
aspect of student needs for learning, and parents’ expectations and wills. 
Mosaica
Mosaica builds an image of excellence through its icon: a classic Greek building 
like a temple of knowledge. The text reads: 
Opening Portals of Opportunities
 At the forefront of education reform, Mosaica Education opens portals 
of opportunity for children and adults through excellence in education 
around the globe. Our purpose is to accelerate education reform, one of 
the most dramatic cultural transformations in our world today. (Mosaica, 
2010)
Mosaica’s text is one of the most overtly ideological, speaking of the need for 
“accelerating” educational reform to revitalize public education with the para-
digm of a world-class education, implying that “children and adults” did not get 
this opportunity from “the traditional public schools.” Mosaica describes itself 
as a national leader in education reform and international leader in excellence. 
Like Leona, Mosaica designs its message to address parent concerns, through 
the discourses of “safe learning environments,” for example. The company 


The Discourses of EMOs  283
constructs professional and formal relations using the third person instead of 
more personal forms of advertising.
Mosaica used to be the only EMO that had its own original curriculum—
Paragon. Now all of the companies show their trademarked products. I think 
this is why the presentation of Paragon includes high values and heroes for 
students to learn “by stepping into the shoes of great historical ﬁ
 gures, both real 
and imaginary . . . to become the architects of tomorrow.”
The section “Executive Management Team,” in “About Mosaica,” includes 
a list of ﬁ
 ve ofﬁ
 cers with background in business. Just Dawn Eidelman, one of 
the co-founders, comes from the ﬁ
 eld of education.
Difference is one of the key concepts that all these companies use, and the 
phrase “make a difference” is obviously associated with improvement and the 
promise that different (private management of public schools) is better. 
National Heritage Academies
Heritage’s discourse appears less conservative than it used to be, without forget-
ting the importance of moral values. The following introductory text empha-
sizes commitment to children’s academic learning, excellence, and moral 
values: 
National Heritage Academies is an education service provider that part-
ners with independent school boards that want to bring a charter school 
to their local community. NHA is hired by the board to manage all of the 
day-to-day operations of the school. School boards choose NHA as their 
partner because we’ve established a proven track record of success over the 
past 14 years and our passion to positively impact the lives of children is 
evident. This passion reveals itself in everything we do; from the unwaver-
ing commitment to our four pillars, to the safe, secure learning environ-
ment our school buildings provide, to the design and implementation of 
our curriculum, to the ongoing investment in professional development 
for teachers, to the commitment to provide students with the resources 
and support they need to succeed, and for constantly asking “what can we 
do today to be better than yesterday?” This passion has taken us from one 
school in 1995 to partnerships with boards at 61 schools in six states, serv-
ing over 38,000 students and families. (NHA, 2010) 
Passion, repeated three times, suggests that charter schools have an energy 
lacking in the traditional public system. Passion, together with commit-
ment and safety, constructs a powerful message that is likely to resonate with 
school boards and parents who have understandable concerns about student 
success.
This company also stresses difference throughout the website—“A different 
kind of education. A different kind of school”—and goes on with the reason: 
“We’re not like any other school. It’s because we take the time to figure out 


284  Mónica Pini
what you do well, and not so well, in order to help you become a better student. 
If things get tough, we’ll be there to guide you.”
The company emphasizes quality through the use of terms such as academic 
excellence, resources, and support for achievement. The first of these pages, for 
example, reads:
At National Heritage Academies, we believe that a quality education is the 
foundation for a successful life. We also believe that every child is capable 
of excelling academically, so we are ﬁ
 rmly committed to providing the 
support and resources to help our students understand and realize their 
potential. At NHA schools, dreams are formed, inspiration is fostered and 
each child is challenged to achieve.
The last phrase conveys the idea that NHA is so good that their kids even learn 
to dream. It is an evocative word for any parent looking for a better future. It 
also evokes the promise of public education. 
NHA uses a more personalized and colloquial style, stressing uniqueness 
and success with parents’ satisfaction. NHA remarks that it responds to par-
ents, implying that traditional public schools are non-responsive. The website 
states, “Together, we can deliver on the promise of your child by offering a 
different kind of education in a different kind of school.” The text fails to men-
tion the proﬁ
 t involved in the operations of privately managed charters. At the 
same time, it presents private management as intrinsically more reliable and 
responsible than public schools owing to its partnership with the “commu-
nity.” Because no real proof of the EMO’s superior performance is offered, this 
is a very good example of a manipulative strategy of persuasion that consists in 
appealing only to the trustworthy character of the advertiser—the EMO—to 
disguise its lack of substance.
Contrasting themselves with the image of mediocre public schools seems to 
be one of the intentions of EMOs’ messages. J. C. Hiuzenga, the multimillion-
aire businessman and founder of Educational Development Corp. (the former 
name of National Heritage Academies), declared to The Grand Rapids Press that 
he was launching a for-proﬁ
 t charter school revolution that would change the 
way American children were educated. His “mission” was also consistent with 
the market model for education, since for him “competition increases quality 
and lowers cost.” Huizenga said, “It is working in every other sector of society. 
Why not in education?” He also believes that if there is not proﬁ
 t in an activity, 
it means that society does not value it. Huizenga hosted a private fundraiser 
for President George W. Bush in 1992 (Wilkerson, 1997). The compatibility 
between corporate ideology and public education is dubious because corporate 
interests are always placed above the public good. 
“Ideological Marketing”
“Ideological marketing” constitutes a set of principles that are important for 
EMOs to build and defend a market (Ferguson, 1999). According to Ferguson 


The Discourses of EMOs  285
(1999), “Unlike other types of companies, for-proﬁ
 t education providers must 
constantly defend their very existence against naysayers who are opposed, for 
myriad reasons, to market-based, consumer-driven education” (p. 2). I found 
several examples of the speciﬁ
 c “defense of their very existence” in the past EMO 
marketing, for example through the constant critique of public schools (Pini, 
2001, 2003). At the present it seems to show less a defense of their existence 
(or the need to legitimize their business) and more the competition between 
companies. The main competition seems to be placed on the appearance of 
the pages, using the most sophisticated techniques and resources to show 
uniqueness. 
The trend to privatize public schools has garnered great intellectual support, 
expressed in various business and education publications and media that dis-
seminate the ideas that 1) private management is better than public, 2) school 
choice is going to fix educational problems, 3) the market can do everything bet-
ter and more efficiently than the government, and 4) educational bureaucracy 
and unions are hampering reform. Some groups, including private companies 
that are in a position to profit from education, have invested in spreading and 
legitimating these ideas as a means of expanding their business.
Consequently, the kind of standardization I found in the design of the EMO’s 
websites, each of them trying to be unique, in my view reflects a consolidation 
of their business and the politics and policies they embody. 
Discussion and Conclusions 
In this section I will elaborate on the following two groups of ﬁ
 ndings: 1) the 
most frequent discursive strategies used by EMOs in their advertising; and 2) 
the re-deﬁ
 nition of “public” that EMOs construct through their advertising. 
Common Discursive Strategies 
From my analysis it is evident that EMOs use several common advertising tech-
niques to construct their image, to build relations, and to attract consumers. 
In order to construct their image they: 1) visually appeal to the potential con-
sumer through the skillful use of color, design, photographs, videos, graphics, 
and links; 2) appeal to the trustworthy character of the companies more than 
to veriﬁ
 able evidence; 3) make claims of commitment to children, learning, 
and life; 4) use evocative rhetoric; 5) make afﬁ
 rmations based on simplistic or 
absent evidence (consumer satisfaction); and 6) denigrate the competitor (tra-
ditional public schools) through lexical opposition or comparison.
To create relations between themselves and their potential consumers, they 
construct logical fallacies characterized by 1) personalization, and 2) appealing 
to parents’ emotions and wills. 
To attract consumers to the websites, they engage in argumentum ad pop-
ulum in three ways: 1) identifying with universal values (for example, “Wis-
dom, Hope, Justice, Respect, Courage, Responsibility, Compassion, Integrity”; 


286  Mónica Pini
Edison Schools, 2009); 2) using appropriate vocabulary reflecting social con-
cerns (for example, “Every child can learn, regardless of ethnicity, economic 
or educational disadvantage”; Leona Group, 2009); and 3) evoking popular 
symbolism (for example, “Making a world of difference”; Mosaica Education, 
2009). Furthermore, they omit significant evidence (for example, studies that 
show low equity and diversity, such as Frankenberg, Siegel-Hawley, & Wang, 
2010 or Miron, Urschel, Mathis, & Tornquist, 2010).
The Symbolic and Material Appropriation of the “Public” 
Just as EMOs construct their own image, they also shape a definition of their 
competitor/partner, the traditional public schools. The classification scheme 
traditional public schools = negative and EMO schools = positive that I re-
constructed in this section is based on the combination of explicit and implicit 
elements in the discourses of these four companies. Explicit elements are EMO 
experience, success, commitment, and expansion, contrasted to public school 
“crisis,” declining quality, escalating costs, bureaucracy, and marginalization of 
students. In most cases the contrast is not overt, but implicit in the references 
to “all children,” “every child,” “student needs,” or “parents’ satisfaction,” con-
veying the ideological polarization.
EMOs characterize “traditional public schools” as inferior and inefficient 
while privately (corporate) managed schools are portrayed as efficient and 
superior. Their texts do this in six ways: 
1) Reinforcing “the manufactured crisis” of public schools;
2) Denigrating traditional public schools; 
3) Advocating school choice based on the purported failure of public 
schools;
4) Exploiting parents’ hopes and fears and school boards’ concerns; 
5) Naturalizing private management of schools as part of the universaliza-
tion of the market logic (what Fairclough, 1995, calls marketization) and 
corporate culture; 
6) Masking the for-profit motive. 
It is possible to describe the EMOs’ re-definition of “public” as a symbolic 
appropriation of all that “public” represents (e.g. the common good) as a 
means to advance the material appropriation of all that public schools repre-
sent to them, e.g. funds, contracts, clientele, facilities, potential profit. The logic 
that underlies EMOs’ rhetoric can be seen as a narrative that goes something 
like this: Because “traditional public schools” are incorrigibly and hopelessly 
inadequate, EMOs had to create and market a superior corporate alternative 
for parents. This alternative is inherently excellent and efficient, and it lacks 
or is able to overcome all the “traditional” problems of public schools in order 
to help all children, especially the poor. One could admire such a noble proj-
ect if not for certain inherent contradictions: the masked interest in profit, the 


The Discourses of EMOs  287
connections with powerful conservative interests, and the similarity with other 
corporate forms of appropriating public goods such as health maintenance 
organizations (HMOs). 
Although similar design elements are present at the institutional sites of the 
EMOs I studied, ideological arguments, except in Mosaica, are expressed more 
subtly and concepts such as efﬁ
 ciency and innovation have given way to oth-
ers such as experience, difference, more products, and commitment to learn-
ing. One hypothesis about the reasons for this change is that the “industry” is 
no longer at the stage of novelty as regards the private management of public 
schools, but is in a time of consolidation and regular competition with other 
companies in the market. The criticism of public schools that used to be a cen-
tral topic in EMOs webpages has gone to a second place, emphasizing their own 
experience (now they do have it), commitment, excellence, and new products 
and services. This emphasis gives the best corporate image of its schools. The 
quality of teaching, a motivating and safe environment, and improved perfor-
mance and growth remain central elements of the image.
Through marketing and the political climate of the last decade, EMO’s have 
achieved high social legitimacy that, in turn, has constructed a kind of common 
sense based on market principles. This logic is less about the public good and 
more about individuals’ choices and interests. Generally, the websites’ collec-
tive conceptual approach constructs a market-oriented “common sense” that 
characterizes “traditional” public schools as an exhausted and anachronistic 
institution, ready to be replaced by what EMOs call the “new” schools, which 
more resemble private schools. EMO schools, like private schools, are relatively 
free of public scrutiny. But unlike private schools, they are publicly funded. 
The appropriation and definition of “public” by corporate schools and market 
model advocates was the key issue addressed by “ideological marketing.” At 
first EMOs tried to sell the market model for education together with its ser-
vices/schools; today what I see is that they sell their schools as a natural part of 
the market model.
Political factors have been influential in obtaining “strong” laws, which in 
charter school parlance means less regulation, while advocates term “weak” 
those laws that are more restrictive. Conservative think tanks and choice advo-
cates have provided the intellectual support necessary for EMOs’ definitions of 
“public” and public schools (e.g., Finn, 1996) that ultimately benefit private-
sector interests. 
EMOs’ ideological rhetoric builds an ideal model of education that is not 
consistently supported by evidence and veils the for-profit character of the 
companies. The ideological appropriation of the public agenda by corporations 
and their allies is functional to the EMOs’ material appropriation of schools. 
My hope is that this study will help to unravel the dominant discourse—the 
common sense of the market model—surrounding education. At the same 
time, this kind of analysis can lead to the constitution of counterpublics—sup-
portive structures that challenge corporate discourses and practices in order to 
expand democracy and improve public education. 


288  Mónica Pini
Notes
1 Free market economics is based on competition between spontaneous forces of sup-
ply and demand in society. While classic liberals thought that the state’s power had to 
maintain market conditions and deal with social issues, neoliberals consider the state 
necessary for enforcing laws that protect private property, contracts, and the work-
ings of the free market (Spring, 1998).
2 “Exnomination is a process whereby the views of the powerful in society are natu-
ralized and the political nature of discourse is masked as class, gender, racial, and 
other differences. Exnominated discourse comes to be accepted as common sense” 
(Ludwig, 1997, p. 160).
3 EMOs call public schools “traditional public schools” in their webpages to differenti-
ate them from their own schools, which they also describe as “public.”
4 Edison Charter Schools is only a division of Edison Schools, because the corporation 
also contracts to manage districts.
References
Anderson, G. L. (1998). “Toward authentic participation: Deconstructing the discourses 
of participatory reforms in education.” American Educational Research Journal, 35(4), 
571–603.
Anderson, G. L., &. Grinberg, J. (1998). “Educational Administration as a disciplinary 
practice: Appropriating Foucault’s view of power, discourse, and method.” Educa-
tional Administration Quarterly, 34(3), 329–353.
Berliner, D., & Biddle, B. (1995). The manufactured crisis: Myths, fraud, and the attack on 
America public schools. New York: Longman.
Buenﬁ
 l Burgos, N. R., & Ruiz Muñoz, M.M. (1997). Antagonismo y articulación en 
el discurso educativo: Iglesia y gobierno (1930–40 y 1970–93). Mexico DF: Torres 
Asociados.
Burch, P. (2009) Hidden markets: The new education privatization: New York: Rout-
ledge.
Cherriholmes, C. (1998). Power and criticism: Poststructural investigations in education. 
New York: Teachers College.
Chouliaraki, L., & Fairclough, N. (1999). Discourse in late modernity. Rethinking critical 
discourse analysis. Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press.
Chubb, J., & Moe, T. (1990). Politics, markets and America’s schools. Washington, DC: 
The Brookings Institution.
Cobb, C. D., & Glass, G. (1999) Ethnic Segregation in Arizona Charter Schools, Educa-
tion Policy Analysis Archives, 7. Retrieved 2/2/10, from http://epaa.asu.edu/ojs/article/
view/536 
District of Columbia Public Charter School Board. Retrieved 2/2/10, from http://www.
dcpubliccharter.com/pcschools/fchamberlainpcs.htm/
Edison Learning (2010). Retrieved 2/2/10, from http://www.edisonlearning.com/ 
Education Industry Report (1999, March). The Leona Group: Charter growth on a mis-
sion. The Education Industry Report, 7(3), 5 & 10.
Education Industry Report (2000, April). K-12 contracting: Assessing progress. The 
Education Industry Report, 8(4), 1–2
Edison Schools (2000). Retrieved 10/12/00, from http://www.edisonschools.com/
Edison Schools (2001). Retrieved 2/5/01 and 2/16/01, from http://www.edisonschools.
com/ 


The Discourses of EMOs  289
Edison Schools (2009). Retrieved 12/20/09, from http://www.edisonschools.com/
edison-schools/about-us
Fairclough, N. (1989). Language and power. London & New York: Longman.
Fairclough, N. (1995). Critical discourse analysis: The critical study of language. London 
and New York: Longman.
Ferguson, R. (1999, June). Ideological Marketing. The Education Industry Report, 7(6), 
2 & 12.
Finn, C. (1996). Hartford schools boot out EAI—and return to the status quo. Retrieved 
4/21/98 from www.channel1.com
Foucault, M. (1995). Discipline and punish. The birth of the prison. New York: Vintage 
Books.
Frankenberg, E., Siegel-Hawley, G., & Wang, J. (2010). Choice without equity: Charter 
school segregation and the need for civil rights standards. Los Angeles, CA: The Civil 
Rights Project/Proyecto Derechos Civiles at UCLA. Retrieved 2/2/10, from www.
civilrightsproject.ucla.edu.
Fraser, N. (1989). Unruly practices: Power, discourse, and gender in contemporary social 
theory. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota.
Furtwengler, C. B. (1998). Heads up! The EMO’s are coming. Educational Leadership, 
56(2), 44–47
Gewirtz, S., Ball, S. J., & Bowe, R. (1995). Markets, choice, and equity in education. 
Buckingham & Philadelphia: Open University Press.
Gramsci, A. (1977). Quaderni del carcere: Edizione critica dell’ Instituto Gramsci, 4 vols., 
vol 2, quaderno 11. Torino: Giulio Einaudi.
Grinberg, J., & Saavedra, E. (2000). The constitution of bilingual/ESL education as a dis-
ciplinary practice: Genealogical explorations. Review of Educational Research, 70(4), 
419–441 
Harré, R. (1985). Persuasion and manipulation. In T. van Dijk (Ed.), Discourse and com-
munication: New approaches to the analyses of mass media and communication. Berlin 
& New York: Walter de Gruyter.
Jewitt, C. & Kress, G. (editors) (2003) Multimodal literacy. New York: Peter Lang.
Kozol, J. (1991). Savage inequalities: Children in America’s schools. New York: Harper 
Perennial.
Kress, G., & van Leeuwen, T. (1996) Reading images. The grammar of visual design, New 
York: Routledge.
Kress, G., Leite-García, R., & van Leeuwen, T. (1997). Semiótica Discursiva. In T. van 
Dijk (Ed.), El Discurso como Estructura y Proceso (pp. 373–416). Barcelona: Gedisa 
Editorial. 
Labaree, D. (1997). How to succeed in school without really learning: The credentials race 
in American education. London & New Haven: Yale University Press.
Leona Group (2000). Retrieved 4/12/00, from http://www.leonagroup.com/
Leona Group (2001). Retrieved 2/9/01, from http://www.leonagroup.com/
Leona Group (2009). Retrieved 12/12/09, from http://www.leonagroup.com/Pages-
4–1-Home_Page.htm
Ludwig, M. (1997). The cultural politics of prevention: Reading anti-drug public service 
announcements. In K. T. Frith (Ed.), Undressing the ad: Reading culture in advertising. 
New York: Peter Lang.
Miron, G., Urschel, J. L., Mathis, W, J., & Tornquist, E. (2010). Schools without diversity: 
Education management organizations, charter schools and the demographic stratification 
of the American school system. Boulder and Tempe: Education and the Public Interest 


290  Mónica Pini
Center & Education Policy Research Unit. Retrieved 2/2/10, from http://epicpolicy.
org/publication/schools-without-diversity
Molnar, A. (1996). Giving kids the business: The commercialization of America’s schools. 
Colorado & Oxford: Westview Press.
Molnar, A., Miron, G., & Urschel, J. (2009), Profiles of for-profit educational manage-
ment organizations: 2008–2009. Education and the Public Interest Center (EPIC), 
University of Colorado, Education Policy Research Unit (EPRU), Commercialism in 
Education Research Unit (CERU), Arizona State University. Retrieved 10/9/09, from 
http://epicpolicy.org/publication/profiles-profit-emos-2008–09 
Mosaica Education (2000). Mosaica Education. Retrieved 10/12/00, from http://www.
mosaicaeducation.com/
Mosaica Education (2009). Mosaica Education. Retrieved 12/15/09, from http://mosai-
caeducation.com/
Mouffe, C. (1993). The return of the political. London & New York: Verso.
National Heritage Academies (2000). National Heritage Academies. Retrieved 4/12/00, 
from http://www.heritageacademies.com/
National Heritage Academies (2000). National Heritage Academies. Retrieved 12/14/09, 
from http://heritageacademies.com/
NCES 2010 US Department of Education, Institute of Education Sciences, National 
Center for Education Statistics (NCES). Retrieved 2/10, from http://nces.ed.gov/fast-
facts/
Patrinos, H., & Ariasingam, D. (1998). Descentralización de la educación. Financiamiento 
basado en la demanda. Washington, DC: Banco Internacional de Reconstrucción y 
Fomento/Banco Mundial
Pini, M. E. (2000). Lineamientos de política educativa en los Estados Unidos. Debates 
actuales. Signiﬁ
 cados para América Latina. EPAA, 8. 
Pini, M. E. (2001) The Corporatization of Public Education: Education Management 
Organizations (EMOs) and Public Schools. Unpublished Doctoral Dissertation, The 
University of New Mexico, College of Education.
Pini, M. E. (2003). Escuelas charter y empresas: Un discurso que vende. Buenos Aires, 
Miño y Dávila Editores.
Postman, N. (1985). Amusing ourselves to death: Public discourse in the age of show busi-
ness. New York: Elisabeth Shifton Books, Viking.
Robelen, E. W. (2001, January 10). A changing of the guard. Bush promises swift action 
on education. Education Week, (16), 1 & 42–43.
Sexe, N. (2001). diseño.com. Buenos Aires, Barcelona, & Mexico: Paidós.
Spring, J. (1997). Political agendas for education: From the Christian coalition to the Green 
Party. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Spring, J. (1998). Education and the rise of the global economy. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence 
Erlbaum.
Spring, J. (2001). The American school: 1642–2000 (5th ed.). New York: Mc Graw Hill.
Stocker, K., Waitzkin, H., & Iriart, C. (1999). The exportation of managed care to Latin 
America. New England Journal of Medicine, 340(14), 1131–1136.
Symonds, W., Palmer, T., Lindorff, D., & McCann, J. (2000, February 7). For-profit 
schools. Business Week.
Symonds, W. C. (2000, January 10). Industry Outlook 2000-Services. Education. 
Business Week. Retrieved 3/24/00 from http://www.businessweek.com/
Torfing, J. (1999). New theories of discourse. Laclau, Mouffe and Zizec. Oxford & Malden, 
MA: Blackwell.


The Discourses of EMOs  291
Torres, C., & Puiggrós, A. (1997). Latin American education. Comparative perspectives. 
Colorado & Oxford: Westview Press.
Tyack, D., & Cuban, L. (1995). Tinkering toward utopia. A century of public school reform. 
Cambridge, MA, and London: Harvard University Press.
US Department of Education, Institute of Education Sciences, National Center for 
Education Statistics (NCES). Retrieved 2/10, from http://nces.ed.gov/fastfacts/ 
U.S. Department of Education, National Commission of Excellence in Education (1983) 
A nation at risk: The imperative for educational reform. Retrieved 1/10, from http://
www2.ed.gov/pubs/NatAtRisk/letter.html 
van Dijk, T. A (1985). Discourse and communication. Berlin & New York: Walter de 
Gruyter
van Dijk, T. A (1997). Discourse as structure and process. Discourse studies: A multidisci-
plinary introduction, Vol. 1. London, Thousand Oaks, CA, & New Delhi: Sage.
van Eemeren, F. H., Grootendorst, Jackson, S., & Jacobs, S. (1997). Argumentation. In 
T. A. van Dijk (Ed.), Discourse as structure and process. Discourse studies: A multidisci-
plinary introduction, Vol. 1. London, Thousand Oaks, CA, & New Delhi: Sage.
Vermehren, C. (1997). Cultural capital: The cultural economy of U.S. advertising. In 
K. Toland Frith (Eds.), Undressing the ad: Reading culture in advertising. New York, 
Washington DC, Boston, MA, Bern, Frankfurt, Vienna, & Paris: Peter Lang.
Walsh, M. (2001a, January 10). Former education secretary starts online-learning 
venture. Education Week, (16), 7. Retrieved 1/10, from www.edweek.org.
Walsh, M. (2001b, April 11). New York City votes are a blow to Edison. Education Week, 
(30), 5. Retrieved 1/10, from www.edweek.org.
Weiss, M. (1999). La microeconomía de la educación (Microeconomy of education). In 
H. Munin (Ed.), La autonomía de la escuela: Libertad y equidad? [School autonomy: 
Freedom and equity?]. Buenos Aires: Aique.
Whitty, G., Power, S., & Halpin, D. (1998). Devolution and choice in education: The 
school, the state, and the market. Buckingham & Philadelphia: Open University Press.
Wilkerson, R. (1997). J.C. Huizenga runs four schools—Part one of his for-proﬁ
 t edu-
cation dream (The Grand Rapids Press). In Excel Charter Academy Annual Report 
1997–1998. Grand Rapids, MI: Excel Charter Academy.
Wong, K., & Shen, F., with Novacek, G. (2001, April). Institutional effects of charter 
schools: Innovation and segregation. Annual Meeting of the American Educational 
Research Association, Seattle, WA.


About the Authors
James Collins is a Professor of Anthropology at the University of Albany, State 
University of New York. Collins’ research combines fine-grained analysis 
of linguistic practices with ethnographic research oriented to current the-
oretical debates about power, identity and inequality. He is the author of 
Understanding Tolowa Histories: Western Hegemonies and Native American 
Responses (1998), and has contributed to a number of books and journals. 
Norman Fairclough is emeritus Professor of Language in Social Life at Lan-
caster University. He is one of the founders of critical discourse analy-
sis. His books include Language and Power, Critical Language Awareness, 
Discourse and Social Change, and Analyzing Discourse: Textual Analysis for 
Social Research and Discourse and Contemporary Social Change. His current 
research focuses on discourse as an element in contemporary social changes 
which are referred to as “globalisation,” “neo-liberalism,” “new capitalism,” 
and the “knowledge economy.” Over the past three years he has been work-
ing specifically on aspects of “transition” in Central and Eastern Europe, 
especially Romania, from a discourse analytical perspective.
James Gee is Mary Lou Fulton Presidential Professor of Literacy Studies, in the 
College of Education at Arizona State University. His book Sociolinguistics 
and Literacies (1990, 3rd edition, 2007) was one of the founding documents 
in the formation of the “New Literacy Studies,” an interdisciplinary field 
devoted to studying language, learning, and literacy in an integrated way in 
the full range of their cognitive, social, and cultural contexts. He has pub-
lished widely in the areas of sociolinguistics, discourse analysis, video games, 
language, and learning. His new book is called An Introduction to Discourse 
Analysis: Theory and Method. 
Jean Ketter is Professor of Education at Grinnell. She has two interconnected 
research interests: the teaching and assessment of writing, and the use of 
critical multicultural approaches in the teaching of young adult literature. In 
both areas of research she focuses on social justice concerns and explores the 
effects educational practices have on student access to and engagement in 
learning. She has published articles in numerous journals including Research 


About the Authors  293
in the Teaching of English, English Education, Reading Research Quarterly, 
and the International Journal of Qualitative Research. 
Gunther Kress is Professor of Semiotics and Education in the Department of 
Learning, Curriculum & Communication at the Institute of Education of 
the University of London. He is one of the founders of the social semiotic, 
multimodal approach to discourse analysis. He has a specific interest in the 
interrelations in contemporary texts of different modes of communica-
tion—writing, image, speech, music—and their effects on forms of learning 
and knowing. He is interested in the changes—and their effects and conse-
quences—brought by the shift in the major media of communication from 
the page to the screen. Some of his recent books are Reading Images: The 
Grammar of Graphic Design, Multimodal Teaching and Learning: The Rheto-
rics of the Science Classroom, and Literacy in the New Media Age. His new 
book is called Multimodality: A Social Semiotic Approach to Contemporary 
Communication (Routledge, 2010). 
Manika Subi Lakshmanan holds a Ph.D. from University of Missouri-St. Louis, 
College of Education. Her research focuses on a critical discourse analysis of 
text and visuals in cross-cultural children’s and young adult fiction, particu-
larly with respect to the use of literature as a curricular support for global 
awareness. She teaches courses on children’s literature, global education, 
and South Asian literature and film.
Jayne C. Lammers is a Ph.D. candidate at Arizona State University, working 
towards a degree in Curriculum and Instruction, with a concentration in 
Language and Literacy. Her dissertation research explores literacies, learn-
ing, and the practices adolescents engage in as members of an online fan 
community supporting Sims fan fiction writers. She comes to her interest in 
literacies and discourses with a background as a secondary Language Arts/
Reading teacher. 
Cynthia Lewis is Professor of Critical Literacy and English Education at the 
University of Minnesota. Her research focuses on the connection between 
literacy practices, social identities, and learning in urban schools. Her books 
include Literary Practices as Social Acts: Power, Status, and Cultural Norms 
in the Classroom and Reframing Sociocultural Research on Literacy: Identity, 
Agency, and Power (co-edited with Patricia Enciso and Elizabeth Moje). 
Both books were awarded the Edward Fry book Award from the National 
Reading Conference. 
Guadalupe López-Bonilla received her Ph.D. in Spanish American Literature 
from the University of California, San Diego. She is Professor of Literacy 
and Discourse Studies at the Instituto de Investigación y Desarrollo Educa-
tivo, Universidad Autónoma de Baja California, Ensenada campus. She co-
authored, with Alma Carrasco and Alicia Peredo, La lectura desde el currículo 
en educación básica y media superior en México (Universidad de Guadalajara, 


294  About the Authors
2008), and is co-editor, with Karen Englander, of Discourses and Identities in 
Contexts of Educational Change (Peter Lang, 2011).
Josephine Marsh is Associate Professor in the Division of Learning, Technol-
ogy, and Psychology in Education. Josephine’s research centers on questions 
of literacy and gender as well as children’s and adolescent literacy. She has 
published widely in language and literacy journals. 
Mónica Pini is a Doctor of Philosophy in Educational Thought and Sociocul-
tural Studies, College of Education, The University of New Mexico, a Masters 
in Public Administration and a Bachelor in Sciences of Education, Univer-
sity of Buenos Aires. She is currently Chair of the Center of Interdisciplinary 
Studies in Education, Culture and Society, School of Humanities, University 
of San Martín (UNSAM), Argentina, and Director of the Graduate Program 
in Education, Languages and Media. She is Associate Professor of Educa-
tion, Culture and Society (UNSAM). She has Published various articles on 
educational politics and policy and educational research. Her recent books 
are La escuela pública que nos dejaron los 90, Discursos y prácticas, and Dis-
curso y Educación: Herramientas para el análisis crítico.
Rebecca Rogers is Associate Professor of Literacy Studies at the University of 
Missouri-St. Louis. Her scholarship focuses on the socio-political contexts 
of literacy and language education and situates critical discourse analysis 
within an ethnographic tradition. She has published widely in journals such 
as Reading Research Quarterly, Linguistics & Education, Critical Discourse 
Studies, Discourse, Critical Inquiry into Language Studies, Journal of Literacy 
Research, Review of Research in Education and Race, Ethnicity and Education. 
Her books include Designing Socially Just Learning Communities: Designing 
Critical Literacy Education across the Lifespan (Routledge, 2009); A Critical 
Discourse Analysis of Family Literacy Practices (Lawrence Erlbaum, 2003); 
Adult Education Teachers Designing Critical Literacy Practices (Routledge, 
2008). She was recently a Fulbright Scholar in Critical Discourse Studies at 
the Universidad de San Martín in Buenos Aires, Argentina. 
Shawn Rowe is Assistant Professor in the Department of Science and Math-
ematics Education at Oregon State University. His research focuses on free 
choice learning outside of school settings. He is particularly interested in 
how families and groups interact in museum settings as well as how exhibits 
are structured to support or undermine certain kinds of learning. 
Lisa Patel Stevens is Associate Professor of Education at Boston College. Her 
areas of expertise are sociology of education, immigration and education, 
policy studies, and the intersections of language, culture, and society. Prior 
to working in the academy, Lisa has worked as a secondary school teacher, a 
literacy consultant, journalist, and policymaker.
Karen E. Wohlwend is Assistant Professor in Literacy, Culture, and Language 
Education at Indiana University. During her career as an early childhood 


About the Authors  295
teacher in U.S. public elementary schools, she developed a deep apprecia-
tion for the creativity, resourcefulness, and intellectual rigor of children’s 
play. Karen reconceptualizes play as a semiotic and social practice that can 
expand the accepted ways of reading, writing, and participating in literacy 
classrooms. Her research in this area has been recognized through the Inter-
national Reading Association Outstanding Dissertation Award and the 
American Educational Research Association Language and Social Processes 
Emerging Scholar Award. Karen is the author of articles published in Read-
ing Research Quarterly, the Journal of Early Childhood Literacy, Language 
Arts, the Journal of Early Childhood Research, the National Reading Confer-
ence Yearbook, Childhood Education, and The New Educator. Her research 
provides a critical perspective on children’s play and literacy, popular media 
toys, gender, and identity using methods of mediated discourse analysis and 
multimodal analysis. 
Haley Woodside-Jiron is Associate Professor in the College of Education and 
Social Sciences at the University of Vermont. Her research focuses on edu-
cational policy, reading education, and school transformation. She has pub-
lished in the International Journal of Disability, Development and Education, 
Reading Research Quarterly, and the Journal of Educational Psychology.


actions 235–6
activities (practices) building task 30, 34
activity as discourse xxiv, 227–40; 
actions 236; activities 235–6; co-
constructed activity 235, 236–7; 
co-constructed utterances 234–5; 
co-construction of dialogue 234; 
Discourse 227, 239–40; discourse 
as talk and activity 229–34; 
language 228; learning as 
appropriation of mediational 
means 237–9; mediated action 245; 
microgenetic analysis 232–3, 240; 
multiple agents 235–7; polyphonic 
utterances 232, 234; situation 
deﬁ
 nitions 235, 236–7, 239; 
sociocultultural approaches to 
learning and CDA 228–9, 
240; strategic activity 228; 
subactivities 236; transcription 
229–35, 240n2; utterance as unit of 
analysis 234–5
activity theory 240n3, 244
adolescent literacy experiences see 
masculinity and literacy
affect 223
agency 84, 209, 215–16, 221
Amsterdam, A. 50, 64–5
“analysis” 10–14; Fairclough’s 
approach 12–13; Gee’s approach 
11–12; Kress’s approach 13–14
Anfara, V. et al. 188
answerability 184–5, 190, 192, 197–9
Archer, M. S. 184
assertions 24
assessment 222
assumed information 24
authoritarian discourse 60
authoritative discourse 60–2
Bakhtin, M. 49, 50, 129, 151n1, 184–5, 
232, 234, 240n1
Baldwin, S. 170, 179n8
Barthes, R. 78, 271
Barton, D. 129
Benhabib, S. 71
Bennett, W. 281
Berliner, D. 268
Bernstein, B. 154, 156–7, 167, 169, 177
Bhabha, H. 72, 76, 87
Biddle, B. 268
Bizzell, P. 36
Blair, T. 123
Blommaert, J. xvi, 3
Bloome, D. et al. 251
Boaler, J. 48
Bonilla-Silva, E. 135
Bourdieu, P. 48, 65, 247
Bredekamp, S. 248
Brown, G. 6
Bruner, J. 49, 50, 64–5
building tasks 11–12, 29–35, 90n3; 
activities (practices) 30, 34; 
connections 32, 35; identities 31, 
34; politics (distribution of social 
goods) 31–2, 35; relationships 31, 35; 
sign systems and knowledge 33, 35; 
signiﬁ
 cance 30, 34
Business Week 267, 268
California Department of Education 
(CDE) 161, 162, 165
California Learning Assessment System 
(CLAS) 166
California reading policy see public policy
California State Board of Education 
(SBE) 165, 167–8
Carlson, L. 142–6
Casey, K. 49
Index


Index  297
causality 122–3, 126n1
CDA see Critical Discourse Analysis; 
critical discourse analysis
CDE see California Department of 
Education
charter schools 267, 269, 273
Cherriholmes, C. 270–1
children’s play and design xxv, 242–63; 
classroom social relationships 242–3, 
248–9, 250, 260–1; critical multimodal 
analysis 244–5, 262; data collection 
and analysis 251–3; design 250, 
253–8, 260–1, 263n1; developmentally 
appropriate practice 248–9, 262, 
263; discursive participation 262; 
educational perspectives 248–9, 
249t; gaze 243, 259–60; image/
artifact 258; learning as mediated, 
motivated and situated activity 245; 
mapping modal density 254–61, 
255f, 255–6t, 257f, 257t, 259f; 
mapping modal relationships 252–3; 
material affordances and designer 
interest 246–7; mediated actions and 
social practices 245, 246f; modes 243, 
246–7, 248–9, 263n2; multimodal 
analysis 243–5; multimodal 
analysis methods 249–50; power 
relations 244, 262, 263; proxemics, 
activity, environment 258–9; semiotic 
repertoires 261; signs 244–5, 246–7; 
skills mastery 248–9, 261–3; talk and 
singing 260–1; transcription 251–3; 
writing 263n1
Chomsky, N. A. 206
Chouliaraki, L. 132, 133, 199
Chrispeels, J. H. 165
Chubb, J. 281
claims 24
Clark, H. 229
CLAS (California Learning Assessment 
System) 166
co-construction of dialogue 234
Cofer, J. O. 137–8
coherence 207–8
cohesion 163, 176–7, 207
Collins, J. 172–3
colonial discourse analysis 72
communication: environments of 
communication 209, 215; as meaning-
making 213–23
communities of practice 88, 129–30, 131
connections building task 32, 35
Connell, R. W. 95
contexts 9–10, 70–1
Copple, C. 248
Coulter, C. A. 49
Crawford, V. 109
“critical” xviii–xix, 3–5, 23–43
critical discourse analysis 1–15; 
“analysis” 10–14; approaches 2; 
“critical” xviii–xix, 3–5, 23–43; 
“discourse” 5–10; in educational 
research 2–3, 14–15, 183–4; frame 
problem 27–8; seven building 
tasks 11–12, 29–35, 90n3; situated 
meaning task 24, 25–6; social 
practices 28–9; terminology 2; tools 
of inquiry 11, 35–43; utterance-type 
meaning task 24–5
Critical Discourse Analysis (CDA) 2, 3, 
183, 227
critical discourse analysts: role xxii–xxiii, 
183–200; answerability 184–5, 190, 
192, 197–9; differing perspectives 
on youth 194–8; enhancing 
learning 198–200; learning 
and acquisition 194; as literacy 
specialist 185–7; reﬂ
 ection 199–200; 
reﬂ
 exivity 184, 190, 192, 197, 199–200; 
research methodologies 188–9; 
as researcher 187–8; sharing 
analyses 189–90; shifting roles 185, 
190–4
critical linguistics 13
critical multiculturalism 133, 136, 137, 
145
critical multimodal analysis 244–5, 263
critical policy analysis 157, 178, 183
Critical Race Theory 132–3
Critical Social Theory (CST) 4
critique 206
cultural hybridity 84–7
dependent clauses 24
design 9, 14, 76–8, 221–3, 270; children’s 
play and design 250, 253–8, 261–2, 
263n1; see also education management 
organizations (EMOs)
dialectical relations 123–5
dialogic approach to language 50, 227, 
234, 240n1
dialogic functions of narrative 49, 50
dialogue, co-construction of 234
“discourse” 5–10; deﬁ
 nitions 6–8, 132, 
206–7, 248; and “Discourse” 6–7, 227; 
meanings 5–6, 121–2; multiethnic 
perspectives 9; orders of 


298  Index
“discourse” (cont.):
 discourse 120–1; text, contexts and 
social practices 9–10
discourse analysis 205–8, 212–13
discourse models 11
discourse practices 155, 157, 158, 159, 
164–9, 270–1
Discourses 6–7, 36–9, 227, 239–40
dislocation 81–2, 90n4
Duncan, A. 174–5
Eagleton, T. 71, 82
Edmondson, J. 155
education 130, 205–8, 213
education management organizations 
(EMOs) xxv, 267–88; appropriation of 
the “public” 286–7, 288n3; common 
discursive strategies 271–2, 278, 
285–6; discourse practices 270–1; 
discourses of privatization 267, 
268–70; Edison Learning 272, 
273t, 274–5, 274t, 278, 279, 280–1, 
285–6; ideal virtual images 279–84; 
“ideological marketing” 271, 
284–5; Leona Group 272, 273t, 
274t, 275–6, 278, 279, 281–2, 286; 
Mosaica Education 272, 273t, 274t, 
276, 278, 279, 282–3, 286; National 
Heritage Academies 272, 273t, 274t, 
276–7, 278, 279, 283–4; research 
design and methodology 270–3; social 
semiotics 270; website design 270–1, 
273–9
educational perspectives on early 
childhood 248–9, 249t
educational research 2–3, 14–15, 126, 
183–4; see also critical discourse 
analysts: role
EMOs see education management 
organizations
Engeström, Y. et al. 36
epistemological commitment 210, 212
Every Child a Reader 168
exclusion, narratives of xix, 46–65; 
authoritarian discourse 60; 
authoritative discourse 60–2; 
background 47–8; construction 
of self 47–8, 60, 64–5; ﬁ
 gured 
worlds 48, 50, 53–4, 55–8, 62, 63–4; 
interpretations 53–64; methods and 
analysis 46–7, 51–3, 65; narratives 
48–50; “not passing a class” 55–60; 
“not understanding” 53–5, 60–2; 
positioning 50, 54–5, 59, 62–4
exnomination 271, 288n2
Fairclough, N. xv–xvi, 2, 3–4, 7, 9, 
12–13, 51, 70, 74, 76, 129, 132, 133, 
151n1, 154, 155–6, 157, 158, 160, 164, 
169, 177, 178, 183, 188–9, 196, 199, 
227, 240n1, 271, 278
Faludi, S. 94
Fang, Z. et al. 130
Ferguson, R. 284–5
ﬁ
 gured worlds 11, 41–3; in masculinity 
and literacy 97–9, 100–2, 103–5, 
106–8, 110–11; in narratives of 
exclusion 48, 50, 53–4, 55–8, 62, 63–4
Finn, C. 281, 285
Flake, F. 281
form and function in language 24–5
Foucault, M. 6, 206
Fowler, R. 2, 13, 81
frame problem 27–8
Fraser, N. 269
fronting 24
Fullan, M. 175
Furtwengler, C. B. 268
Gagnon, P. 24, 26, 28
gaze 78–9, 243, 259–60
Gee, J. P. xv, 6–7, 9, 11–12, 36, 49, 50, 68, 
70, 72, 73, 88, 90n3, 96, 97, 109, 136, 
166, 173, 188, 227, 228, 235, 240n1, 
245, 248
gender order 95–6, 101, 102, 104–5, 
107–8, 109, 110, 112
genre 121, 133–7, 138–9, 146–8, 149, 205
Gentili, P. 47
Giroux, H. A. 5
Goldstein, L. S. 263
Gramsci, A. 269
Grossman, P. et al. 130
ground 214, 216
Habermas, J. 38, 207
habitus 247
Hacking, I. 37
Halliday, M. A. K. 5–6, 13, 155, 160, 176, 
179n4
Hamilton, M. 129
Harris, V. J. 130
Harvey, D. 123
hegemony 76, 86
Hicks, D. 129
Hittelman, M. 175–6
Hodge, R. 2, 8, 13
Holland, D. et al. 49, 50


Index  299
Honig, B. 160, 165, 169–70, 173
Huizenga, J. C. 284
Hymes, D. 206
I-statements 99, 109–10
identities building task 31, 34
ideology effects of texts 123
imagination 82
independent (main) clauses 24
individualism 9
instructional discourse 156
interdiscursivity 129, 141–8, 151n1
interest 207, 209, 211–12, 214–15, 218, 
220–1, 247
interpretation 214–15, 216, 217–21
intertextuality 271, 272
Jameson, F. 50
JanMohamed, A. 84
Jewitt, C. 244
Kantrowitz, B. 172
Kapur, R. 84
Kimmel, M. S. 95
Kingdon, J. W. 155
Kintsch, W. 206
knowledge 33, 35, 211, 215
Kress, G. 2, 8, 9, 13–14, 48, 73, 76, 77, 78, 
79, 82, 242, 246–7, 252, 270
Kristeva J. 151n1
Labov, W. 36, 49, 51, 52, 58, 64, 206
Laclau, E. 76, 86
Ladson-Billings, G. 9
language 120–1; and activity 228; 
centrality in learning 206, 208, 223; 
dialogic approach 50, 227, 234, 
240n1; form and function 24–5; 
metalanguage 78, 225; social 
languages 11, 39–40, 96–7
Latour, B. 36
Lave, J. 36, 62, 88, 129
Lawrence, S. M. 130
Leander, K. 50
learners as interpreters 215
learning: and acquisition 194; 
agency 209, 215–16, 221; as 
appropriation of mediational 
means 237–9; centrality of 
language 206, 208, 223; as community 
of practice 88; as mediated, motivated 
and situated activity 245; signs of 
learning 216, 217–18, 222; sites of 
learning 213–14, 216; sociocultural 
approaches 228–9, 245; use of CDA 
to enhance learning 198–200; see 
also learning as social interaction; 
multimodal social semiotic approach; 
social transformation and learning
learning as social interaction xxi–xxii, 
128–31; book list 148–9; coding 
categories 149–51; communities 
of practice 129–30, 131; critical 
multiculturalism 133, 136, 137, 
145; discourse 132–7, 147–8, 
149–50; ethnographic context 131; 
genre 133–7, 138–9, 146–8, 149; 
interdiscursivity 129, 141–8, 151n1; 
liberal humanism 133, 135–6, 137, 
144; methods and analysis 131–5, 
151n3; multicultural education 130; 
multicultural literature 130–1; polite 
opposition 137–42; professional 
development 130; race and 
ethnicity 130, 136, 137–8, 142–5, 146–
7; transcription 151n2; voice 133–5, 
147–8, 150–1
Lemke, J. L. 229–30
Leonardo, Z. 5
Levine, P. 233
Levinson, S. C. 23
Lewis, G. 68
lexical cohesion 163, 176–7, 207
liberal humanism 133, 135–6, 137, 144
lifeworld Discourse 38
Linell, P. 227, 228, 234, 240n1
linguistic turn 206
literacy: deﬁ
 nitions 243, 245; and 
neocolonialism 85–6; reading 
education 154, 179n1; see also 
masculinity and literacy; public policy
literature 68–70, 71–2; see also learning 
as social interaction
Ludwig, M. 288n2
Luke, A. 14, 132
Lyon, G. R. 170–1, 172, 173, 179n6
McCormick, P. see neocolonialism in Sold
McGillis, R. 88
McKenna, M. J. 69
Martin, J. 14, 206
masculinity and literacy xx–xxi, 93–113; 
adolescent literacy experiences 94, 
99–113; athletes 105, 106–7, 108–9, 
110, 111–12; boys’ achievement 94–5; 
challenge 100–2, 109, 112; Chavo’s 
perspective 105–10; critical discourse 
analysis 96–9; deﬁ
 ned 110–11; 


300  Index
masculinity and literacy (cont.):
 Discourses 93–4, 95–6, 111–12; 
ﬁ
 gured worlds 97–9, 100–2, 103–5, 
106–8, 110–11; gender order 95–6, 
101, 102, 104–5, 107–8, 109, 110, 112; 
I-statements 99, 109–10; “literature 
kids” 103–4, 105; machismo 93; 
mother’s perspective 99–102; 
researchers’s perspective 110–13;
 situated meanings 96–7; 
social language 96–7; teacher’s 
perspective 103–5; theories 93
Mayo, K. 88
mediated action 245
mediation 245
metalanguage 78, 225
metaphors 279–80
Meyer, M. 206, 243
Miramontes, A. 48, 54
modes 208, 223, 243, 246–7, 248–9, 
263n2
Mohanty, C. T. 84
Molnar, A. et al. 267, 268, 273, 280
Morson, G. S. 60
Mouffe, C. 76, 86
multicultural education 130; see also 
critical multiculturalism
multicultural literature 130–1
multimodal discourse analysis see 
activity as discourse; children’s play 
and design; education management 
organizations (EMOs); multimodal 
social semiotic approach
multimodal social semiotic 
approach xxiii–xxiv, 205–25; 
affect 223; agency of learners 209, 
215–16, 221; assessment 222; 
coherence 207–8; cohesion 207; 
communication as meaning-
making 213–23; design 221–3; 
discourse 206–7; discourse 
analysis 205–8, 212–13; 
education 205–8, 213; environments 
of communication 209, 215; 
epistemological commitment 210, 
212; genre 205; ground 214, 216; 
interest 207, 209, 211–12, 214–15, 
218, 220–1; interpretation 214–15, 
216, 217–21; language 206, 208, 223; 
metalanguage 225; modes 208, 223; 
multimodality 208–12, 223; power 
relations 205, 206, 208, 209, 215; 
prompts 213–16; recognition 208, 
212, 216; rhetoric 223; sign-
making 209, 212–13, 221; signs 
of learning 216, 217–18, 222; 
simulation 224; sites of learning 
213–14, 216; social semiotics 208–12; 
texts 205, 207; transcription 224; 
transduction 223, 224
multimodality 208–12, 223
Myers, W. D. 139–41
narrative analysis 49
narratives 48–50; see also exclusion, 
narratives of
A Nation at Risk 267
National Assessment of Educational Press 
(NAEP) 95, 166
National Center for Education 
Statistics 94
National Institute of Health (NIH) 170, 
173
National Institutes of Child and Human 
Development (NICHD) 169, 172, 173, 
177
National Reading Panel 171, 179n7
National Research Council’s Committee 
on the Prevention of Reading 
Difﬁ
 culties in Young Children 171
naturalization 173, 176, 178, 271, 288n2
NCLB see No Child Left Behind (NCLB) 
Act
Nelson, M. E. et al. 252
neocolonialism in Sold xx, 68–90; 
agency 84; building tasks 73–5, 75f, 
76, 80–1, 83, 86, 87–8; closure 86; 
cover of the book 76–9, 77f; cultural 
hybridity 84–7; dislocation 81–
2, 90n4; hegemony 76, 86; 
literacy 85–6; literature 68–70, 
71–2; method of analysis 73–6; 
Orientalism 72, 76; point of view 81; 
post/neocolonialism 72–3; self-
awareness 85–6; social semiotic 
approach 73; text and context 70–1; 
textual analysis 74, 79–87; texture 74; 
“Third World” narrative 87–9
New Literacy Studies 11
NICHD see National Institutes of Child 
and Human Development
NIH see National Institute of Health
No Child Left Behind (NCLB) Act 154, 
174, 179n3, 248
Norris, S. 233, 240n3, 243, 244, 252, 253, 
263n2
Oba, R. 142–4


Index  301
Ochs, E. 252
orders of discourse 120–1
Orientalism 72
Pahl, K. 247, 249
Passeron, J. C. 48
Paton, A. 72
pedagogic device 156–7, 168
photographs 78–9
Pini, M. E. 268, 273, 278, 285
point of view 81
politics building task 31–2, 35
positioning 50, 54–5, 59, 62–4
postcolonialism 72–3
Postman, N. 278
power relations 3–4, 205, 206, 208, 209, 
215; in children’s play and design 244, 
261, 263; see also public policy
practices (activities) building task 30, 
34
primary Discourse 38
privatization of public education 267, 
268–70; see also education 
management organizations (EMOs)
professional development 130, 187–8
prompts 213–16
provenance 78, 82
Prunty, J. J. 155
public policy xxii, 154–79; California 
reading policy 154, 157–73, 176, 
179n2; constitutive aspect 155, 176, 
178; critical discourse analysis 155–6, 
156t; critical policy analysis 157, 
178; data and analysis 158–9; 
discourse practice 155, 157, 158, 
159, 164–9; inquiry context 157–8; 
Instructional Materials 160–4, 
166; Instructional Materials: 
Spelling 165–6; lexical cohesion 163, 
176–7; naturalization 173, 176, 178; 
pedagogic device 156–7, 168; policy 
analysis 155; policy: deﬁ
 nition 155; 
policy impacts on literacy 
education 174–6; power 155; Reading 
Instruction 164, 166–7; rheme 159, 
160; skills mastery 160–2, 163, 166, 
179n5; social practice 155, 157, 158, 
159, 169–73; Teacher Training 167–9; 
text 155, 157, 158–9, 160–4; 
theme 159, 160
race and ethnicity 9, 130, 136, 137–8, 
142–5, 146–7
Race to the Top 174–5
reading education 154, 179n1; see also 
public policy
Reading Excellence Act 172
Reading First 154
Reading Program Advisory 168
recognition 38, 208, 212, 216
reﬂ
 ection 199–200
reﬂ
 exivity 184, 190, 192, 197, 199–200
register see social languages
regulative discourse 156, 169
relationships building task 31, 35
rhetoric 223, 271
Rorty, R. 206
Rowe, S. 230–2, 235
Rowsell, J. 247, 249
Rushdie, S. 72
Said, E. W. 72, 75–6, 88
San Francisco Gate 175
SBE see California State Board of 
Education
scaffolding 238
Schlesinger, A. 280–1
Schmidt, B. C. 280, 281
Scollon, R. 233, 240n1
secondary Discourses 38
self, construction of 47–8, 60, 64–5, 
85–6, 137–8
semiosis 119, 120, 121–2, 124
semiotics see multimodal social semiotic 
approach; social semiotics
seven building tasks see building tasks
Sexe, N. 271
Shi-xu 9
sign-making 209, 212–13, 221; see also 
multimodal social semiotic approach
sign systems and knowledge building 
task 33, 35
signiﬁ
 cance building task 30, 34
signs 244–5, 246–7
signs of learning 216, 217–18, 222
simulation 224
sites of learning 213–14, 216
situated meaning task 24, 25–6
situated meanings 11, 23, 25, 40–1, 96–7
skills mastery 248; in children’s play and 
design 248–9, 261–2, 263; in reading 
instruction 160–2, 163, 166, 179n5
Skinner, D. et al. 50
Sleeter, C. E. 130
Smith, M. L. 49
social action 207
social constructivism 123
social effects of texts and on texts 122–3


302  Index
social events 119, 120, 121
social goods 31–2
social groups 36
social interaction in a study group see 
learning as social interaction
social languages 11, 39–40, 96–7
social practices 28–9, 120, 121, 245, 
246f; in multicultural discourse 9–10; 
and public policy 155, 157, 158, 159, 
169–73
social semiotics 8, 14, 73, 208–12, 
246–7, 270; see also multimodal social 
semiotic approach
social structures 119–20
social transformation and learning xxi, 
119–26; causality 122–3, 126n1; 
construction vs. construal 123; critical 
educational research 126; dialectical 
relations 123–5; discourses 121–2; 
genres 121; language 120–1; 
learning 119, 124–5; orders of 
discourse 120–1; orientations to 
difference 125–6; semiosis 119, 120, 
121–2, 124; social effects of texts and 
on texts 122–3; social events 119, 
120, 121; social practices 120, 121; 
social structures 119–20; styles 122; 
text 119, 120; textual meanings 122
sociocultultural approaches to learning 
and CDA 228–9, 240, 245
Sold see neocolonialism in Sold
Sommers, C. H. 94
Sontag, S. 78
Spivak, G. C. 72, 73
Spring, J. 280, 281
Stephens, J. 81, 86
strategic activity 228
Street, B. 36
Stubbs, M. 6
styles 122
subactivities 236
Symonds, W. C. et al. 267, 268, 269
synthetic personalization 271
systemic functional linguistics 5–6
Tagg, J. 79
taken-for-granted information 24
Tatum, B. D. 130
terminology 2
test-grammar 206–7
text-linguistics 206–7
texts: deﬁ
 nitions 119, 120, 205, 207; 
interdiscursivity 129, 141–8, 151n1; 
meanings 122; in multicultural 
discourse 9–10; and public 
policy 155, 157, 158–9, 160–4; social 
effects 122–3
thematization 24
theme and rheme 159, 160
tools of inquiry 11, 35–43; Discourses 
6–7, 36–9; ﬁ
 gured worlds 11, 41–3; 
situated meanings 11, 23, 25, 40–1; 
social languages 11, 39–40
Torﬁ
 ng, J. 76, 86, 90n4
transcription 224, 229–35, 240n2, 
251–3
transduction 223, 224
Trew, T. 2, 13
turn-taking 133, 195, 230, 234
utterance-token meanings see situated 
meanings
utterance-type meaning 23
utterance-type meaning task 24–5
utterances 234; co-constructed 234–5; 
polyphonic 232, 234; as unit of 
analysis 234–5
Van Dijk, T. xvi, 71, 74, 206
Van Leeuwen, T. 73, 76, 77, 78, 79, 82, 
243, 270
voice 133–5, 147–8, 150–1
voucher programs 267, 269, 280
Vygotsky, L. S. 228, 240n3, 245
Waletzky, J. 49, 51, 52, 64
website for this book xxvi–xxvii
Weiss, M. 280
Wenger, E. 36, 48, 62, 88, 129
Wertsch, J. 49, 50, 228, 245
Whittle, C. 280–1
Williams, B. 132–3
Wingert, P. 172
Wodak, R. 206, 243
Wong Scollon, S. 240n1
Young, R. J. 73, 89–90n1
Yule, G. 6