United Nations 
 
A/78/322 
 
 
General Assembly 
 
Distr.: General 
21 August 2023 
 
Original: English 
 
23-16116 (E)    050923     
*2316116* 
 
 
Seventy-eighth session 
Item 76 of the provisional agenda* 
Report of the International Criminal Court 
 
 
 
Report of the International Criminal Court 
 
 
Note by the Secretary-General 
 
 
 
The annual report of the International Criminal Court on its activities for 
2022/23 is submitted herewith to the General Assembly in accordance with article 6 
of the Relationship Agreement between the United Nations and the International 
Criminal Court and paragraph 31 of General Assembly resolution 77/6. 
 
 
 
 
 
* A/78/150. 


A/78/322 
 
 
23-16116 
2/19 
 
Report of the International Criminal Court on its activities 
in 2022/23 
 
 
 
 Summary 
 
The present annual report provides an update on the activities of the 
International Criminal Court during one of its most active periods since its 
establishment. Drawing on new tools and approaches, the Court has sought to 
effectively address the exceptionally high workload it faces across situations in the 
form of investigations, pretrial proceedings, trials and appeals, as well as reparations 
programmes for victims. 
 
Among the notable developments during the reporting period was the 
confirmation by the Appeals Chamber of the conviction and 25-year sentence of 
Dominic Ongwen for crimes against humanity and war crimes committed in northern 
Uganda between 1 July 2002 and 31 December 2005. The case is now at the victims’ 
reparation stage. 
 
With regard to the situation in Mali, the presentation of evidence in the trial of 
Al Hassan Ag Abdoul Aziz Ag Mohamed Ag Mahmoud concluded and the Trial 
Chamber is deliberating on the verdict. 
 
With regard to the situation in Darfur, the trial of Ali Muhammad Ali Abd-Al-
Rahman on charges of war crimes and crimes against humanity continued. This is the 
first trial to take place before the Court on the basis of a referral by the Security Council. 
 
With regard to the situation in the Central African Republic II, the trial of Alfred 
Yekatom and Patrice-Edouard Ngaïsonna and the trial of Mahamat Said Abdel Kani 
continued. In addition, the confirmation of charges hearing in the case of Maxime 
Jeoffroy Eli Mokom Gawaka is scheduled for 22 August 2023. 
 
With regard to the situation in Ukraine, arrest warrants were issued for Vladimir 
Vladimirovich Putin and Maria Alekseyevna Lvova-Belova for the alleged war crimes 
of unlawful deportation and unlawful transfer of population (children) from occupied 
areas of Ukraine to the Russian Federation. 
 
The Prosecutor resumed his investigations into the situations in Afghanistan, the 
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela and the Philippines, following judicial decisions on 
the admissibility challenges presented by the States concerned. With regard to the 
situation in Georgia and the situation in the Central African Republic II, the 
Prosecutor announced the conclusion of the investigation phase. During the reporting 
period, the Office of the Prosecutor also continued its work with respect to the other 
situations that fall within its mandate. 
 
Reparations to victims continued to feature prominently in the Court’s work, 
with the Trust Fund for Victims implementing reparation orders in four cases. The 
Trust Fund is also implementing other programmes for the benefit of victims in 
respect of the situations in the Central African Republic, Côte d’Ivoire, the 
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Georgia, Kenya, Mali and Uganda, directly 
benefiting close to 17,000 individuals. 
 
The Court remains strongly committed to the principle of continuous 
improvement, including in the context of the review process initiated by the Assembly 
of States Parties in 2019 to strengthen the Court and as reflected in the strategic plans 
for 2023–2025 of the Court, the Office of the Prosecutor, the Registry and the Trust 
Fund for Victims, and the Strategy on Gender Equality and Workplace Culture 


 
A/78/322 
 
3/19 
23-16116 
 
launched in December 2022, as well as other documents, such as the new Policy on 
the Crime of Gender Persecution of the Office of the Prosecutor. 
 
The Court is grateful for the support of the United Nations across its activities. 
It continued to receive highly valuable cooperation from the United Nations on a wide 
range of issues, notably operational assistance in the field, on a cost-reimbursable 
basis. The cooperation, assistance and support of States remained equally essential to 
the Court’s operations, particularly at a time when a number of the Court’s elected 
officials are facing unacceptable threats for carrying out their mandate. 
 
Court-issued public arrest warrants are outstanding against 16 individuals: 
 
(a) 
Democratic Republic of the Congo: Sylvestre Mudacumura, since 2012; a 
 
(b) 
Uganda: Joseph Kony and Vincent Otti, since 2005; 
 
(c) 
Central African Republic: Mahamah Nouradine Adam, since 2019; 
 
(d) 
Darfur: Ahmad Harun, since 2007; Omar Al-Bashir, since 2009 and 2010; 
Abdel Raheem Muhammad Hussein, since 2012; and Abdallah Banda, since 2014; 
 
(e) 
Kenya: Walter Barasa, since 2013; and Philip Kipkoech Bett, since 2015; 
 
(f) 
Libya: Saif Al-Islam Gaddafi, since 2011; 
 
(g) 
Georgia: Mikhail Mayramovich Mindzaev, Gamlet Guchmazov and David 
Georgiyevich Sanakoev, since 2022; 
 
(h) 
Ukraine: Vladimir Vladimirovich Putin and Maria Alekseyevna Lvova-
Belova, since 2023. 
 
The Court calls on States Parties and others to provide the necessary cooperation 
and assistance for their arrest and surrender to the Court. 
 
 
 
a The Office of the Prosecutor is in the process of verifying the reported death of Sylvestre 
Mudacumura (in 2019). 
 
 
 
 
 


A/78/322 
 
 
23-16116 
4/19 
 
Introduction 
 
 
1. 
The present report, which covers the period from 1 August 2022 to 31 July 2023, 
is submitted in accordance with article 6 of the Relationship Agreement between the 
United Nations and the International Criminal Court (see A/58/874 and A/58/874/ 
Add.1).1 
 
 
 
I. Update on judicial and prosecutorial activities  
 
 
 
A. Situations and cases 
 
 
2. 
During the reporting period, the Chambers issued 534 written decisions, in 
addition to oral and email decisions. Some 227 hearings were held. 
3. 
A combined total of over 15,000 victims participated in cases before the Court 
during the reporting period. The Court received more than 8,900 new victim 
application forms, including 1,083 in the Al Mahdi case (reparations), 1,320 in the 
Abd-Al-Rahman case, over 2,000 for the situation in Ukraine and approximately 600 
in the cases related to the situation in the Central African Republic II. A total of 2,341 
representation forms were received with regard to the situations in the Bolivarian 
Republic of Venezuela and the Philippines for processes initiated pursuant to 
article 18 of the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court. The Court received 
follow-up information for a total of 1,300 existing applications. 
 
 
1. 
Situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo 
 
 
(a) 
Judicial proceedings and reparations 
 
The Prosecutor v. Thomas Lubanga Dyilo 
 
4. 
Trial Chamber II remained seized of the implementation plans for symbolic 
collective reparations and collective service-based reparations and continued to 
receive progress reports from the Trust Fund for Victims pursuant to the Chamber ’s 
decisions of 21 October 2016, 6 April 2017 and 7 February 2019.  
5. 
To date, 2,462 child soldiers and their families and other indirect victims have 
been deemed eligible for a reparations award; 872 beneficiaries are currently 
benefiting from service-based reparations in the form of medical treatment, 
psychological rehabilitation and socioeconomic support.  
6. 
As part of the symbolic reparations award, the Trust Fund for Victims launched 
the construction of a building that will be used by community members for collective 
activities. To date, the Trust Fund has complemented around 75 per cent of the total 
liability of Mr. Lubanga for reparations to victims, but there is a funding gap of about 
$2.5 million.  
 
The Prosecutor v. Germain Katanga 
 
7. 
Trial Chamber II remained seized of the implementation of its reparations order 
issued on 24 March 2017, wherein individual and collective reparations were granted 
to 297 victims of the attack on the village of Bogoro, Ituri Province. Individual 
reparations have been fully implemented and the implementation of collective 
reparations is almost complete. A ceremony to mark the end of the implementation of 
the reparations is planned by the Trust Fund for Victims. 
 
__________________ 
 
1  More information on the Court’s activities can be found on its website, www.icc-cpi.int. 


 
A/78/322 
 
5/19 
23-16116 
 
The Prosecutor v. Bosco Ntaganda  
 
8. 
Trial Chamber II remained seized of the implementation of the reparations order 
issued on 8 March 2021. In light of its finding as to the joint liability in solidum of 
Mr. Ntaganda and co-perpetrators, the Chamber adopted, for the purposes of 
reparations in the Ntaganda case, the reparation programmes ordered in the Lubanga 
case, in relation to the overlapping victims and harm in both cases. 
9. 
On 12 September 2022, the Appeals Chamber delivered its judgment on the 
appeals by Mr. Ntaganda and one of the legal representatives of victims against the 
reparations order of Trial Chamber II of 8 March 2021, partially reversing the order 
and remanding the matter to Trial Chamber II.  
10. On 14 July 2023, Trial Chamber II delivered an addendum to the reparations 
order, which included, inter alia, the estimation of the approximate number of direct 
and indirect victims of crimes against child soldiers (3,000), the estimation of the 
approximate number of direct and indirect victims of the attacks (7,500), and an 
assessment of Mr. Ntaganda’s liability for reparations of $31,300,000. The Chamber 
will next rule on the draft implementation plan of the Trust Fund for Victims for the 
reparations awarded in this case. 
11. In 2022 the Trust Fund for Victims began providing reparations to 29 former 
child soldiers and 45 victims of the attacks identified as priority victims. Following 
Trial Chamber II’s issuance of the addendum to the reparations order, preparations 
are under way for the Trust Fund to mobilize resources and prepare for the 
implementation of this large reparations programme. 
 
 
(b) 
Investigations 
 
12. In June 2023, the Prosecutor visited the Democratic Republic of the Congo, 
meeting with high-level officials, survivors, affected communities and civil society 
organizations. He signed a memorandum of understanding with the President of the 
Democratic Republic of the Congo on 1 June 2023, which set a new framework for 
cooperation and complementarity. Following this visit, the Office of the Prosecutor 
deepened its engagement with authorities in the country and other stakeholders to 
encourage national proceedings to address serious crimes.  
13. On 18 May 2023, the Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo 
submitted a second referral to the Prosecutor, relating to alleged crimes under the 
Rome Statute committed in North Kivu Province from 1 January 2022. The Office 
will conduct its preliminary examination and determine whether a new investigation 
should be opened. 
 
 
2. 
Situation in Uganda 
 
Judicial proceedings 
 
The Prosecutor v. Dominic Ongwen 
 
14. On 15 December 2022, the Appeals Chamber delivered two final judgments in 
open court, the first confirming Trial Chamber IX’s conviction decision of 4 February 
2021 and the second confirming, by majority, Trial Chamber IX’s sentencing decision 
of 6 May 2021, which imposed a sentence of 25 years of imprisonment on Mr. Ongwen. 
15. On 16 December 2022, Trial Chamber IX issued a decision instructing the 
Registry to extract from the universe of 4,096 victims a random but representative 
sample constituted of 205 victims, to proceed in a similar fashion as Trial Chamber II 
had in the Ntaganda case at the reparations stage. On 9 January 2023, the Registry 


A/78/322 
 
 
23-16116 
6/19 
 
submitted the sample, which was subsequently approved by Trial Chamber IX as 
sufficiently representative of the universe of potential victims.  
 
The Prosecutor v. Joseph Kony and Vincent Otti 
 
16. On 24 November 2022, the Prosecutor requested Pre-Trial Chamber II to hold a 
hearing on the confirmation of charges against Mr. Kony (for whom a warrant of 
arrest was issued in 2005) in his absence, pursuant to article 61, paragraph 2 (b), of 
the Rome Statute. On 30 March 2023, the Office of Public Counsel for Victims and 
the Office of Public Counsel for the Defence submitted observations.  
17. On 1 December 2022, Pre-Trial Chamber II rejected the Prosecution’s request 
to terminate the proceedings against Mr. Otti on account of his death, on grounds that 
his alleged killing had not been established. 
 
 
3.  Situation in the Central African Republic I and situation in the Central African 
Republic II 
 
 
(a) 
Judicial proceedings 
 
 
 
The Prosecutor v. Alfred Yekatom and Patrice-Edouard Ngaïssona 
 
18. The Prosecution’s presentation of evidence, which commenced on 15 March 
2021, continued. To date, the Chamber has heard the testimony of 72 out of a total of 
an anticipated 79 witnesses called by the Prosecution. On 29 May 2023, the Chamber 
directed the Defence to indicate by 25 August 2023 whether it intended to present 
evidence. If the Defence responds in the affirmative, it is to call its first witness on 
11 December 2023. 
 
 
 
The Prosecutor v. Mahamat Said Abdel Kani 
 
19. The Prosecution’s presentation of evidence commenced on 26 September 2022. 
The Prosecution is expected to call 58 witnesses to testify and was authorized to 
introduce into evidence the prior recorded testimony of 24 witnesses, pursuant to 
rule 68, paragraph 2, of the Court’s Rules of Procedure and Evidence. As at the end 
of the reporting period, the Prosecution had called 16 witnesses.  
20. Since February 2023 there have been no trial hearings owing to Mr. Said’s 
medical condition. Trial Chamber VI is monitoring the situation and will resume the 
trial whenever possible. 
 
 
 
The Prosecutor v. Maxime Jeoffroy Eli Mokom Gawaka 
 
21. Proceedings for the confirmation of the charges have been ongoing since 
Mr Mokom’s surrender on 14 March 2022. On 19 December 2022, the Appeals 
Chamber confirmed, by majority, Pre-Trial Chamber II’s decision to remove 
Mr. Mokom’s counsel of choice owing to an impediment to representation or a 
conflict of interest.  
22. On 3 February 2023, following the appointment of permanent counsel for 
Mr. Mokom, Pre-Trial Chamber II postponed the commencement of the confirmation 
of charges hearing, which was initially scheduled to commence on 31 January 2023, 
to 22 August 2023.  
23. Between September 2022 and June 2023, the Chamber held two status 
conferences and issued a large number of decisions on procedural matters, addressing 
in particular victims’ representation and participation, disclosure and related issues. 
On 9 March 2023, the Prosecution submitted the document containing the charges.  


 
A/78/322 
 
7/19 
23-16116 
 
24. On 8 March 2023, Pre-Trial Chamber II rejected Mr. Mokom’s request for 
interim release, in the absence of a State willing to accept him and to implement any 
conditions suitable to mitigate any risk of flight. On 19 April 2023, Pre-Trial 
Chamber II ordered the Registry to assist the Defence in identifying such a State. 
 
 
(b) 
Investigations 
 
25. On 16 December 2022, the Prosecutor announced the conclusion of the 
investigation phase in the situation in the Central African Republic II. The Office of 
the Prosecutor is not pursuing new lines of inquiry into the alleged criminal 
responsibility of other persons or in relation to other conduct in the situation beyond 
the cases before the Court. The Office continued to cooperate with the authorities of 
the Central African Republic, share information with the Special Criminal Court in 
Bangui and engage on matters of common interest aimed at closing the impunity gap. 
 
 
4.  Situation in Darfur  
 
 
(a) 
Judicial proceedings 
 
 
 
The Prosecutor v. Ali Muhammad Ali Abd-Al-Rahman (“Ali Kushayb”) 
 
26. The trial of Mr. Abd-Al-Rahman, which commenced on 5 April 2022, continued 
in 2022. The Prosecution concluded its presentation of evidence, in which 56 
witnesses were heard and written statements of an additional 25 witnesses and more 
than 1,200 items of evidence were submitted. On 19 April 2023, Trial Chamber I 
rejected the Defence’s request for a motion of acquittal. From 5 to 7 June the victims’ 
legal representatives made their opening statements and called witnesses and victims, 
who appeared in court. On 7 July, the Chamber granted a second Defence request for 
postponement of the commencement of its case, which is now scheduled to start on 
16 October 2023. 
27. On 28 June 2023, the Appeals Chamber, by majority, confirmed Trial Chamber I’s 
decision of 17 February 2023 recognizing the admission of a video of Mr. Abd-Al-
Rahman into evidence. 
28. On 17 July 2023, the Appeals Chamber, by majority, dismissed the Defence’s 
request for reconsideration of the Appeals Chamber’s judgment of 1 November 2021 
confirming Pre-Trial Chamber II’s decision of 17 May 2021 that rejected the 
Defence’s jurisdictional challenge of 15 March 2021. 
 
 
(b) 
Investigations 
 
29. In addition to its prosecution case in the trial of Mr. Abd-Al-Rahman, the Office 
of the Prosecutor continued to advance investigations in relation to suspects at large, 
despite very limited cooperation from the Sudanese authorities. The outbreak of 
fighting across the Sudan, including Darfur, continues to pose additional challenges 
to the Office’s investigations. 
30. On 26 January and 13 July 2023, pursuant to Security Council resolution 1593 
(2005), the Prosecutor briefed the Security Council on the situation in Darfur, 
detailing the progress in the case of Mr. Abd-Al-Rahman, addressing the armed 
hostilities that have prevailed in the Sudan since April 2023 and outlining the 
significant challenges his Office has encountered in receiving cooperation from the 
Government of the Sudan. In his briefing in July 2023, the Prosecutor confirmed that 
he had commenced investigations in relation to incidents occurring in the context of 
the present hostilities, in accordance with the mandate of his Office pursuant to 
resolution 1593 (2005). 
 


A/78/322 
 
 
23-16116 
8/19 
 
 
5. 
Situation in Kenya 
 
 
 
Judicial proceedings 
 
 
 
The Prosecutor v. Paul Gicheru 
 
31. On 14 October 2022, Trial Chamber III terminated the proceedings against 
Mr. Gicheru following the confirmation of his passing.  
 
 
6.  Situation in Libya 
 
 
(a) 
Judicial proceedings 
 
32. On 7 September 2022, Pre-Trial Chamber I terminated proceedings against 
Mr. Al-Tuhamy Mohamed Khaled following the Prosecution’s submission of the 
notification of the death of Mr. Al-Tuhamy and request to withdraw the arrest warrant, 
dated 2 August 2022, to which it annexed a copy of a death certificate issued by the 
Libyan authorities. 
 
 
(b) 
Investigations 
 
33. The Office of the Prosecutor continued to implement its investigative strategy 
across multiple lines based on its assessment of progress achieved in the investigation 
as well as continued challenges. The Office undertook missions to Libya and other 
countries while strengthening cooperation and engagement with States, international 
organizations and civil society organizations. On 7 September 2022, the Office 
became a formal member of the joint team supporting investigations into crimes 
against migrants and refugees in Libya. In October 2022, two key suspects were 
arrested and extradited to partner countries of the joint team as part of an operation 
supported by the Office. 
34. On 9 November 2022 and 11 May 2023, pursuant to Security Council resolution 
1970 (2011), the Prosecutor briefed the Council on the situation in Libya, detailing 
the progress made as a result of his Office’s renewed approach to the situation. The 
Prosecutor’s briefing of 9 November marked the first time he presented to the Council 
from Libya. The briefing was conducted virtually while the Prosecutor was on an 
official visit to various parts of the country with the aim of strengthening engagement 
both with Libyan authorities and victims’ groups. 
 
 
7. 
Situation in Côte d’Ivoire  
 
 
 
Investigations 
 
35. The Office of the Prosecutor continued its efforts to secure cooperation from 
national authorities and other stakeholders to assist in accelerating the ongoing 
investigations into crimes allegedly committed between December 2010 and June 
2011 in the context of post-electoral violence. 
 
 
8.  Situation in Mali 
 
 
(a) 
Judicial proceedings and reparations 
 
 
 
The Prosecutor v. Ahmad Al Faqi Al Mahdi 
 
36. Trial Chamber VIII remained seized of the implementation of its reparations 
order issued on 17 August 2017, wherein individual, collective and symbolic 
reparations for the community of Timbuktu were granted.  
37. The Trust Fund for Victims provided individual awards in the form of 
compensation to 1,450 victims of the attacks against religious and historic buildings 
carried out in June and July 2012. In 2022, together with the United Nations 


 
A/78/322 
 
9/19 
23-16116 
 
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, the Trust Fund launched the 
implementation of collective awards for the restoration of cultural heritage in 
Timbuktu. The awards provide for commemorations that address the moral harm 
caused to the community and the building of a facility for socioeconomic activities to 
address the damage caused to the economy as a result of the destruction of its cultural 
heritage. 
 
 
 
The Prosecutor v. Al Hassan Ag Abdoul Aziz Ag Mohamed Ag Mahmoud 
 
38. The Defence’s presentation of evidence concluded on 6 February 2023 and Trial 
Chamber X subsequently declared the submission of evidence closed. In total, the 
Chamber heard the in-court testimony of 76 witnesses and received the evidence of 
31 witnesses, pursuant to rule 68, paragraph 2, of the Court’s Rules of Procedure and 
Evidence. Closing statements were delivered from 23 to 25 May 2023. The Chamber 
is deliberating on its judgment.  
 
 
(b) 
Investigations 
 
39. The Office of the Prosecutor continued its activities related to this situation, 
including those concerning the Al Hassan case, and monitored developments and 
incidents on the ground, including reports of atrocity crimes. The Office has been 
seeking to explore further options to reinforce the impact of its activities with respect 
to the situation in Mali, including by developing synergies with the Malian national 
justice system and other partners within the framework of complementarity. 
 
 
9. 
Situation in Georgia 
 
 
 
Investigations 
 
40. On 16 December 2022, the Prosecutor announced the conclusion of the 
investigation phase of the situation in Georgia. The Office of the Prosecutor will not 
pursue new lines of inquiry into the alleged criminal responsibility of other persons 
or in relation to other conduct in the situation beyond the case pending before the 
Court. The Office focused its efforts on ensuring trial readiness in relation to the 
existing warrants and on preserving witness evidence, including in accordance with 
article 56 of the Rome Statute. The Office is also monitoring developments in the 
context of suspect tracking. 
 
 
10. 
Situation in Burundi 
 
 
 
Investigations 
 
41. The Office of the Prosecutor continued its investigation, conducting missions to 
a number of countries. The investigation advanced steadily following the Office’s 
comprehensive analysis of the evidence collected since the start of the investigation 
and benefited from the cooperation of States, United Nations entities and 
non-governmental organizations. 
 
 
11. 
Situation in Afghanistan 
 
 
(a) 
Judicial proceedings 
 
42. On 31 October 2022, Pre-Trial Chamber II authorized the Prosecution to resume 
its investigation into the situation in Afghanistan, pursuant to article 18, paragraph 2, 
of the Rome Statute. The Chamber found, inter alia, that the information presented 
did not show that Afghanistan had investigated or was investigating the alleged crimes 
in a manner that would cover the full scope of the Prosecution’s intended investigation 
and that would justify even a partial deferral.  


A/78/322 
 
 
23-16116 
10/19 
 
43. On 4 April 2023, the Appeals Chamber issued a judgment amending Pre-Trial 
Chamber II’s decision of 31 October 2022 in order to align it with the scope of the 
Prosecutor’s investigation in relation to alleged crimes committed on the territory of 
Afghanistan in the period since 1 May 2003, as well as other alleged crimes that have 
a nexus to the armed conflict in Afghanistan and are sufficiently linked to the situation 
and were committed on the territory of other States Parties in the period since 1 July 
2002, as previously determined by the Appeals Chamber in its judgment of 5 March 
2020. 
 
 
(b) 
Investigations 
 
44. Following the authorization granted by the Pre-Trial Chamber in October 2022, 
the Office of the Prosecutor resumed investigative activities, with a focus on 
identifying and interviewing witnesses, collecting relevant documentary evidence, 
identifying and analysing representative incidents and further refining the case 
hypotheses. The Office has further worked to galvanize cooperation from States, 
international organizations and civil society organizations. 
 
 
12. 
Situation in Bangladesh/Myanmar 
 
 
 
Investigations 
 
45. The Office of the Prosecutor continued its investigation, conducting regular 
missions, collecting and analysing evidence and carrying out initiatives aimed at 
strengthening engagement and cooperation with partners in the region. The 
investigation into this situation included the conduct of interviews with witnesses in 
Bangladesh, drawing on the almost permanent presence of investigators in the 
country. The Office engaged with government ministries in Bangladesh, diplomats, 
United Nations entities and non-governmental organizations to request assistance and 
inform them of developments. The Prosecutor conducted an official visit to 
Bangladesh from 3 to 7 July 2023, meeting with civil society and survivors from the 
Rohingya community in Cox’s Bazar and with high-level officials in Dhaka. 
 
 
13. 
Situation in the State of Palestine 
 
 
 
Investigations 
 
46. The Office of the Prosecutor continued its investigation in line with its 
independent mandate and in a manner that ensured the preservation of the integrity 
of the process and the safety and security of all of those involved. The investigation 
encompasses conduct that might amount to crimes under the Rome Statute committed 
since 13 June 2014 in Gaza and the West Bank, including East Jerusalem. The Office 
continued to collect, preserve and analyse information, communications and evidence 
from key stakeholders, including civil society organizations and various national and 
international sources. 
 
 
14. 
Situation in the Philippines 
 
 
(a) 
Judicial proceedings 
 
47. On 26 January 2023, Pre-Trial Chamber I authorized the Prosecution to resume 
its investigation, pursuant to article 18, paragraph 2 of the Rome Statute. The 
Chamber determined that the domestic initiatives and procedures relied on by the 
Philippines did not amount to tangible, concrete and progressive investigative steps 
carried out with a view to conducting criminal proceedings, in a way that would 
sufficiently mirror the Court’s investigation as authorized by the Chamber in its 
decision of 15 September 2021 under article 15 of the Rome Statute. 


 
A/78/322 
 
11/19 
23-16116 
 
48. On 21 March 2023, the Appeals Chamber issued a decision on the involvement 
of victims in the appeal by the Philippines against Pre-Trial Chamber I’s decision of 
26 January 2023, and on a request by the Office of Public Counsel for Victims. On 
27 March 2023, the Appeals Chamber rejected the request of the Philippines for 
suspensive effect. 
49. On 18 July 2023, the Appeals Chamber confirmed, by majority, Pre-Trial 
Chamber I’s decision of 26 January 2023. 
 
 
(b) 
Investigations 
 
50. Following the decision of Pre-Trial Chamber I of 26 January 2023, the Office 
of the Prosecutor resumed its planning and investigative activities, while at the same 
time engaging in litigation before the Chamber following the appeal lodged by the 
authorities of the Philippines. 
 
 
15. 
Situation in the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela I 
 
 
(a) 
Judicial proceedings 
 
51. On 27 June 2023, Pre-Trial Chamber I authorized the Prosecution to resume its 
investigation into the situation in the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela I, pursuant to 
article 18, paragraph 2, of the Rome Statute. The Chamber determined that, while the 
State was taking some investigative steps, its criminal proceedings did not sufficiently 
mirror the scope of the Prosecution’s intended investigation as they did not cover the 
factual allegations underlying the contextual elements of crimes against humanity, 
and its domestic investigations appeared limited and generally focused on direct and 
low-level perpetrators and did not sufficiently address the forms of criminality the 
Prosecution intended to investigate. 
52. On 12 July 2023, the Appeals Chamber, in the appeal of the Bolivarian Republic 
of Venezuela against Pre-Trial Chamber I’s decision of 27 June 2023, extended the 
deadline for the filing of the appeal brief to 14 August 2023.  
 
 
(b) 
Investigations  
 
53. The Office of the Prosecutor continued to engage with the Venezuelan 
authorities within the framework of the memorandum of understanding signed by the 
Office and the Government of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela in November 
2021 to promote cooperation and complementarity. In June 2023 the Prosecutor 
conducted a third official visit to the country where he signed a second memorandum 
of understanding establishing, among others, the legal and operational framework for 
the establishment of an in-country office for his Office.  
54. Following the 27 June 2023 ruling by Pre-Trial Chamber I, the Office of the 
Prosecutor resumed its planning and investigative activities while remaining 
committed to the terms and spirit of the above-mentioned memorandums of 
understanding. 
 
 
16. 
Situation in Ukraine 
 
 
(a) 
Judicial proceedings 
 
55. On 17 March 2023, Pre-Trial Chamber II issued warrants of arrest against 
Vladimir Vladimirovich Putin and Maria Alekseyevna Lvova-Belova for the alleged 
war crimes of unlawful deportation and the unlawful transfer of population (children) 
from occupied areas of Ukraine to the Russian Federation, under article 8, paragraph 2 
(a) (vii), and article 8, paragraph 2 (b) (viii), of the Rome Statute. The crimes were 
allegedly committed in Ukrainian occupied territory from at least 24 February 2022. 


A/78/322 
 
 
23-16116 
12/19 
 
 
(b) 
Investigations  
 
56. The Office of the Prosecutor continued its investigation during the reporting 
period, engaging actively and maintaining a near constant presence on the ground in 
Ukraine and the region. The Office engaged in cooperation and coordination efforts 
with a variety of domestic and international stakeholders, including States parties, 
notably in the context of the joint investigation team established under the auspices 
of the European Union Agency for Criminal Justice Cooperation, and international 
and regional organizations. Following the issuance of the two arrest warrants by the 
Court, the Office continued to develop multiple, interconnected lines of investigation, 
building on the cooperation with the Ukrainian Prosecutor-General’s office and other 
domestic authorities. The Registry and the Office of the Prosecutor worked with 
Ukrainian authorities to establish a country office of the Court in Ukraine on the basis 
of an agreement signed between the Court and Ukraine on 23 March 2023. 
 
 
 
B. Preliminary examinations 
 
 
57. As at the end of the reporting period, the Office of the Prosecutor was seized of 
three preliminary examinations, in relation to the following situations: Nigeria, 
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) II and Democratic Republic of the Congo II. The 
preliminary examination of the situation in Nigeria was completed and the Office 
engaged with domestic authorities on the next immediate steps to be taken. The 
preliminary examination of the situation in the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela II 
was at the advanced stage of analysis. In relation to the situation in the Democratic 
Republic of the Congo II, the Office will conduct a preliminary examination in order 
to assess, as a preliminary matter, whether the scope of the situation is sufficiently 
linked to the scope of the existing situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo 
to constitute a single situation. 
58. The Office continued to review its policy on preliminary examinations and make 
efforts to optimize its internal processes and enhance synergies between preliminary 
examinations and investigations, which are now fully integrated, in accordance with 
the Office’s organizational structure. 
 
 
 
C. Other situations 
 
 
59. In June 2023 the Prosecutor conducted a second official visit to Colombia, to 
receive firsthand information on the authorities’ ongoing accountability efforts and to 
continue efforts to ensure the effective implementation of the cooperation agreement 
signed by the Office of the Prosecutor and the Government of Colombia in November 
2021. To this end, an action plan was signed between the Office of the Prosecutor and 
the Government of Colombia to facilitate enhanced implementation of the 
cooperation agreement and of a complementary workplan with the Special 
Jurisdiction for Peace, which will facilitate, inter alia, the provision of support in the 
near term with respect to the investigation and prosecution of sexual and gender-based 
crimes.  
60. In relation to Guinea, the Prosecutor undertook a visit to Conakry at the end of 
September 2022, continuing the extensive and constructive engagement of his Office 
with the Guinean authorities. On the occasion of the visit and the opening of the 
domestic trial related to the events of 28 September 2009 in Conakry, the Prosecutor 
and the President of the Transition signed a memorandum of understanding aimed at 
furthering the principle of complementarity and strengthening future cooperation in 
pursuit of justice. On that basis, the Prosecutor decided to close the preliminary 
examination in Guinea. During the reporting period, the Office of the Prosecutor 


 
A/78/322 
 
13/19 
23-16116 
 
continued to engage with the national authorities and relevant stakeholders in the 
context of the implementation of the memorandum of understanding. 
 
 
 
II. International cooperation 
 
 
 
A. Cooperation with the United Nations 
 
 
 
1. 
General cooperation with United Nations Headquarters and entities present in 
the field  
 
61. The Court continued to receive crucial cooperation and support from the United 
Nations and its senior leadership, in line with the 2004 Relationship Agreement.  
62. The Court principals valued the constructive bilateral meetings held throughout 
the reporting period with United Nations officials, including the Under-Secretary-
General for Legal Affairs and United Nations Legal Counsel, the Under-Secretary-
General for Political and Peacebuilding Affairs, the Under-Secretary-General for 
Safety and Security, the Under-Secretary-General for Management Strategy, Policy 
and Compliance, the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights and 
several special advisers and special representatives of the Secretary-General. The 
meetings were aimed at reinforcing and clarifying existing parameters for cooperation 
and initiating discussions on new domains of cooperation. 
63. The Court recognizes the critical role of the Under-Secretary-General for Legal 
Affairs as the interface between the Court and the United Nations, in particular for 
the transmission and coordination of judicial cooperation requests. The Court 
continued to provide funding to the United Nations for a post in the Office of Legal 
Affairs, at the P-3 level, to handle requests for assistance and cooperation from the 
Court while ensuring full respect for the independent mandates of the Court and the 
United Nations. The Court also continued to reimburse the staffing costs associated 
with a post at the P-2 level in order to support the significantly increased workload 
arising from the Court’s requests. 
64. The Court’s liaison office to the United Nations continued to promote and 
facilitate cooperation between the two organizations, represent the Court in various 
meetings, apprise the Court of relevant developments at the United Nations and 
facilitate and support meetings between officials of the two organizations. The liaison 
office also continued to act as a key contact point between the Court and permanent 
missions to the United Nations, especially of those countries without representation 
in The Hague. 
65. The Court continued to benefit from the cooperation of various United Nations 
system entities, departments and offices, and special advisers and representatives of 
the Secretary-General, including those present in the field, in accordance with their 
mandate and with the agreement of host States. The Court highly appreciates such 
cooperation, which is essential to its operations. The Court’s offices in the Central 
African Republic, Côte d’Ivoire, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Georgia, 
Mali and Uganda played an important role by liaising with United Nations entities in 
this respect. This support will also be invaluable as the Court is currently undertaking 
to open offices in a number of new countries. In this context, an important 
development took place on 7 October 2022, when the Court and the United Nations 
Development Programme (UNDP) signed a framework agreement for the provision 
of support services, which facilitates the provision of operational support from UNDP 
to the Court, including UNDP country offices in geographical areas of relevance. 
66. The Registry of the Court continued to receive, with appreciation, support from 
the United Nations for the deployment of Court personnel throughout the many 


A/78/322 
 
 
23-16116 
14/19 
 
countries in which it operates. In this context, 2023 saw continued requests for 
operational support relating to situations in various geographical locations (namely, 
Bangladesh, Colombia, the Central African Republic, Chad, the Democratic Republic 
of the Congo, Libya, Mali and the Sudan) and for support for several actors and 
participants in the proceedings (Defence teams, Office of the Prosecutor, legal 
representatives of victims and staff of the Trust Fund for Victims). A total of 70 
missions received support from the United Nations. The Court is looking into 
alternative ways to support its operations in Mali in light of the termination of the 
mandate of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in 
Mali. 
67. The Court continued to cooperate with United Nations common system 
organizations by participating in inter-agency meetings on facilities management, 
travel and security. The country offices and the Court’s liaison office at the United 
Nations in New York also benefited from coordination in administrative and 
management areas across the United Nations system. As a participant in the United 
Nations security management system, the Court relied on the United Nations for 
services such as transportation, radio and video communication, medical assistance, 
security briefings, and security training on a reimbursable basis. The Court also 
continued engaging with the High-Level Committee on Management. 
68. Since 2019, the Court has been a participating organization in the 
Inter-Organization Agreement concerning Transfer, Secondment or Loan of Staff 
among the Organizations Applying the United Nations Common System of Salaries 
and Allowances. During the reporting period, four of the Court’s staff members were 
on loan and five were on secondment to other international organizations, and six 
transferred to other organizations under the Agreement. One United Nations staff 
member is currently on loan and another is on secondment to the Court. The Court 
also received six staff members on transfer from other international organizations.  
69. The Senior Legal Adviser of the Registry and the Director of the Secretariat of 
the Assembly of States Parties attended a meeting of the United Nations Legal 
Advisers Network in Rome from 15 to 17 May 2023. 
 
 
2. 
Mainstreaming the International Criminal Court in the United Nations system 
 
70. The Court greatly appreciates the support for its activities expressed in 
resolutions, declarations and other documents adopted by the General Assembly, the 
Security Council and other United Nations organs, committees and commissions. The 
Court also values opportunities for its senior officials to participate in United Nations 
meetings on themes and situations of relevance to its mandate.  
71. National jurisdictions have the primary responsibility to investigate and 
prosecute crimes under the Rome Statute. With that in mind, the Court encourages 
the inclusion of capacity-building elements in legal and judicial reform programmes 
supported by the United Nations as part of its rule of law development assistance, 
such as by incorporating into national law the crimes and principles of the Rome 
Statute, establishing or enhancing national processes for cooperation with the Court 
and training legal professionals on the investigation and prosecution of international 
crimes, in particular as part of the mandate to support justice and corrections 
institutions in post-conflict settings. The Court is open to collaboration with the 
United Nations in this context. By way of example, its country office in the Central 
African Republic has engaged with the United Nations to promote justice as a key 
foundation to lasting peace, with the support of the Secretary-General’s Peacebuilding 
Fund.  
72. The Court supported the organization of the event held by the Assembly of 
States Parties on 17 July 2023 at United Nations Headquarters in New York to 


 
A/78/322 
 
15/19 
23-16116 
 
commemorate the twenty-fifth anniversary of the Rome Statute and coordinated with 
the United Nations social media focal points to amplify related content, including a 
special video and other content related to the #MoreJustWorld digital campaign. At 
the Court’s request, United Nations entities publicized the exhibition “Common 
bonds: From the Rome Conference to today”, marking the twenty-fifth anniversary 
of the Rome Statute, by posting photographs and publicity on their global platforms. 
In the second half of 2022, the Court coordinated with the United Nations to continue 
publicizing stories of survivors of serious crimes profiled in its “Life After Conflict” 
photo exhibit, which was on display at United Nations Headquarters in July 2022. As 
in previous years, the Court marked United Nations international observance days 
with statements and social media posts and shared this content, as well as additional 
content related to Sustainable Development Goal 16 on peace and justice, with the 
United Nations social media focal points for amplification. These focal points also 
offered the Court advice on communications challenges and opportunities as they 
unfolded. The Court is grateful to the United Nations for its communications support.  
 
 
3. 
Cooperation with the Security Council 
 
73. The Court and the Security Council have different yet complementary roles in 
addressing the gravest crimes of concern to the international community, which have 
the potential to destabilize international peace and security. The Council’s prerogative 
to refer a situation to the Court can help promote accountability in situations where 
grave crimes may have been committed but where the Court lacks jurisdiction. This 
is demonstrated in concrete terms by the trial of Mr. Abd-Al-Rahman, which 
continued during the reporting period and represents the first trial to take place at the 
Court based on a referral by the Council. 
74. Where the Council has made a referral, active follow-up is necessary to ensure 
cooperation, especially for the arrest and surrender of individuals for whom the Court 
has issued arrest warrants. Following the Darfur and Libya referrals, the Court has 
communicated to the Council a total of 16 findings of non-cooperation in respect of 
a State. The Council has not responded to these communications in substantive form.  
75. As noted above, the Prosecutor’s biannual briefings to the Security Council on 
the situations in Darfur and Libya provided opportunities to inform the Council and 
the United Nations membership of progress and challenges related to his Office’s 
investigations and of the importance of cooperation, including with regard to the 
outstanding arrest warrants. In addition, in September 2022, the Prosecutor briefed 
the Council in relation to developments in the situation in Ukraine. 
76. The Court believes that, building on past exchanges, the dialogue between the 
Court and the Security Council on matters of mutual interest, both thematic and 
situation-specific, can be enhanced further, with a view to strengthening synergies 
between the mandates of both entities. 
77. The Court is grateful for the support of the Security Council, which the States 
parties to the Rome Statute serving on the Council play a key role in securing. The 
Office of the Prosecutor has benefited from formal and informal exchanges and from 
the strong support expressed, in part, at media stakeouts held after the Prosecutor ’s 
briefings by the Court’s focal points in the Council on behalf of those Council 
members that are also States parties. The Registrar also received such support during 
his mission to New York in June 2023.  
78. On 18 July 2023, the President of the Assembly of States Parties and the 
Executive Director of the Trust Fund for Victims briefed the Security Council during 
an Arria formula meeting entitled “25th Anniversary of the Rome Statute: The 
Contribution of the International Criminal Court to the Maintenance of International 
Peace and Security”. 


A/78/322 
 
 
23-16116 
16/19 
 
 
B. Cooperation with and assistance from States, other international 
organizations and civil society 
 
 
79. States continued to provide highly valuable assistance in relation to 
investigations and prosecutions including with respect to arrests, identification and 
recovery of assets, provision of documents and facilitation of missions of the Court 
on their territory.  
80. During the reporting period, the Registry transmitted 536 requests for visas to 
States and 300 primary requests for cooperation to States parties, other States and 
international and regional organizations, in addition to following up on pending 
requests apart from operational support requests sent by country offices.  
81. The Office of the Prosecutor continued its efforts to enhance cooperation with 
partners, including by increasingly incorporating the use of technology and 
intelligence-led actions. The Office transmitted 458 requests for assistance (including 
125 notifications for mission) to States Parties, States not parties, international and 
regional organizations and other public or private entities, and followed up on the 
execution of pending requests. The Office also received 22 incoming requests for 
cooperation under article 93, paragraph 10, of the Rome Statute. 
82. In addition to transmitting its own requests and requests on behalf of Chambers, 
the Registry requested the assistance of States to support the investigative activities 
of Defence teams, including by giving them access to documents or potential 
witnesses, and to facilitate visits of detainees’ families to the Court’s detention centre 
by issuing visas. States were also requested to provide assistance for reparations 
proceedings, including by identifying the whereabouts of victims and by supporting 
the activities of the Trust Fund for Victims. All these forms of assistance are 
appreciated as contributing to the efficiency and fairness of the Court’s proceedings. 
83. As demonstrated by the list of outstanding arrest warrants in the summary of the 
present report, the arrest and surrender of individuals subject to the Court’s warrants 
remains a critical challenge. The Court reiterates the importance it attaches to the 
Secretary-General’s guidance on contacts with persons who are the subject of arrest 
warrants or summonses issued by the Court (A/67/828-S/2013/210).  
84. The Court continued to encourage States to conclude cooperation agreements 
with it regarding the relocation of witness under threat, the enforcement of sentences, 
and the interim and final release of suspects or accused. One new agreement was 
concluded with Belgium on the release of persons on 7 July 2023.  
85. The Registry and the Office of the Prosecutor continued efforts to further 
enhance cooperation with national, regional and international judicial and law 
enforcement networks in support of the Court’s needs, and to assist national 
proceedings, where appropriate, in accordance with the principle of complementarity. 
86. These efforts have produced tangible results, notably the strengthening of 
relations between the Office of the Prosecutor and the African Union following the 
Prosecutor’s participation in the thirty-fifth and thirty-sixth African Union summits 
in Addis Ababa. The attendance of the Prosecutor at the ninth summit of the 
Association of Caribbean States, held in May 2023 in Antigua, Guatemala, also served 
to enhance cooperation with States in the region. 
87. The Registry and the Office of the Prosecutor also continued to work closely 
together within the inter-organ working group on arrest strategies to devise and 
implement strategies to facilitate the arrest of suspects, as well as to develop a 
network of partners to foster information exchange and cooperation in the 
identification, freezing and seizure of assets.  


 
A/78/322 
 
17/19 
23-16116 
 
88. On 23 June 2023 the Registry organized a hybrid meeting with States from the 
Group of Latin American and Caribbean States on framework cooperation 
agreements, with the participation of representatives of embassies and experts from 
capitals. Lastly, the Registry continued its efforts to obtain sufficient funds for the 
trust fund it relies on to ensure family visits for indigent detainees. The Court 
organized six family visits, in which a total of 18 persons participated (10 adults and 
8 children). Six States made generous donations to the trust fund during the reporting 
period.  
89. With the financial support of the European Commission and other donors, the 
Court organized over 15 seminars and events in support of efforts to strengthen 
cooperation, complementarity and universality, including a second high-level virtual 
seminar for judges in the Asia-Pacific region, a training on witness protection for 
victims of conflict related sexual violence in Ukraine, a seminar for national 
cooperation for focal points from the ministries of justice of countries with situations 
subject to the jurisdiction of the Court and the fifth Asia-Pacific Forum of the Hague.  
90. The Court continued to develop its interaction and cooperation with 
international and regional organizations as key partners for promoting universal 
ratification and full national implementation of the Rome Statute, raising awareness 
of the Court’s work, enhancing cooperation and promoting wider geographical 
representation within the Court’s staff.  
91. The Court greatly values the activities that civil society partners undertake to 
raise awareness of the Court and promote the universal ratification and full 
implementation of the Rome Statute, and it continued to participate in those activities. 
From 19 to 23 June 2023, the Court held, in hybrid format, an annual round table with 
non-governmental organizations. In addition, the Office of the Prosecutor organized 
two thematic round tables on crimes against and affecting children and gender 
persecution with civil society organizations from countries with situations subject to 
the jurisdiction of the Court. The round tables included discussions of the newly 
launched policy of the Office of the Prosecutor on the crime of gender persecution, 
which strengthens the basis on which the Office can advance the fight against 
impunity for sexual and gender-based crimes. 
 
 
 
III. Institutional developments 
 
 
 
A. Treaty matters 
 
 
92. Two States accepted or ratified the amendment to article 8 of the Rome Statute 
adopted in 2010, bringing the total number of States parties having accepted or 
ratified the amendment to 45. Two States accepted or ratified the amendment on the 
crime of aggression, bringing the total number of States parties having accepted or 
ratified the amendment to 45. One State accepted or ratified the amendment to article 
124, bringing the total number of States parties having accepted or ratified the 
amendment to 19. Three States accepted or ratified the amendment to article 8 
regarding the use of weapons that use biological agents or toxins, bringing the total 
number of States parties having accepted or ratified the amendment to 15. Three 
States accepted or ratified the amendment to article 8 regarding the use of weapons 
designed to injure by fragments undetectable by X-rays, bringing the total number of 
States parties having accepted or ratified the amendment to 13. Three States accepted 
or ratified the amendment to article 8 regarding the use of blinding laser weapons, 
bringing the total number of States parties having accepted or ratified the amendment 
to 13. Four States accepted or ratified the amendment to article 8 on intentionally 


A/78/322 
 
 
23-16116 
18/19 
 
using the starvation of civilians, bringing the total number of States parties having 
accepted or ratified the amendment to 12. 
93. The Court continued efforts to attract all States not among the 123 parties to the 
Rome Statute to join the treaty as soon as possible. 
 
 
 
B. Elections 
 
 
94. On 10 February 2023, the judges of the Court elected by secret ballot Osvaldo 
Zavala Giler as Registrar for a period of five years by an absolute majority. Mr. Zavala 
Giler, a national of Ecuador, commenced his term on 17 April 2023, succeeding Peter 
Lewis.  
 
 
 
C. Trust Fund for Victims 
 
 
95. As detailed in section II above, the Trust Fund for Victims continued 
implementing Court-ordered reparations in four cases, and it participated in the 
reparations proceedings in the Ongwen case.  
96. The Trust Fund also implemented other programmes to benefit victims through 
the provision of medical treatment, psychological rehabilitation, socioeconomic 
support, education and peace-building activities. Those programmes were 
implemented for the benefit of victims in the situations in the Central African 
Republic, Côte d’Ivoire, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Georgia, Kenya, 
Mali and Uganda, all under the jurisdiction of the Court. The programmes in Georgia 
and Kenya were launched at the beginning of 2023. Close to 17,000 individuals 
directly benefited from reparations programmes in 2022. The Trust Fund worked with 
locally based international organizations and local organizations to implement 
reparations activities.  
97. In its resolution 77/6 of 2 November 2022 the General Assembly encouraged 
States to contribute to the Trust Fund for Victims. In 2022, the Trust Fund received 
over €3.8 million in voluntary contributions from 32 States parties, which enabled it 
to continue its activities in 2023. The Trust Fund calls upon the General Assembly to 
continue to call on States, individuals and entities to make voluntary contributions for 
the benefit of victims and their families. 
98. In line with the 2020 report of the Independent Expert Review, the Trust Fund’s 
Board of Directors initiated a series of reforms to strengthen the fundraising capacity, 
visibility and effective management of the secretariat of the Trust Fund for Victims, 
which has been led by a new Executive Director since 1 May 2023, following a 
competitive recruitment process.  
 
 
 
D. Launch of strategic plans for 2023–2025  
 
 
99. On 14 June 2023, the strategic plans for 2023–2025 of the Court, the Office of 
the Prosecutor, the Registry and the Trust Fund for Victims were launched, marking 
the first time all four strategic plans have been developed and adopted concurrently, 
following the same three-year cycle. This underscores the Court’s commitment to the 
“one Court principle” and strengthens the Court’s relationship with the Trust Fund for 
Victims by promoting greater synergies while upholding the independence of the 
organs involved in judicial proceedings. During the process of elaborating the 
strategic plans, the Court benefited from the input provided by its staff as well as by 
States parties and civil society organizations.  


 
A/78/322 
 
19/19 
23-16116 
 
100. Building on the achievements made during the previous strategic cycle and 
taking into account the recommendations of the Independent Expert Review, the four 
strategic plans aim to drive further progress in the 2023–2025 period. The 
introduction of key performance indicators and a strategic framework will enable the 
Court to better demonstrate how the performance of each organ and the Trust Fund 
for Victims contributes to shared, overarching goals. The Court’s strategic plan 
reaffirms its pledge to act with integrity and acknowledges the crucial role of the 
Court’s staff in the achievement of its mission. In December 2022, the Court also 
launched a comprehensive Court-wide Strategy on Gender Equality and Workplace 
Culture, the first of its kind adopted by an international court or tribunal. 
101. Through the development of the strategic plans, the Court identified key 
additional resources required to meet core strategic objectives, as reflected in the 
proposed programme budget for 2024 recently transmitted by the Court to the 
Assembly of States Parties. 
 
 
 
IV. Conclusion 
 
 
102. The reporting period marked a particularly active year for the International 
Criminal Court, including significant activities in pretrial, trial and appeals 
proceedings and in the implementation of reparations, as well as the investigations 
and preliminary examinations conducted by the Office of the Prosecutor with respect 
to situations on four continents. Among the notable developments were the 
confirmation of a conviction and sentence on appeal; the conclusion of the 
presentation of evidence in one trial and the progress of three other trials in the 
courtrooms; the issuance of two new arrest warrants; and the conclusion of one 
preliminary examination. The Trust Fund for Victims implemented court-ordered 
reparations to victims in four cases and conducted other projects in several countries, 
benefiting close to 17,000 victims.  
103. The Court recognizes with gratitude the many forms of important assistance 
provided by the United Nations system during the reporting period and is equally 
appreciative of the cooperation of States with its ongoing investigative, prosecutorial 
and judicial activities. Furthermore, the Court highly appreciates the numerous vocal 
statements of support expressed by States and other international actors in high-level 
forums, such as the General Assembly and the Security Council. Such support is 
particularly important at a time when officials of the Court have come under attack 
for carrying out their mandates. The Court looks forward to further strengthening its 
relations with all stakeholders as it seeks to enhance the delivery of justice under its 
mandate set out in the Rome Statute.  
 


 
United Nations 
 
A/79/198 
 
 
General Assembly 
 
Distr.: General 
19 August 2024 
 
Original: English 
 
24-14914 (E)    050924 
*2414914* 
 
 
Seventy-ninth session 
Item 74 of the provisional agenda* 
Report of the International Criminal Court 
 
 
 
 
 Report of the International Criminal Court 
 
 
 
 Note by the Secretary-General 
 
 
 
The annual report of the International Criminal Court on its activities for 
2023/24 is submitted herewith to the General Assembly in accordance with article 6 
of the Relationship Agreement between the United Nations and the International 
Criminal Court and paragraph 31 of General Assembly resolution 78/6. 
 
 
 
 
* A/79/150. 


A/79/198 
 
 
24-14914 
2/19 
 
 
 Report of the International Criminal Court on its activities 
in 2023/24 
 
 
 
 Summary 
 
During the reporting period, the International Criminal Court made significant 
contributions to the global fight against impunity for the most serious crimes of 
concern to the international community as a whole. Drawing on new tools and 
approaches, the Court is addressing the unprecedented demand for its work in the 
form of investigations, pretrial proceedings, trials and appeals, as well as reparation 
programmes for victims, carrying out extensive activities in highly challenging 
operational environments and fragile security situations in ongoing conflict zones. 
 
Among the notable developments during the reporting period, Trial Chamber X 
convicted Al Hassan Ag Abdoul Aziz Ag Mohamed Ag Mahmoud of crimes against 
humanity and of war crimes committed between 2 April 2012 and 29 January 2013 in 
Timbuktu, northern Mali. Sentencing proceedings are under way, and the verdict is 
subject to appeal. Reparation proceedings are soon to commence. Three other trials 
continued in the courtrooms: the trial of Ali Muhammad Ali Abd-Al-Rahman with 
regard to the situation in Darfur and the trial of Alfred Yekatom and Patrice-Edouard 
Ngaïssonna and the trial of Mahamat Said Abdel Kani with regard to the situation in 
the Central African Republic. 
 
With regard to the situation in Uganda, Trial Chamber IX issued a reparations 
order in the case of Dominic Ongwen, who previously had been found guilty for 
crimes against humanity and war crimes committed in northern Uganda between 2002 
and 2005. The Chamber set Mr. Ongwen’s financial liability to €52,429,000, the 
highest amount of reparations to victims ordered in any case before the Court thus 
far. Mr. Ongwen has appealed the reparations order. The Registry will now proceed 
with identifying the victim population that is potentially eligible for reparations. 
 
The Court reached a historic milestone as the Trust Fund for Victims finalized 
the implementation of reparations in the Katanga case with a closing ceremony held 
in Bunia, Democratic Republic of the Congo. The Trust Fund is also implementing 
other reparation orders and other programmes to benefit victims through the provision 
of medical treatment, psychological rehabilitation, socioeconomic support, education 
and peacebuilding activities, directly benefiting around 24,000 individuals in 2023. 
 
With regard to the situation in Ukraine, four new arrest warrants were issued 
against the following individuals: Sergei Kuzhugetovich Shoigu, Minister of Defence 
of the Russian Federation; Valery Vasilyevich Gerasimov, Chief of the General Staff 
of the Armed Forces of the Russian Federation and First Deputy Minister of Defence; 
Sergei Ivanovich Kobylash, Lieutenant General in the Russian Armed Forces and 
Commander of long-range aviation of the Aerospace Force; and Viktor Nikolayevich 
Sokolov, admiral in the Russian Navy and Commander of the Black Sea fleet 
(functions held at the time of the alleged conduct). 
 
With regard to the situation in Mali, the arrest warrant issued in 2017 for Iyad 
Ag Ghaly, alleged leader of Ansar Eddine, was unsealed. 
 
With regard to the situation in Uganda and the situation in Kenya, the Office of 
the Prosecutor announced the conclusion of the investigation phase. During the 
reporting period, the Office of the Prosecutor also continued its work with respect to 
the other situations that fall within its mandate. Pressure on its investigative function 
has greatly increased in the light of the significant range of allegations of crimes under 
the Rome Statute stemming from ongoing active conflicts, including in relation to the 


 
A/79/198 
 
3/19 
24-14914 
 
situations in Darfur, the State of Palestine and Ukraine. To address increased 
requirements for its investigative activities, the Office is drawing on a new evidence-
processing system that was finalized during the reporting period; an increase in field 
presence, including through an increase in staffing in Ukraine and the establishment 
of an office in Caracas; and a revitalization of its policy framework, as reflected in 
the adoption, in December 2023, of new policies on children and on gender-based 
crimes. 
 
The contents of the present report do not reflect confidential activity before the 
Court’s pretrial chambers, which has increased in terms of both workload and output. 
 
On 11 March 2024, six new judges of the Court commenced their nine-year 
terms, and Tomoko Akane was elected President of the Court for the period 2024–
2027.  
 
Security issues continued to gain prominence among the priorities of senior 
leadership of the Court owing to, inter alia, a serious cyberattack against the Court 
during the reporting period and other threats and attacks to which the Court and its 
officials have been subjected on account of their efforts to carry out their mandate, 
including arrest warrants issued by the Russian Federation against several judges and 
the Prosecutor. 
 
The Court is grateful for the highly valuable cooperation that it continued to 
receive from the United Nations on a wide range of issues, notably including 
operational assistance in the field on a cost-reimbursable basis. The cooperation, 
assistance and support of States remained essential to the Court’s operations. 
 
Court-issued public arrest warrants are outstanding against 20 individuals: 
 
(a) 
Democratic Republic of the Congo: Sylvestre Mudacumura, since 2012; a  
 
(b) 
Uganda: Joseph Kony, since 2005; 
 
(c) 
Central African Republic: Mahamat Nouradine Adam, since 2019; 
 
(d) 
Darfur: Ahmad Harun, since 2007; Omar Al-Bashir, since 2009 and 2010; 
Abdel Raheem Muhammad Hussein, since 2012; and Abdallah Banda, since 2014; 
 
(e) 
Kenya: Walter Barasa, since 2013; and Philip Kipkoech Bett, since 2015;  
 
(f) 
Libya: Saif Al-Islam Gaddafi, since 2011;  
 
(g) 
Mali: Iyad Ag Ghaly, since 2017; 
 
(h) 
Georgia: Mikhail Mayramovich Mindzaev, Gamlet Guchmazov and David 
Georgiyevich Sanakoev, since 2022; 
 
(i) 
Ukraine: Vladimir Vladimirovich Putin and Maria Alekseyevna Lvova-
Belova, since 2023; and Sergei Ivanovich Kobylash, Viktor Nikolayevich Sokolov, 
Sergei Kuzhugetovich Shoigu and Valery Vasilyevich Gerasimov, since 2024. b 
 
The Court calls upon States Parties and others to provide the necessary 
cooperation and assistance for their arrest and surrender to the Court. 
 
 
 
a Efforts are being undertaken to verify the reported death of Sylvestre Mudacumura (in 2019). 
 
b While the warrants are secret, the Chamber has authorized the Registry to make public their 
existence, the names of the suspects and the legal qualification of the alleged crimes, considering 
that public awareness of the warrants may contribute to the prevention of the further commission 
of crimes pursuant to article 58, paragraph 1 (b) (iii) of the Rome Statute. 
 


A/79/198 
 
 
24-14914 
4/19 
 
 
 Introduction 
 
 
1. 
The present report, which covers the period from 1 August 2023 to 31 July 2024, 
is submitted in accordance with article 6 of the Relationship Agreement between the 
United Nations and the International Criminal Court (see A/58/874 and 
A/58/874/Add.1).1  
 
 
 
I. Update on judicial and prosecutorial activities  
 
 
 
A. Situations and cases 
 
 
2. 
During the reporting period, the Chambers issued 532 written decisions, in 
addition to oral and email decisions. Some 158 hearings were held. 
3. 
A combined total of over 16,000 victims participated in cases before the Court. 
During the reporting period, the Court received more than 4,500 new victim 
application forms, as well as a total of 164 representation forms from victims and 
victim groups with regard to the situation in the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela. 
The Registry also received and processed follow-up information for approximately 
650 existing applications. 
4. 
As of July 2024, the Court had determined that approximately 5,500 victims 
were eligible for reparations in the Katanga, Lubanga and Al Mahdi cases, of which 
close to 75 per cent of beneficiaries had received reparations or were enrolled in 
reparation programmes. In relation to the Ntaganda and Ongwen cases, the Registry 
is in the process of identifying approximately 10,000 and 50,000 individuals, 
respectively, for enrolment in reparation programmes. 
5. 
The above-mentioned statistics do not reflect confidential proceedings before 
pretrial chambers. 
 
 
1. 
Situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo 
 
 
(a) 
Judicial proceedings and reparations 
 
 
 
The Prosecutor v. Thomas Lubanga Dyilo 
 
6. 
The Trust Fund for Victims continued to implement the symbolic collective 
reparations and collective service-based reparations ordered by Trial Chamber II. In 
total, 2,471 former child soldiers have been deemed eligible for a reparations award; 
1,324 beneficiaries have completed or are currently benefiting from service-based 
reparations in the form of medical treatment, psychological rehabilitation and 
socioeconomic support. As part of the symbolic reparations award, the Trust Fund has 
continued construction of four community centres. 
 
 
 
The Prosecutor v. Germain Katanga 
 
7. 
At the request of the victims, a ceremony was held on 24 April 2024 in Bunia, 
Ituri Province, Democratic Republic of the Congo, to mark the completion of the 
implementation of reparations in the Katanga case. The reparations, which had been 
ordered by Trial Chamber II on 24 March 2017, benefited individuals who lost family 
members, suffered physical and psychological harm and lost their homes, property 
and livestock as a result of the attack of 24 February 2003 on the village of Bogoro, 
Ituri Province, for which Mr. Katanga had been found guilty, as an accessory, of one 
__________________ 
 
1  More information on the Court’s activities can be found on its website, www.icc-cpi.int. 


 
A/79/198 
 
5/19 
24-14914 
 
count of a crime against humanity (murder) and four counts of war crimes (murder, 
attacking a civilian population, destruction of property and pillaging). 
 
 
 
The Prosecutor v. Bosco Ntaganda  
 
8. 
Trial Chamber II remained seized of the implementation of the reparations order 
issued on 8 March 2021 by Trial Chamber VI and the addendum issued by Trial 
Chamber II on 14 July 2023, which included the estimation of the approximate 
number of direct and indirect victims of crimes against child soldiers (3,000), the 
estimation of the approximate number of direct and indirect victims of the attacks 
(7,500) and an assessment of Mr. Ntaganda’s liability for reparations ($31,300,000).  
9. 
Mr. Ntaganda and the legal representatives of the victims of the attack filed an 
appeal against the addendum. On 5 February 2024, the Appeals Chamber rejected the 
requests for suspensive effect of the appeal. The appeal is pending. 
10. On 27 February 2024, Trial Chamber II approved the updated draft 
implementation plan for reparations of the Trust Fund for Victims and endorsed the 
beneficiary eligibility determinations. The Registry is conducting victim identification 
and eligibility screening for reparations in various locations. 
11. 
Between 2022 and 2024, the Trust Fund for Victims provided initial reparations 
to 123 priority victims in urgent need. 
 
 
(b) 
Investigations 
 
12. The Office of the Prosecutor continues to deepen its engagement with the 
authorities of the Democratic Republic of the Congo and other stakeholders, including 
through multiple field deployments. Those efforts have included a significant focus 
on encouraging national proceedings to address serious crimes, in line with the 
memorandum of understanding signed on 1 June 2023. Following a workshop held in 
Kinshasa in November 2023 and a follow-up mission undertaken by experts from the 
Office’s forensic team in February 2024 to identify challenges and capacity-building 
needs, the Office has continued its evaluation of the handling of priority cases by 
national judicial authorities.  
 
 
(c) 
Programme for the benefit of victims 
 
13. In 2008, the Trust Fund for Victims launched a programme for the benefit of 
victims in respect of the situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Over 
2,000 affected individuals directly benefited from rehabilitation services in 2023.  
14. To support domestic efforts for the benefit of victims, in May 2024, the Trust 
Fund, in collaboration with the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for 
Human Rights, co-facilitated a workshop for the benefit of the national fund for 
reparations for victims of conflict-related sexual violence and victims of crimes 
against the peace and security of humanity, with a view to sharing experiences, 
challenges and lessons learned in the design and implementation of reparation 
programmes.  
 
 
2. 
Situation in Uganda 
 
 
(a) 
Judicial proceedings and reparations 
 
 
 
The Prosecutor v. Dominic Ongwen 
 
15. Following the conviction of Mr. Ongwen on 4 February 2021, which was 
confirmed on appeal, on 28 February 2024 Trial Chamber IX issued a reparations 
order, setting his financial liability to €52,429,000. The liability considered the 
estimated 49,772 victims affected by the 61 crimes for which Mr. Ongwen was 


A/79/198 
 
 
24-14914 
6/19 
 
sentenced to 25 years in prison, including sexual and gender-based crimes, crimes 
committed against children and crimes creating transgenerational harm. The financial 
liability includes an award for collective community-based reparations, consisting of 
collective rehabilitation programmes, as well as symbolic and satisfaction measures, 
including a symbolic award of €750 for all eligible victims. In December 2023, 
Mr. Ongwen was transferred to Norway to serve his sentence. 
16. Mr. Ongwen has appealed the reparations order. On 16 May 2024, the Appeals 
Chamber rejected Mr. Ongwen’s request for suspensive effect of the appeal. 
17. Between May and July 2024, the Trust Fund for Victims conducted 
consultations with 2,715 potential beneficiaries of reparations in five locations in 
northern Uganda relevant to the crimes for which Mr. Ongwen was convicted. The 
consultations will inform the draft implementation plan for reparations. The Trust 
Fund also announced its first urgent funding appeal of €5 million in June 2024 to start 
a reparations programme in this case. In addition, the Registry has been establishing 
a framework for victim identification and eligibility screening for reparations in 
various locations across the country. 
 
 
 
The Prosecutor v. Joseph Kony and Vincent Otti 
 
18. On 17 November 2023, Pre-Trial Chamber II terminated the proceedings against 
Vincent Otti, finding that, based on the information provided by the Prosecution, the 
only reasonable conclusion was that Mr. Otti is deceased. As a consequence, only the 
arrest warrant for Joseph Kony remained outstanding with respect to the situation. 
19. On 23 November 2023, following the Prosecution’s request to hold a hearing on 
the confirmation of charges against Mr. Kony in his absence, Pre-Trial Chamber II 
found that Mr. Kony qualified as a person who “cannot be found” within the meaning 
of article 61, paragraph 2 (b) of the Rome Statute, that all reasonable steps to secure 
his appearance had been taken and that there would be cause to hold a confirmation 
hearing against him in his absence. The Chamber instructed the Registry to submit a 
plan indicating the outreach activities and notification efforts it would pursue to 
inform Mr. Kony of the charges. 
20. On 4 March 2024, Pre-Trial Chamber II found that all reasonable steps to inform 
Mr. Kony of the charges had been taken and decided that the hearing on the 
confirmation of charges against Mr. Kony, to be held in his absence should he not 
appear, would commence on 15 October 2024. On 24 June 2024, Peter Haynes was 
appointed as counsel for Mr. Kony. The Registry is reaching out to victims for their 
potential participation in these proceedings. 
 
 
(b) 
Investigations 
 
21. On 1 December 2023, the Prosecutor announced the conclusion of the 
investigation phase in the situation in Uganda. Accordingly, absent a significant 
change in circumstances and without prejudice to the work required to support the 
ongoing judicial process, the Office will not pursue new lines of inquiry and will 
focus on ensuring the successful prosecution of Joseph Kony, the alleged leader of 
the Lord’s Resistance Army. The Office will continue to devote concerted efforts, in 
collaboration with the Registry and relevant partners, to secure his arrest. The Office 
will work with the Ugandan authorities and civil society to ensure that information 
and evidence are shared under the framework of the Office’s Policy on 
Complementarity and Cooperation.  
 


 
A/79/198 
 
7/19 
24-14914 
 
 
(c) 
Programme for the benefit of victims 
 
22. In 2008, the Trust Fund for Victims launched a programme for the benefit of 
victims in respect of the situation in Uganda. Over 6,500 affected individuals directly 
benefited from rehabilitation services in 2023.  
 
 
3. 
Situation in the Central African Republic I and situation in the Central African 
Republic II 
 
 
(a) 
Judicial proceedings 
 
 
 
The Prosecutor v. Alfred Yekatom and Patrice-Edouard Ngaïssona  
 
23. The Prosecution concluded its presentation of evidence on 11 September 2023, 
at which time the Chamber had heard the testimony of 75 witnesses called by the 
Prosecution. In addition, the Chamber received more than 10,000 items of evidence 
from the Prosecution. Following the Prosecution, the legal representatives of the 
victims presented their evidence by calling three witnesses, and the testimony of one 
Chamber witness was heard. On 28 November 2023, the Defence for Mr. Yekatom 
made its opening statements and subsequently called 18 witnesses. In addition to live 
testimony, the Chamber received the written testimony of over 50 witnesses from the 
Prosecution and the Defence. The Chamber granted participatory status to 299 victims, 
bringing the total number to 1,965. The Registry continues to engage with victim 
communities and collect victims’ information. 
24. On 20 May 2024, the Appeals Chamber confirmed two decisions of Trial 
Chamber V, in which the Prosecution’s requests to introduce prior recorded testimony 
were granted. 
 
 
 
The Prosecutor v. Mahamat Said Abdel Kani 
 
25. The trial resumed following the adjournment of the proceedings in February 
2023 on account of Mr. Said’s medical condition. On 15 December 2023, Trial 
Chamber VI found Mr. Said fit to stand trial. The Chamber continues to monitor his 
condition and his physical ability to participate in a regular sitting schedule. The 
Chamber has heard 44 witnesses called by the Prosecution. 
26. To date, the Chamber has granted participatory status to 31 victims. The Registry 
continues to engage with victim communities and collect victims’ information. 
 
 
 
The Prosecutor v. Maxime Jeoffroy Eli Mokom Gawaka 
 
27. From 22 to 24 August 2023, the Chamber held a hearing on the confirmation of 
charges. On 16 October 2023, the Prosecution notified the Chamber of the withdrawal 
of all charges against Mr. Mokom. On 17 October 2023, the Chamber terminated the 
proceedings against him and ordered his immediate release. The Chamber ordered the 
Registry to ensure that Mr. Mokom’s rights as a free person are not restricted, while 
requesting him to abide by certain practical arrangements. 
28. On 18 January 2024, the Chamber rejected the extradition request from the 
Central African Republic. Noting that no other State was willing to accept 
Mr. Mokom, the Chamber decided that its residual jurisdiction regarding Mr. Mokom 
would conclude on 8 February 2024 if no such State was identified by that date; in 
that event, he would fall under the exclusive jurisdiction of the host State. 
29. On 23 April 2024, Mr. Mokom filed a request pursuant to article 85 of the Rome 
Statute, seeking compensation for the harm and damage allegedly caused to him as a 
result of the proceedings against him. A special chamber composed of three judges 
has been constituted to hear the claim. 


A/79/198 
 
 
24-14914 
8/19 
 
 
(b) 
Investigations 
 
30. Investigative activities continued in relation to all pending cases before the 
Court, including the arrest warrant against Mahamat Nouradine Adam. The Office of 
the Prosecutor has deepened its cooperation with the authorities of the Central African 
Republic, including through a visit by the Deputy Prosecutor, Mame Mandiaye Niang, 
in November 2023, during which he signed memorandums of understanding with the 
Government of the Central African Republic and the Special Criminal Court, as a 
reflection of a joint commitment to strengthen collaboration to effectively address 
international crimes committed in the country.  
31. The Office continued its tracking efforts with good cooperation from various 
stakeholders. 
 
 
(c) 
Programme for the benefit of victims 
 
32. Since 2020, the Trust Fund for Victims has been implementing a programme for 
the benefit of victims in the Central African Republic. Over 15,000 affected 
individuals, including nearly 8,000 victims of sexual and gender-based crimes, have 
directly benefited from rehabilitation services since the start of the programme.  
 
 
4. 
Situation in Darfur 
 
 
(a) 
Judicial proceedings 
 
 
 
The Prosecutor v. Ali Muhammad Ali Abd-Al-Rahman (“Ali Kushayb”) 
 
33. The trial of Mr. Abd-Al-Rahman continued in 2023 with the presentation of 
views and concerns by the victims and the presentation of evidence by the Defence. 
The presentation of evidence by the victims concluded in October 2023, and the 
Defence started the presentation of its evidence immediately thereafter. The Chamber 
has heard 17 witnesses called by the Defence. The Chamber granted participatory 
status to an additional 731 victims, bringing the total number to 1,331. The Registry 
continues to engage with victim communities and collect victims’ information. 
 
 
(b) 
Investigations 
 
34. The Office of the Prosecutor continued to advance investigations with cooperation 
from different States and increased cooperation from Sudanese authorities. In 
September 2023, the Prosecutor met with First Lieutenant General Abdel-Fattah 
Al-Burhan Abdelrahman Al-Burhan on the sidelines of the General Assembly and 
underlined the obligations of the Sudan pursuant to Security Council resolution 1593 
(2005) with respect to cooperating with the Court and ensuring justice for the people 
of the Sudan. Following that meeting, a new focal point for cooperation was appointed 
by the Government of the Sudan, which has assisted in improving cooperation. 
35. On 29 January 2024, during his visit to Chad, the Prosecutor briefed the Security 
Council on the situation in Darfur. The Office is accelerating its operations, with 
multiple field missions and advanced exploitation of online open sources, and 
harnessing its partnerships with civil society actors, victims’ groups, national 
authorities and international and regional organizations. 
36. In relation to the ongoing violence in Darfur, the Office is prioritizing 
investigations of crimes affecting children and gender-based crimes. The Office has 
conducted several outreach missions to refugee camps in the east of Chad. The Office 
continues to engage constructively with various national authorities that are 
developing relevant investigations. 
 


 
A/79/198 
 
9/19 
24-14914 
 
 
5. 
Situation in Kenya 
 
 
(a) 
Investigations 
 
37. On 27 November 2023, the Deputy Prosecutor, Nazhat Shameem Khan, 
announced the conclusion of the investigation phase with respect to the situation in 
Kenya, after considering the specific facts and circumstances.  
38. The Office will not pursue additional cases into the alleged criminal 
responsibility of other persons but maintains its capacity to act on information relating 
to retaliation against witnesses.  
 
 
(b) 
Programme for the benefit of victims 
 
39. In April 2023, the Trust Fund for Victims launched a two-year programme for 
the benefit of victims of sexual and gender-based violence in respect of the situation 
in Kenya. Over 190 affected individuals directly benefited from rehabilitation 
services in 2023. 
 
 
6. 
Situation in Libya 
 
 
 
Investigations 
 
40. On 9 November 2023 and 14 May 2024, pursuant to Security Council resolution 
1970 (2011), the Prosecutor briefed the Council on the situation in Libya and outlined 
a road map aimed at completing the investigation phase by the end of 2025, subject 
to operational conditions.  
41. The Prosecutor further updated the Security Council on the implementation of 
the strategic plan adopted in respect of this situation in 2022, which involved multiple 
investigative operations, enhanced cooperation with national authorities from Libya 
and other States and continued outreach with survivors and civil society. The Office 
succeeded in significantly advancing investigations, including through interviewing 
many witnesses, and collected substantial evidence, including from open sources, 
documents, forensics and satellite imagery.  
42. The Office made particular progress with respect to crimes committed over the 
period 2014–2020, and related investigations are advancing successfully towards 
completion. The investigations related to detention facilities and crimes against 
migrants have also been advanced significantly. The implementation of new 
technologies and the new “OTPLink” portal to receive submissions from the public 
have been instrumental to this progress.  
43. The Prosecutor’s vision of having the Office operate as a cooperation hub has 
been implemented in this situation with positive results. The Office continued to work 
closely with the joint team that is investigating crimes against migrants on the central 
Mediterranean route. Through this cooperation, significant contributions have been 
made to investigations and prosecutions related to trafficking in persons in Italy and 
the Kingdom of the Netherlands. 
44. In April 2024, the Deputy Prosecutor, Nazhat Shameem Khan, conducted a 
productive mission to Tripoli, setting the course for enhanced cooperation with the 
Attorney General and other national actors, including civil society.  
 
 
7. 
Situation in Côte d’Ivoire 
 
 
(a) 
Investigations 
 
45. The Office of the Prosecutor continued its efforts to secure cooperation from 
national authorities, international organizations, civil society organizations and other 


A/79/198 
 
 
24-14914 
10/19 
 
relevant stakeholders to assist in accelerating the ongoing investigations into crimes 
allegedly committed between December 2010 and June 2011 in the context of 
post-electoral violence. The Office has been conducting regular investigative missions 
and is seeking to move its activities towards the next phase of the proceedings. 
 
 
(b) 
Programme for the benefit of victims 
 
46. Since 2022, the Trust Fund for Victims has been implementing a programme for 
the benefit of victims in respect of the situation in Côte d’Ivoire. Over 160 affected 
individuals, related to 13 identified incidents, directly benefited from rehabilitation 
services in 2023. Furthermore, the Trust Fund collaborated with artists to realize 
memorials in accordance with the wishes of affected communities comprising over 
131,000 victims. The first stone was laid for a memorial near Abidjan in the presence 
of senior Government officials; five other memorials have been built and will be 
inaugurated in the upcoming reporting period. 
 
 
8. 
Situation in Mali 
 
 
(a) 
Judicial proceedings and reparations 
 
 
 
The Prosecutor v. Ahmad Al Faqi Al Mahdi 
 
47. The Trust Fund for Victims continued to implement the reparations ordered by 
Trial Chamber VIII on 17 August 2017 for the community of Timbuktu. Implementation 
of the symbolic reparations award was completed in March 2021 with ceremonies in 
Bamako and Timbuktu. In June 2024, the Trust Fund completed the delivery of 
individual awards in the form of financial compensation to 1,685 eligible victims of 
the attacks against religious and historic buildings in June and July 2012. The Trust 
Fund continues to implement the collective awards, which include the restoration of 
protected buildings of cultural value; memorialization measures to address the moral 
damage caused to the Timbuktu community; and the establishment of an economic 
resilience facility to address the indirect economic damage caused to the community.  
 
 
 
The Prosecutor v. Al Hassan Ag Abdoul Aziz Ag Mohamed Ag Mahmoud 
 
48. On 26 June 2024, Trial Chamber X, by majority, convicted Mr. Al Hassan of the 
crimes against humanity of torture, persecution and other inhumane acts and of the 
war crimes of torture, outrage upon personal dignity, mutilation, cruel treatment and 
the passing of sentences without previous judgment pronounced by a regularly 
constituted court, affording all judicial guarantees which are generally recognized as 
indispensable. These crimes were committed between 2 April 2012 and 29 January 
2013 in Timbuktu, northern Mali, in the context of control by Ansar Eddine and 
Al-Qaida in Islamic Maghreb over the region.  
49. The Chamber found that certain crimes of sexual violence had been committed 
in Timbuktu during the relevant period, but that Mr. Al Hassan was not guilty of the 
war crimes of rape and sexual slavery or of the crimes against humanity of rape, 
sexual slavery and other inhumane acts in the form of forced marriage. He was also 
found not guilty of the war crime of attacking protected objects. 
50. Proceedings on sentencing are under way, and the conviction is subject to 
appeal. The Registry has relaunched consultations with victim communities and is 
collecting mapping information for the impending reparation proceedings. 
 
 
 
The Prosecutor v. Iyad Ag Ghaly 
 
51. On 21 June 2024, Pre-Trial Chamber I issued a public redacted version of the 
warrant of arrest against Iyad Ag Ghaly, initially issued on 18 July 2017, for war 


 
A/79/198 
 
11/19 
24-14914 
 
crimes and crimes against humanity allegedly committed in northern Mali between 
January 2012 and January 2013. 
 
 
(b) 
Investigations 
 
52. The Office of the Prosecutor continued its activities and monitored developments 
and reports of atrocity crimes on the ground. The Office has also explored additional 
options to reinforce the impact of its activities, including by developing synergies 
with the Malian national justice system and other partners under the framework of 
complementarity. 
 
 
(c) 
Programme for the benefit of victims 
 
53. Since 2022, the Trust Fund for Victims has implemented a programme that is 
aimed at providing support to victims of incidents under the jurisdiction of the Court 
in the areas of Mopti and Gao, complementing the reparation programme implemented 
for victims in Timbuktu. 
 
 
9. 
Situation in Georgia 
 
 
(a) 
Investigations 
 
54. The Office of the Prosecutor continued to monitor the situation as part of its 
tracking activities. Following the conclusion of the investigation phase on 16 December 
2022, the Office has focused its efforts on ensuring trial readiness in relation to the 
existing warrants of arrest. The Office has also undertaken preservation activities 
under article 56 of the Rome Statute. 
 
 
(b) 
Programme for the benefit of victims 
 
55. In 2023, the Trust Fund for Victims launched a programme for the benefit of 
victims in respect of the situation in Georgia; over 530 affected individuals directly 
benefited from rehabilitation services during the first year. 
 
 
10. 
Situation in Burundi 
 
 
 
Investigations 
 
56. The Office of the Prosecutor continued its investigation, conducting missions to 
a number of countries, despite a lack of cooperation from the Government of Burundi. 
The Office received cooperation from States, United Nations entities and civil society 
organizations and has been progressively advancing its investigative work. 
 
 
11. 
Situation in Afghanistan 
 
 
 
Investigations  
 
57. The Office of the Prosecutor conducted major investigative activities, including 
extensive engagement with witnesses and the collection of documentary evidence, 
public statements and decrees by leaders, and large volumes of open source material. 
Reports of systematic discrimination and persecution are one of the Office’s 
investigative priorities. Investigations are advancing progressively, thanks to 
cooperation from civil society organizations, survivors, national authorities and 
international organizations. The Office has integrated gender experts into the 
investigation team, along with country experts, with a view to ensuring that the gender 
dimension of the alleged crimes is addressed. The progress made should establish a 
foundation for applications for warrants of arrest.  
 


A/79/198 
 
 
24-14914 
12/19 
 
 
12. 
Situation in Bangladesh/Myanmar 
 
 
 
Investigations 
 
58. The Office of the Prosecutor continued its investigation with missions, the 
collection and analysis of evidence, interviews with witnesses in Bangladesh, 
facilitated by the rotational presence of investigators in the country, and initiatives 
aimed at strengthening engagement and cooperation with partners in the region. Given 
the severe trauma among victims caused both by the violent attacks in their homeland 
and by subsequent protracted displacement and harsh conditions of life, the Office 
has taken special care to adopt trauma-informed strategies, including careful contact 
and screening of potential witnesses and specialized support from psychosocial experts.  
59. The Office has engaged with Government ministries in Bangladesh, diplomats, 
international organizations and non-governmental organizations regarding requests 
for assistance and to inform them of developments. The significant progress made with 
the investigations should establish the foundation for applications for warrants of arrest. 
 
 
13. 
Situation in the State of Palestine 
 
 
(a) 
Judicial proceedings 
 
60. Pre-Trial Chamber I has granted leave for several amici curiae to file written 
observations pursuant to rule 103 of the Court’s Rules of Procedure and Evidence. 
The Registry continues to receive victim applications for participation in potential 
future criminal proceedings and reparations. 
 
 
(b) 
Investigations 
 
61. Following dedicated investigative efforts, including for events since 7 October 
2023, the Prosecutor announced in May 2024 that he had filed applications for arrest 
warrants in relation to five individuals. 
62. The Office continues its investigation into the situation, covering multiple lines 
of inquiry pertaining to alleged crimes committed in Gaza and the West Bank, 
including East Jerusalem, since 13 June 2014. With a view to further strengthening 
action, the Office continues to engage with all relevant parties and stakeholders, 
including civil society, States and international and regional organizations. As in all 
situations, complementarity remains an important consideration in the Office’s 
overall approach.  
 
 
14. 
Situation in the Philippines 
 
 
 
Investigations 
 
63. The Office of the Prosecutor has continued its planning and investigative 
activities and engagement with key stakeholders, including civil society organizations, 
with a view to advancing its investigation. 
 
 
15. 
Situation in the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela I 
 
 
(a) 
Judicial proceedings 
 
64. On 7 and 8 November 2023, the Appeals Chamber held a hearing on the appeal 
of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela against the Pre-Trial Chamber I decision of 
27 June 2023 authorizing the resumption of the Prosecution’s investigation, pursuant 
to article 18, paragraph 2 of the Rome Statute. On 1 March 2024, the Appeals Chamber 
delivered a judgment confirming the decision. The Registry facilitated victims’ 
participation in these proceedings through a standardized victim consultation system. 
 


 
A/79/198 
 
13/19 
24-14914 
 
 
(b) 
Investigations 
 
65. After the 27 June 2023 ruling by Pre-Trial Chamber I, the Office of the 
Prosecutor resumed its independent investigation while engaging in litigation before 
the Appeals Chamber following the appeal lodged by the authorities of the 
Government of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela. In this context, the Office 
benefited from cooperation with various national and international stakeholders. 
66. The Office also continued to engage with the Venezuelan authorities within the 
framework of the two memorandums of understanding signed with the Government 
in 2021 and 2023 to promote cooperation and complementarity. The Prosecutor 
conducted a fourth official visit to the country in June 2024, during which he 
inaugurated the in-country office for his Office and placed focus on the 
implementation of the joint workplan signed with the Government in December 2023.  
 
 
16. 
Situation in Ukraine 
 
 
(a) 
Judicial proceedings 
 
67. On 5 March 2024, Pre-Trial Chamber II issued warrants of arrest against Sergei 
Ivanovich Kobylash, Lieutenant General in the Russian Armed Forces and 
Commander of long-range aviation of the Aerospace Force at the relevant time, and 
Viktor Nikolayevich Sokolov, admiral in the Russian Navy and Commander of the 
Black Sea fleet at the relevant time. On 24 June 2024, it issued warrants of arrest 
against Sergei Kuzhugetovich Shoigu, Minister of Defence of the Russian Federation 
at the relevant time, and Valery Vasilyevich Gerasimov, Chief of the General Staff of 
the Armed Forces of the Russian Federation and First Deputy Minister of Defence at 
the relevant time. All four individuals are allegedly responsible for the war crime of 
directing attacks at civilian objects, the war crime of causing excessive incidental 
harm to civilians or damage to civilian objects and the crime against humanity of 
inhumane acts, allegedly committed from at least 10 October 2022 until at least 
9 March 2023. The Registry continues to receive victim applications. 
 
 
(b) 
Investigations  
 
68. The Office of the Prosecutor continued its investigation across multiple 
interconnected lines, engaging actively on the ground in Ukraine and the region. The 
Office has benefited from effective cooperation with Ukraine and engaged in 
cooperation and coordination efforts with a variety of domestic and international 
stakeholders, including in the context of the joint investigation team established under 
the auspices of the European Union Agency for Criminal Justice Cooperation. The 
Office also continued to benefit from the deployment of teams of experts by States 
parties under the Office’s innovative forensic rotation model. 
69. The Court officially opened its country office in Ukraine in September 2023 in 
the presence of the Prosecutor, thereby deepening the Office’s investigative activities 
in the country and its engagement with the Office of the Prosecutor General of 
Ukraine, local civil society organizations and other partners. 
 
 
(c) 
Programme for the benefit of victims 
 
70. The Trust Fund for Victims has engaged with Ukrainian authorities and with the 
Register of Damage Caused by the Aggression of the Russian Federation against 
Ukraine to consider potential collaboration, the exchanging of experiences and 
potential synergies in efforts to seek redress for victims of crimes under the 
jurisdiction of the Court in respect of the situation in Ukraine. 
 
 


A/79/198 
 
 
24-14914 
14/19 
 
 
B. Preliminary examinations 
 
 
71. The Office of the Prosecutor has been seized of preliminary examinations in 
three situations: Nigeria, Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela II and Democratic 
Republic of the Congo II. 
72. The preliminary examination in relation to the situation in Nigeria has been 
completed, and the Office engaged in next steps, including a visit by the Deputy 
Prosecutor, Mame Mandiaye Niang, to Nigeria in March 2024, where he held 
constructive meetings with relevant national authorities and institutions, the 
diplomatic community and civil society organizations. The Office noted the country’s 
determination to close the impunity gap but remains committed to moving forward 
with investigations in the absence of genuine efforts by the Nigerian authorities.  
73. In relation to the situation in the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela II, the Office 
worked towards finalizing its assessment of the preliminary examination and engaged 
with the Government of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela and civil society to 
that end.  
74. In relation to the situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo II, the Office 
conducted an assessment of jurisdiction and admissibility, including in the context of 
a technical-level mission to the country, as well as an assessment of the potential 
linkage of the situation with the existing situation in the Democratic Republic of the 
Congo I. 
75. The Office also considered large volumes of submissions received under 
article 15 of the Rome Statute and worked towards the finalization of its assessment 
on a number of situations at the initial filtering stage.  
 
 
 
C. Other activities 
 
 
76. The Prosecutor visited Colombia in April 2024 in order to launch the Office’s 
Policy on Cooperation and Complementarity, with the participation of officials from 
the Government of Colombia, senior national experts and civil society representatives.  
77. In March 2024, the Deputy Prosecutor, Mame Mandiaye Niang, visited Guinea 
in the context of the implementation of the memorandum of understanding signed on 
28 September 2022 in Conakry. He met with senior Government officials and 
expressed satisfaction with the ongoing trial and with the country’s commitment to 
bringing the alleged perpetrators to justice. During these exchanges, Guinean 
authorities identified areas in which support was needed. The Deputy Prosecutor 
committed to engaging with key actors and partners, such as the Team of Experts on 
the Rule of Law and Sexual Violence in Conflict, relevant sections of the Court and 
the Trust Fund for Victims, with a view to proposing an action plan aimed at 
facilitating the exchange of expertise and knowledge transfer for the benefit of 
national judicial personnel.  
 
 
 
II. International cooperation 
 
 
 
A. Cooperation with the United Nations 
 
 
78. The Court continued to receive crucial cooperation and support from the United 
Nations and its senior leadership, in line with the 2004 Relationship Agreement. The 
Court principals valued the constructive bilateral meetings held throughout the 
reporting period with senior United Nations officials. 


 
A/79/198 
 
15/19 
24-14914 
 
79. The Court recognizes the critical role of the Under-Secretary-General for Legal 
Affairs, the United Nations Legal Counsel, as the interface between the Court and the 
United Nations, in particular for the transmission and coordination of judicial 
cooperation requests. The Court continued to reimburse staffing costs for two posts 
in the Office of Legal Affairs, at the P-3 and P-2 levels, to handle the significant 
amount of requests from the Court for assistance and cooperation. The Court’s liaison 
office to the United Nations continued to facilitate cooperation between the two 
organizations, represent the Court in various meetings, apprise the Court of relevant 
developments at the United Nations and facilitate and support meetings between 
officials of the two organizations. The liaison office also acts as a key contact point 
between the Court and permanent missions to the United Nations. 
80. In May 2024, the liaison office, together with the Office of Legal Affairs, 
coordinated the convening of a virtual round table meeting as a forum for 
International Criminal Court focal points across the United Nations system and their 
counterparts from various organs of the Court and its Trust Fund for Victims. The 
topics discussed included cooperation with the United Nations, including United 
Nations entities with a humanitarian mandate, and modalities for the provision of 
logistical support by United Nations field operations. 
81. The Court highly appreciates the continued cooperation from various United 
Nations entities, departments, offices and special advisers and representatives of the 
Secretary-General, including those present in the field, which is essential for its 
operations. The Court’s offices in the Central African Republic, Côte d’Ivoire, the 
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Mali, Uganda and Ukraine played an important 
role by liaising with United Nations entities in this respect. Support from United 
Nations entities will also be invaluable as the Court is currently undertaking to open 
offices in a number of additional countries.  
82. The Registry of the Court continued to receive, with appreciation, support from 
the United Nations for the deployment of Court personnel throughout the many 
countries in which it operates, and there were continued requests for operational 
support for several actors and participants in the proceedings (defence teams, Office 
of the Prosecutor, legal representatives of victims and staff of the Trust Fund for 
Victims). A total of 103 missions received support from the United Nations.  
83. The Office of the Prosecutor continued to expand engagement with the Office 
of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, including through 
thematic exchanges and cooperation in relation to ongoing activities. 
84. The Court continued to cooperate with United Nations common system 
organizations by participating in inter-agency meetings on facilities management, 
travel and security. The country offices and the Court’s liaison office at United 
Nations Headquarters have also benefited from coordination in administrative and 
management areas across the United Nations system. The Court continued to 
participate in the United Nations security management system and relied on the 
United Nations for services such as transportation, radio and video communication, 
medical assistance, security briefings and security training on a reimbursable basis. 
The Court also continued engaging with the High-level Committee on Management. 
85. During the reporting period, eight of the Court’s staff members were on loan, 
one was on secondment to other international organizations and one was transferred 
to other organizations under the Inter-Organization Agreement concerning Transfer, 
Secondment or Loan of Staff among the Organizations Applying the United Nations 
Common System of Salaries and Allowances. One United Nations staff member is 
currently on secondment to the Court, and the Court received one staff member on 
transfer from other international organizations.  


A/79/198 
 
 
24-14914 
16/19 
 
86. The Senior Legal Adviser of the Registry and the Director of the Secretariat of 
the Assembly of States Parties attended the 2024 meeting of the informal network of 
the Legal Advisers of the Specialized Agencies and the Related and Other 
Organizations of the United Nations System in Montreal from 27 to 30 May 2024. 
87. The United Nations supported, on a reimbursable basis, the hosting of the 
twenty-second session of the Assembly of States Parties to the Rome Statute at United 
Nations Headquarters from 4 to 14 December 2023, as well as the hosting of the event 
organized by the Assembly to commemorate the World Day for International Justice, 
held at United Nations Headquarters on 17 July 2024. The exhibition entitled 
“Common bonds”, which was produced by the Court in collaboration with the Trust 
Fund for Victims and which includes photographs contributed by multiple United 
Nations entities, has been on display at United Nations Headquarters since 16 July 
2024, where it will remain until 23 August 2024. Social media content produced by 
the Court, including content related to Sustainable Development Goal 16, was 
amplified on United Nations social media platforms, reaching millions of people. The 
Court is grateful to the United Nations for its valuable communications support. 
88. The Prosecutor’s biannual briefings to the Security Council on the situations in 
Darfur and Libya provided opportunities to inform the Council and United Nations 
membership of progress and challenges related to his Office’s investigations and of 
the importance of cooperation, including with regard to outstanding arrest warrants. 
The Court is grateful for the Council’s support, which the States parties to the Rome 
Statute serving on the Council play a key role in securing, under the coordination of 
the Co-Chairs of the Court’s Security Council caucus, Japan and Switzerland.  
 
 
 
B. Cooperation with and assistance from States, other international 
organizations and civil society 
 
 
89. States continued to provide highly valuable assistance in relation to the Court’s 
investigations and prosecutions, including with respect to the identification and 
recovery of assets, the provision of documents and the facilitation of missions of the 
Court on their territory.  
90. During the reporting period, the Registry transmitted 416 primary requests for 
cooperation to States parties, other States and international and regional organizations, 
which are essential to ensure the advancement of judicial proceedings. In addition, 
the Registry transmitted 734 requests for visas to States, and country offices transmitted 
numerous requests for cooperation to support the operations of Court personnel in 
situation countries.  
91. The Office of the Prosecutor continued its efforts to enhance cooperation with 
partners, including by increasingly incorporating the use of technology and 
intelligence-led actions. The Office transmitted 519 requests for assistance (including 
175 notifications for missions), to States parties, States not parties, international and 
regional organizations and other public or private entities, and followed up on the 
execution of pending requests. The Office also received 36 incoming requests for 
cooperation under article 93, paragraph 10 of the Rome Statute.  
92. The Registry requested the assistance of States to support the investigative 
activities of defence teams, including requests to be given access to documents and 
to organize meetings with relevant authorities and with potential witnesses. States 
were also requested to provide assistance for reparations proceedings, including by 
identifying the whereabouts of victims and by supporting the activities of the Trust 
Fund for Victims.  


 
A/79/198 
 
17/19 
24-14914 
 
93. As demonstrated by the list of outstanding arrest warrants in the summary of the 
present report, the arrest and surrender of individuals subject to the Court’s warrants 
remains a critical challenge, one that requires an intensified engagement by States. 
The Registry and the Office of the Prosecutor continued to work closely together on 
tracking activities and within the inter-organ working group on arrest strategies. The 
Court reiterates the importance it attaches to the Secretary-General’s guidance on 
contacts with persons who are the subject of arrest warrants or summonses issued by 
the Court (A/67/828-S/2013/210).  
94. The Court continued to encourage States to conclude cooperation agreements 
regarding the relocation of witnesses under threat, the enforcement of sentences and 
the interim and final release of suspects or accused. The lack of long-term solutions 
to address these gaps has a critical impact on the Court’s ability to function properly.  
95. The Court continued its efforts to further enhance cooperation with national, 
regional and international judicial and law enforcement networks in support of its 
needs and to assist national proceedings, where appropriate, in accordance with the 
principle of complementarity. 
96. The Court also continued to develop its interaction with regional intergovernmental 
organizations, including through participation by the Deputy Prosecutor, Mame 
Mandiaye Niang, in the thirty-seventh African Union Summit in February 2024.  
97. The Registry continued its efforts to obtain sufficient funds for the trust fund 
used for family visits for indigent detainees and for securing relevant visas. The Court 
organized three family visits, in which six persons participated in total, four adults 
and two children.  
98. With the financial support of the European Commission and other donors, the 
Court organized over 15 seminars and events in support of efforts to strengthen 
cooperation, complementarity and universality, including a high-level regional 
seminar in Seoul.  
99. The Court greatly values the activities that civil society partners undertake to 
raise awareness of the Court and promote the universal ratification and full 
implementation of the Rome Statute, and it continued to participate in those activities. 
From 24 to 28 June 2024, the Court held, in hybrid format, an annual round table with 
non-governmental organizations.  
100. The Office of the Prosecutor further intensified its engagement with civil society 
organizations from situation countries, including by appointing a civil society 
organization focal point and engaging in regular consultations on thematic priorities. 
The Office held its most recent thematic round table event for civil society 
organizations on the trauma-informed approach to investigations and prosecutions, 
and it also held a dedicated session with civil society organization partners on the 
development of a new structured dialogue with civil society in line with its new Policy 
on Complementarity and Cooperation. 
 
 
 
III. Institutional developments 
 
 
 
A. Treaty matters 
 
 
101. Armenia ratified the Rome Statute on 14 November 2023, becoming the 124th 
State party. 
102. Four States accepted or ratified the amendment to article 124 of the Rome 
Statute, bringing the total number of States Parties having accepted or ratified this 
amendment to 23. Six States accepted or ratified the amendment to article 8 regarding 


A/79/198 
 
 
24-14914 
18/19 
 
the use of weapons that use biological agents or toxins, bringing the total number of 
States parties having accepted or ratified the amendment to 21. Six States accepted or 
ratified the amendment to article 8 regarding the use of weapons designed to injure 
by fragments undetectable by X-rays, bringing the total number of States parties 
having accepted or ratified the amendment to 19. Six States accepted or ratified the 
amendment to article 8 regarding the use of blinding laser weapons, bringing the total 
number of States parties having accepted or ratified the amendment to 19. Five States 
accepted or ratified the amendment to article 8 on intentionally using the starvation 
of civilians, bringing the total number of States parties having accepted or ratified the 
amendment to 17.  
103. The Court continued efforts to attract all States not among the 124 parties to the 
Rome Statute to join the treaty as soon as possible. 
 
 
 
B. Elections 
 
 
104. At its twenty-second session, the Assembly of States Parties elected Keebong 
Paek, Erdenebalsuren Damdin, Iulia Motoc, Haykel Ben Mahfoudh, Nicolas Guillou 
and Beti Hohler as judges of the Court, each for a nine-year term beginning on 
11 March 2024. The Assembly also elected, by acclamation, Päivi Kaukoranta as its 
President for its twenty-third to twenty-fifth sessions.  
105. On 11 March 2024, the Court’s judges elected Tomoko Akane as President of 
the Court for a three-year term, with immediate effect. Rosario Aitala and Reine 
Alapini-Gansou were elected First Vice-President and Second Vice-President, 
respectively. 
 
 
 
C. Trust Fund for Victims 
 
 
106. As of July 2024, the Trust Fund for Victims had received voluntary contributions 
from 52 States Members of the United Nations. In 2023, it received over €5.3 million 
from 28 Member States, which represents an increase of 40 per cent of the income 
received from voluntary contributions each year.  
107. As detailed in section II above, the Trust Fund continued to implement Court-
ordered reparations and other programmes for the benefit of victims. Around 24,000 
individuals directly benefited from these programmes in 2023, an increase of around 
53 per cent compared with 2022. In all, 69 per cent of the beneficiaries were women.  
108. The Board of Directors of the Trust Fund calls upon States, individuals and 
entities to make voluntary contributions for the benefit of victims and their families. 
 
 
 
D. Policy initiatives 
 
 
109. In December 2023, the Office of the Prosecutor issued its Policy on Children 
and its Policy on Gender-based Crimes. Work is ongoing in relation to the 
promulgation of policies on crimes of slavery and on environmental crimes. 
110. On 25 April 2024, the Office of the Prosecutor launched its Policy on 
Complementarity and Cooperation through field-based events led by the Prosecutor 
and the Deputy Prosecutors. The policy contains a fundamentally renewed approach 
to the principles at the heart of the Rome Statute, bringing the Office’s work closer to 
affected communities and deepening its partnerships with States, civil society and 
regional and international organizations. The Office’s commitment to bringing justice 
services closer to the affected communities is underlined, with a simultaneous focus 


 
A/79/198 
 
19/19 
24-14914 
 
on delivering on the core investigative mandate of the Office and on increasing its 
ability to support the efforts of other criminal jurisdictions and accountability actors. 
 
 
 
E. Security of the Court 
 
 
111. The Court’s security posture has undergone a transformative shift because of its 
recent work in various situations, including most prominently those of Ukraine and 
the State of Palestine. 
112. Security of the Court and its officials was one of the highest priorities of the 
Court’s leadership during the reporting period in the light of the increasing external 
threats against the institution, in addition to pre-existing attacks, such as the arrest 
warrants issued by the Russian Federation against several judges and the Prosecutor 
of the Court on account of their performance of their independent mandates as elected 
officials of a multilateral judicial institution.  
113. On 15 September 2023, the Court detected a cybersecurity incident potentially 
affecting its systems and data, which was soon confirmed to be a serious and 
unprecedented cyberattack exhibiting high levels of sophistication, focus, resources 
and persistence. As a response, the Court commissioned the services of a reputable 
commercial vendor to develop a blueprint for its future information technology 
architecture. Implementation of the blueprint is under way, with a series of projects 
to be carried out in the next two years aimed at better protecting the Court’s 
information, personnel and operations in response to a heightened threat environment. 
The Registrar also established a special fund for security to provide urgent additional 
resources for the implementation of high-level priorities set out in the blueprint. 
 
 
 
IV. Conclusion 
 
 
114. The Court continued to have an extremely high workload in relation to pretrial, 
trial and appeal proceedings, reparations for victims and the preliminary examinations 
and investigations conducted by the Office of the Prosecutor on four continents, with 
a combined total of over 16,000 victims participating in judicial proceedings.  
115. Notable developments during the reporting period included the following: one 
accused person was convicted, and three other trials continued in the courtrooms; a 
judicially ordered reparations programme was completed for the first time; the Court 
issued its largest ever reparation order for the benefit of victims; four new arrest 
warrants were issued, and one was unsealed; the Prosecutor announced that he had 
applied for a number of other arrest warrants; and the investigation phase was 
concluded in respect of two situations. In addition to the developments described in 
the present report, an increasing amount of confidential activity took place before the 
Court’s pretrial chambers.  
116. The Court recognizes with gratitude the many forms of invaluable assistance 
provided by the United Nations system during the reporting period and is equally 
appreciative of the cooperation of States with its ongoing investigative, prosecutorial 
and judicial activities.  
117. While making unprecedented progress in enforcing international law and 
advancing the global fight against impunity, the Court and its officials are being 
increasingly subjected to attacks and threats from external actors. The Court’s 
leadership is gravely concerned about this worrisome trend and calls upon States and 
the international community at large to redouble their commitment to the Court and 
its independence so as to enable it to carry out its mandate of justice effectively.